<doc id="16550" wikidata="Q129308" url="?curid=16550" title="John, King of England">
<text>John (24 December 1166 – 19 October 1216) was King of England from 1199 until his death in 1216. He lost the Duchy of Normandy and most of his other French lands to King Philip II of France, resulting in the collapse of the Angevin Empire and contributing to the subsequent growth in power of the French Capetian dynasty during the 13th century. The baronial revolt at the end of John&#x27;s reign led to the sealing of Magna Carta, a document considered a foundational milestone in the evolution of the constitution of the United Kingdom.

John was the youngest son of King Henry II of England and Duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine. He was nicknamed John Lackland () because, as a younger son, he was not expected to inherit significant lands. He became Henry&#x27;s favourite child following the failed revolt of 1173–1174 by his brothers Henry the Young King, Richard, and Geoffrey against their father. John was appointed Lord of Ireland in 1177 and given lands in England and on the continent. During the reign of his brother Richard I, he unsuccessfully attempted a rebellion against Richard&#x27;s royal administrators while the King was participating in the Third Crusade, but he was proclaimed king after Richard died in 1199. He came to an agreement with Philip II of France to recognise John&#x27;s possession of the continental Angevin lands at the peace treaty of Le Goulet in 1200.

When war with France broke out again in 1202, John achieved early victories, but shortages of military resources and his treatment of Norman, Breton, and Anjou nobles resulted in the collapse of his empire in northern France in 1204. He spent much of the next decade attempting to regain these lands, raising huge revenues, reforming his armed forces and rebuilding continental alliances. His judicial reforms had a lasting effect on the English common law system, as well as providing an additional source of revenue. His dispute with Pope Innocent III over the election of Archbishop of Canterbury Stephen Langton led to the Papal interdict of 1208, in which church services were banned until 1214, as well as John&#x27;s excommunication the following year, a dispute he finally settled in 1213. John&#x27;s attempt to defeat Philip in 1214 failed because of the French victory over John&#x27;s allies at the Battle of Bouvines. When he returned to England, John faced a rebellion by many of his barons, who were unhappy with his fiscal policies and his treatment of many of England&#x27;s most powerful nobles. Magna Carta was drafted as a peace treaty between John and the barons, and agreed in 1215. However, neither side complied with its conditions and civil war broke out shortly afterwards, with the barons aided by Prince Louis of France. It soon descended into a stalemate. John died of dysentery contracted while on campaign in eastern England in late 1216; supporters of his son Henry III went on to achieve victory over Louis and the rebel barons the following year.

Contemporary chroniclers were mostly critical of John&#x27;s performance as king, and his reign has since been the subject of significant debate and periodic revision by historians from the 16th century onwards. Historian Jim Bradbury has summarised the current historical opinion of John&#x27;s positive qualities, observing that John is today usually considered a &quot;hard-working administrator, an able man, an able general&quot;. Nonetheless, modern historians agree that he also had many faults as king, including what historian Ralph Turner describes as &quot;distasteful, even dangerous personality traits&quot;, such as pettiness, spitefulness, and cruelty. These negative qualities provided extensive material for fiction writers in the Victorian era, and John remains a recurring character within Western popular culture, primarily as a villain in Robin Hood folklore.

==Early life (1166–1189)==

===Childhood and the Angevin inheritance===
John was born on 24 December 1166. His father, King Henry II of England, had inherited significant territories along the Atlantic seaboard — Anjou, Normandy and England — and expanded his empire by conquering Brittany. John&#x27;s mother was Eleanor, the powerful duchess of Aquitaine, who had a tenuous claim to Toulouse and Auvergne in southern France and was the former wife of King Louis VII of France. The territories of Henry and Eleanor formed the Angevin Empire, named after Henry&#x27;s paternal title as Count of Anjou and, more specifically, its seat in Angers. The Empire, however, was inherently fragile: although all the lands owed allegiance to Henry, the disparate parts each had their own histories, traditions and governance structures. As one moved south through Anjou and Aquitaine, the extent of Henry&#x27;s power in the provinces diminished considerably, scarcely resembling the modern concept of an empire at all. Some of the traditional ties between parts of the empire such as Normandy and England were slowly dissolving over time. The future of the empire upon Henry&#x27;s eventual death was not secure: although the custom of primogeniture, under which an eldest son would inherit all his father&#x27;s lands, was slowly becoming more widespread across Europe, it was less popular amongst the Norman kings of England. Most believed that Henry would divide the empire, giving each son a substantial portion, and hoping that his children would continue to work together as allies after his death. To complicate matters, much of the Angevin empire was held by Henry only as a vassal of the king of France of the rival line of the House of Capet. Henry had often allied himself with the Holy Roman Emperor against France, making the feudal relationship even more challenging.

Shortly after his birth, John was passed from Eleanor into the care of a wet nurse, a traditional practice for medieval noble families. Eleanor then left for Poitiers, the capital of Aquitaine, and sent John and his sister Joan north to Fontevrault Abbey. This may have been done with the aim of steering her youngest son, with no obvious inheritance, towards a future ecclesiastical career. Eleanor spent the next few years conspiring against Henry and neither parent played a part in John&#x27;s very early life. John was probably, like his brothers, assigned a &quot;magister&quot; whilst he was at Fontevrault, a teacher charged with his early education and with managing the servants of his immediate household; he was later taught by Ranulf de Glanvill, a leading English administrator. John spent some time as a member of the household of his eldest living brother Henry the Young King, where he probably received instruction in hunting and military skills.

John grew up to be around tall, relatively short, with a &quot;powerful, barrel-chested body&quot; and dark red hair; he looked to contemporaries like an inhabitant of Poitou. John enjoyed reading and, unusually for the period, built up a travelling library of books. He enjoyed gambling, in particular at backgammon, and was an enthusiastic hunter, even by medieval standards. He liked music, although not songs. John would become a &quot;connoisseur of jewels&quot;, building up a large collection, and became famous for his opulent clothes and also, according to French chroniclers, for his fondness for bad wine. As John grew up, he became known for sometimes being &quot;genial, witty, generous and hospitable&quot;; at other moments, he could be jealous, over-sensitive and prone to fits of rage, &quot;biting and gnawing his fingers&quot; in anger.

===Early life===

During John&#x27;s early years, Henry attempted to resolve the question of his succession. Henry the Young King had been crowned King of England in 1170, but was not given any formal powers by his father; he was also promised Normandy and Anjou as part of his future inheritance. His brother Richard was to be appointed the count of Poitou with control of Aquitaine, whilst his brother Geoffrey was to become the duke of Brittany. At this time it seemed unlikely that John would ever inherit substantial lands, and he was jokingly nicknamed &quot;Lackland&quot; by his father.

Henry II wanted to secure the southern borders of Aquitaine and decided to betroth his youngest son to Alais, the daughter and heiress of Count Humbert III of Savoy. As part of this agreement John was promised the future inheritance of Savoy, Piedmont, Maurienne, and the other possessions of Count Humbert. For his part in the potential marriage alliance, Henry II transferred the castles of Chinon, Loudun and Mirebeau into John&#x27;s name; as John was only five years old, his father would continue to control them for practical purposes. Henry the Young King was unimpressed by this; although he had yet to be granted control of any castles in his new kingdom, these were effectively his future property and had been given away without consultation. Alais made the trip over the Alps and joined Henry II&#x27;s court, but she died before marrying John, which left the prince once again without an inheritance.

In 1173 John&#x27;s elder brothers, backed by Eleanor, rose in revolt against Henry in the short-lived rebellion of 1173 to 1174. Growing irritated with his subordinate position to Henry II and increasingly worried that John might be given additional lands and castles at his expense, Henry the Young King travelled to Paris and allied himself with Louis VII. Eleanor, irritated by her husband&#x27;s persistent interference in Aquitaine, encouraged Richard and Geoffrey to join their brother Henry in Paris. Henry II triumphed over the coalition of his sons, but was generous to them in the peace settlement agreed at Montlouis. Henry the Young King was allowed to travel widely in Europe with his own household of knights, Richard was given Aquitaine back, and Geoffrey was allowed to return to Brittany; only Eleanor was imprisoned for her role in the revolt.

John had spent the conflict travelling alongside his father, and was given widespread possessions across the Angevin empire as part of the Montlouis settlement; from then onwards, most observers regarded John as Henry II&#x27;s favourite child, although he was the furthest removed in terms of the royal succession. Henry II began to find more lands for John, mostly at various nobles&#x27; expense. In 1175 he appropriated the estates of the late Earl of Cornwall and gave them to John. The following year, Henry disinherited the sisters of Isabella of Gloucester, contrary to legal custom, and betrothed John to the now extremely wealthy Isabella. In 1177, at the Council of Oxford, Henry dismissed William FitzAldelm as the Lord of Ireland and replaced him with the ten-year-old John.
Henry the Young King fought a short war with his brother Richard in 1183 over the status of England, Normandy and Aquitaine. Henry II moved in support of Richard, and Henry the Young King died from dysentery at the end of the campaign. With his primary heir dead, Henry rearranged the plans for the succession: Richard was to be made King of England, albeit without any actual power until the death of his father; Geoffrey would retain Brittany; and John would now become the Duke of Aquitaine in place of Richard. Richard refused to give up Aquitaine; Henry II was furious and ordered John, with help from Geoffrey, to march south and retake the duchy by force. The two attacked the capital of Poitiers, and Richard responded by attacking Brittany. The war ended in stalemate and a tense family reconciliation in England at the end of 1184.

In 1185 John made his first visit to Ireland, accompanied by 300 knights and a team of administrators. Henry had tried to have John officially proclaimed King of Ireland, but Pope Lucius III would not agree. John&#x27;s first period of rule in Ireland was not a success. Ireland had only recently been conquered by Anglo-Norman forces, and tensions were still rife between Henry II, the new settlers and the existing inhabitants. John infamously offended the local Irish rulers by making fun of their unfashionable long beards, failed to make allies amongst the Anglo-Norman settlers, began to lose ground militarily against the Irish and finally returned to England later in the year, blaming the viceroy, Hugh de Lacy, for the fiasco.

The problems amongst John&#x27;s wider family continued to grow. His elder brother Geoffrey died during a tournament in 1186, leaving a posthumous son, Arthur, and an elder daughter, Eleanor. Geoffrey&#x27;s death brought John slightly closer to the throne of England. The uncertainty about what would happen after Henry&#x27;s death continued to grow; Richard was keen to join a new crusade and remained concerned that whilst he was away Henry would appoint John his formal successor.

Richard began discussions about a potential alliance with Philip II in Paris during 1187, and the next year Richard gave homage to Philip in exchange for support for a war against Henry. Richard and Philip fought a joint campaign against Henry, and by the summer of 1189 Henry made peace, promising Richard the succession. John initially remained loyal to his father, but changed sides once it appeared that Richard would win. Henry died shortly afterwards.

==Richard&#x27;s reign (1189–1199)==
When Richard became king in September 1189, he had already declared his intention of joining the Third Crusade. He set about raising the huge sums of money required for this expedition through the sale of lands, titles and appointments, and attempted to ensure that he would not face a revolt while away from his empire. John was made Count of Mortain, was married to the wealthy Isabella of Gloucester, and was given valuable lands in Lancaster and the counties of Cornwall, Derby, Devon, Dorset, Nottingham and Somerset, all with the aim of buying his loyalty to Richard whilst the King was on crusade. Richard retained royal control of key castles in these counties, thereby preventing John from accumulating too much military and political power. The King named his four-year-old nephew Arthur as his heir. In return, John promised not to visit England for the next three years, thereby in theory giving Richard adequate time to conduct a successful crusade and return from the Levant without fear of John seizing power. Richard left political authority in England—the post of justiciar—jointly in the hands of Bishop Hugh de Puiset and William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex, and made William Longchamp, the Bishop of Ely, his chancellor. Mandeville immediately died, and Longchamp took over as joint justiciar with Puiset, which would prove a less than satisfactory partnership. Eleanor, the queen mother, convinced Richard to allow John into England in his absence.

The political situation in England rapidly began to deteriorate. Longchamp refused to work with Puiset and became unpopular with the English nobility and clergy. John exploited this unpopularity to set himself up as an alternative ruler with his own royal court, complete with his own justiciar, chancellor and other royal posts, and was happy to be portrayed as an alternative regent, and possibly the next king. Armed conflict broke out between John and Longchamp, and by October 1191 Longchamp was isolated in the Tower of London with John in control of the city of London, thanks to promises John had made to the citizens in return for recognition as Richard&#x27;s heir presumptive. At this point Walter of Coutances, the Archbishop of Rouen, returned to England, having been sent by Richard to restore order. John&#x27;s position was undermined by Walter&#x27;s relative popularity and by the news that Richard had married whilst in Cyprus, which presented the possibility that Richard would have legitimate children and heirs.
The political turmoil continued. John began to explore an alliance with King Philip II of France, who had returned from the crusade in late 1191. John hoped to acquire Normandy, Anjou and the other lands in France held by Richard in exchange for allying himself with Philip. John was persuaded not to pursue an alliance by his mother. Longchamp, who had left England after Walter&#x27;s intervention, now returned, and argued that he had been wrongly removed as justiciar. John intervened, suppressing Longchamp&#x27;s claims in return for promises of support from the royal administration, including a reaffirmation of his position as heir to the throne. When Richard still did not return from the crusade, John began to assert that his brother was dead or otherwise permanently lost. Richard had in fact been captured shortly before Christmas 1192, while en route to England, by Duke Leopold V of Austria and was handed over to Emperor Henry VI, who held him for ransom. John seized the opportunity and went to Paris, where he formed an alliance with Philip. He agreed to set aside his wife, Isabella of Gloucester, and marry Philip&#x27;s sister, Alys, in exchange for Philip&#x27;s support. Fighting broke out in England between forces loyal to Richard and those being gathered by John. John&#x27;s military position was weak and he agreed to a truce; in early 1194 the King finally returned to England, and John&#x27;s remaining forces surrendered. John retreated to Normandy, where Richard finally found him later that year. Richard declared that John—despite being 27 years old—was merely &quot;a child who has had evil counsellors&quot; and forgave him, but removed his lands with the exception of Ireland.

For the remaining years of Richard&#x27;s reign, John supported his brother on the continent, apparently loyally. Richard&#x27;s policy on the continent was to attempt to regain through steady, limited campaigns the castles he had lost to Philip II whilst on crusade. He allied himself with the leaders of Flanders, Boulogne and the Holy Roman Empire to apply pressure on Philip from Germany. In 1195 John successfully conducted a sudden attack and siege of Évreux castle, and subsequently managed the defences of Normandy against Philip. The following year, John seized the town of Gamaches and led a raiding party within of Paris, capturing the Bishop of Beauvais. In return for this service, Richard withdrew his (ill-will) towards John, restored him to the county of Gloucestershire and made him again the Count of Mortain.

==Early reign (1199–1204)==

===Accession to the throne, 1199===

After Richard&#x27;s death on 6 April 1199 there were two potential claimants to the Angevin throne: John, whose claim rested on being the sole surviving son of Henry II, and young Arthur I of Brittany, who held a claim as the son of John&#x27;s elder brother Geoffrey. Richard appears to have started to recognise John as his heir presumptive in the final years before his death, but the matter was not clear-cut and medieval law gave little guidance as to how the competing claims should be decided. With Norman law favouring John as the only surviving son of Henry II and Angevin law favouring Arthur as the only son of Henry&#x27;s elder son, the matter rapidly became an open conflict. John was supported by the bulk of the English and Norman nobility and was crowned at Westminster Abbey, backed by his mother, Eleanor. Arthur was supported by the majority of the Breton, Maine and Anjou nobles and received the support of Philip II, who remained committed to breaking up the Angevin territories on the continent. With Arthur&#x27;s army pressing up the Loire Valley towards Angers and Philip&#x27;s forces moving down the valley towards Tours, John&#x27;s continental empire was in danger of being cut in two.

Warfare in Normandy at the time was shaped by the defensive potential of castles and the increasing costs of conducting campaigns. The Norman frontiers had limited natural defences but were heavily reinforced with castles, such as Château Gaillard, at strategic points, built and maintained at considerable expense. It was difficult for a commander to advance far into fresh territory without having secured his lines of communication by capturing these fortifications, which slowed the progress of any attack. Armies of the period could be formed from either feudal or mercenary forces. Feudal levies could be raised only for a fixed length of time before they returned home, forcing an end to a campaign; mercenary forces, often called Brabançons after the Duchy of Brabant but actually recruited from across northern Europe, could operate all year long and provide a commander with more strategic options to pursue a campaign, but cost much more than equivalent feudal forces. As a result, commanders of the period were increasingly drawing on larger numbers of mercenaries.

After his coronation, John moved south into France with military forces and adopted a defensive posture along the eastern and southern Normandy borders. Both sides paused for desultory negotiations before the war recommenced; John&#x27;s position was now stronger, thanks to confirmation that the counts Baldwin IX of Flanders and Renaud of Boulogne had renewed the anti-French alliances they had previously agreed to with Richard. The powerful Anjou nobleman William des Roches was persuaded to switch sides from Arthur to John; suddenly the balance seemed to be tipping away from Philip and Arthur in favour of John. Neither side was keen to continue the conflict, and following a papal truce the two leaders met in January 1200 to negotiate possible terms for peace. From John&#x27;s perspective, what then followed represented an opportunity to stabilise control over his continental possessions and produce a lasting peace with Philip in Paris. John and Philip negotiated the May 1200 Treaty of Le Goulet; by this treaty, Philip recognised John as the rightful heir to Richard in respect to his French possessions, temporarily abandoning the wider claims of his client, Arthur. John, in turn, abandoned Richard&#x27;s former policy of containing Philip through alliances with Flanders and Boulogne, and accepted Philip&#x27;s right as the legitimate feudal overlord of John&#x27;s lands in France. John&#x27;s policy earned him the disrespectful title of &quot;John Softsword&quot; from some English chroniclers, who contrasted his behaviour with his more aggressive brother, Richard.

===Second marriage and consequences, 1200–1202===

The new peace would last only two years; war recommenced in the aftermath of John&#x27;s decision in August 1200 to marry Isabella of Angoulême. In order to remarry, John first needed to abandon his wife Isabella, Countess of Gloucester; the King accomplished this by arguing that he had failed to get the necessary papal dispensation to marry the Countess in the first place—as a cousin, John could not have legally wedded her without this. It remains unclear why John chose to marry Isabella of Angoulême. Contemporary chroniclers argued that John had fallen deeply in love with her, and John may have been motivated by desire for an apparently beautiful, if rather young, girl (Isabella of Angoulême was either 12 or 14 at the time of their marriage). On the other hand, the Angoumois lands that came with her were strategically vital to John: by marrying Isabella, John was acquiring a key land route between Poitou and Gascony, which significantly strengthened his grip on Aquitaine.

Isabella of Angoulême, however, was already engaged to Hugh IX of Lusignan, an important member of a key Poitou noble family and brother of Raoul I, Count of Eu, who possessed lands along the sensitive eastern Normandy border. Just as John stood to benefit strategically from marrying Isabella, so the marriage threatened the interests of the Lusignans, whose own lands currently provided the key route for royal goods and troops across Aquitaine. Rather than negotiating some form of compensation, John treated Hugh &quot;with contempt&quot;; this resulted in a Lusignan uprising that was promptly crushed by John, who also intervened to suppress Raoul in Normandy.

Although John was the Count of Poitou and therefore the rightful feudal lord over the Lusignans, they could legitimately appeal John&#x27;s actions in France to his own feudal lord, Philip. Hugh did exactly this in 1201 and Philip summoned John to attend court in Paris in 1202, citing the Le Goulet treaty to strengthen his case. John was unwilling to weaken his authority in western France in this way. He argued that he need not attend Philip&#x27;s court because of his special status as the Duke of Normandy, who was exempt by feudal tradition from being called to the French court. Philip argued that he was summoning John not as the Duke of Normandy, but as the Count of Poitou, which carried no such special status. When John still refused to come, Philip declared John in breach of his feudal responsibilities, reassigned all of John&#x27;s lands that fell under the French crown to Arthur—with the exception of Normandy, which he took back for himself—and began a fresh war against John.

===Loss of Normandy, 1202–1204===
John initially adopted a defensive posture similar to that of 1199: avoiding open battle and carefully defending his key castles. John&#x27;s operations became more chaotic as the campaign progressed, and Philip began to make steady progress in the east. John became aware in July that Arthur&#x27;s forces were threatening his mother, Eleanor, at Mirebeau Castle. Accompanied by William de Roches, his seneschal in Anjou, he swung his mercenary army rapidly south to protect her. His forces caught Arthur by surprise and captured the entire rebel leadership at the battle of Mirebeau. With his southern flank weakening, Philip was forced to withdraw in the east and turn south himself to contain John&#x27;s army.

John&#x27;s position in France was considerably strengthened by the victory at Mirebeau, but John&#x27;s treatment of his new prisoners and of his ally, William de Roches, quickly undermined these gains. De Roches was a powerful Anjou noble, but John largely ignored him, causing considerable offence, whilst the King kept the rebel leaders in such bad conditions that twenty-two of them died. At this time most of the regional nobility were closely linked through kinship, and this behaviour towards their relatives was regarded as unacceptable. William de Roches and others of John&#x27;s regional allies in Anjou and Brittany deserted him in favour of Philip, and Brittany rose in revolt. John&#x27;s financial situation was tenuous, once factors such as the comparative military costs of materiel and soldiers were taken into account. While Philip enjoyed a considerable, although not overwhelming, advantage of resources over John.

Further desertions of John&#x27;s local allies at the beginning of 1203 steadily reduced his freedom to manoeuvre in the region. He attempted to convince Pope Innocent III to intervene in the conflict, but Innocent&#x27;s efforts were unsuccessful. As the situation became worse for John, he appears to have decided to have Arthur killed, with the aim of removing a potential rival and to undermine the rebel forces in Brittany. Arthur had initially been imprisoned at Falaise and was then moved to Rouen. After this, Arthur&#x27;s fate remains uncertain, but modern historians believe he was murdered by John. The annals of Margam Abbey suggest that &quot;John had captured Arthur and kept him alive in prison for some time in the castle of Rouen ... when John was drunk he slew Arthur with his own hand and tying a heavy stone to the body cast it into the Seine.&quot; Rumours of the manner of Arthur&#x27;s death further reduced support for John across the region. Arthur&#x27;s sister, Eleanor, who had also been captured at Mirebeau, was kept imprisoned by John for many years, albeit in relatively good conditions.
In late 1203, John attempted to relieve Château Gaillard, which although besieged by Philip was guarding the eastern flank of Normandy. John attempted a synchronised operation involving land-based and water-borne forces, considered by most historians today to have been imaginative in conception, but overly complex for forces of the period to have carried out successfully. John&#x27;s relief operation was blocked by Philip&#x27;s forces, and John turned back to Brittany in an attempt to draw Philip away from eastern Normandy. John successfully devastated much of Brittany, but did not deflect Philip&#x27;s main thrust into the east of Normandy.

Opinions vary amongst historians as to the military skill shown by John during this campaign, with most recent historians arguing that his performance was passable, although not impressive.
John&#x27;s situation began to deteriorate rapidly. The eastern border region of Normandy had been extensively cultivated by Philip and his predecessors for several years, whilst Angevin authority in the south had been undermined by Richard&#x27;s giving away of various key castles some years before. His use of mercenaries in the central regions had rapidly eaten away his remaining support in this area too, which set the stage for a sudden collapse of Angevin power. John retreated back across the Channel in December, sending orders for the establishment of a fresh defensive line to the west of Chateau Gaillard. In March 1204, Gaillard fell. John&#x27;s mother Eleanor died the following month. This was not just a personal blow for John, but threatened to unravel the widespread Angevin alliances across the far south of France. Philip moved south around the new defensive line and struck upwards at the heart of the Duchy, now facing little resistance. By August, Philip had taken Normandy and advanced south to occupy Anjou and Poitou as well. John&#x27;s only remaining possession on the Continent was now the Duchy of Aquitaine.

==John as king==

===Kingship and royal administration===

The nature of government under the Angevin monarchs was ill-defined and uncertain. John&#x27;s predecessors had ruled using the principle of (&quot;force and will&quot;), taking executive and sometimes arbitrary decisions, often justified on the basis that a king was above the law. Both Henry II and Richard had argued that kings possessed a quality of &quot;divine majesty&quot;; John continued this trend and claimed an &quot;almost imperial status&quot; for himself as ruler. During the 12th century, there were contrary opinions expressed about the nature of kingship, and many contemporary writers believed that monarchs should rule in accordance with the custom and the law, and take counsel of the leading members of the realm. There was as yet no model for what should happen if a king refused to do so. Despite his claim to unique authority within England, John would sometimes justify his actions on the basis that he had taken council with the barons. Modern historians remain divided as to whether John had a case of &quot;royal schizophrenia&quot; in his approach to government, or if his actions merely reflected the complex model of Angevin kingship in the early 13th century.

John inherited a sophisticated system of administration in England, with a range of royal agents answering to the Royal Household: the Chancery kept written records and communications; the Treasury and the Exchequer dealt with income and expenditure respectively; and various judges were deployed to deliver justice around the kingdom. Thanks to the efforts of men like Hubert Walter, this trend towards improved record keeping continued into his reign. Like previous kings, John managed a court that travelled around the kingdom, dealing with both local and national matters as he went. John was very active in the administration of England and was involved in every aspect of government. In part he was following in the tradition of Henry I and Henry II, but by the 13th century the volume of administrative work had greatly increased, which put much more pressure on a king who wished to rule in this style. John was in England for much longer periods than his predecessors, which made his rule more personal than that of previous kings, particularly in previously ignored areas such as the north.

The administration of justice was of particular importance to John. Several new processes had been introduced to English law under Henry II, including &quot;novel disseisin&quot; and &quot;mort d&#x27;ancestor&quot;. These processes meant the royal courts had a more significant role in local law cases, which had previously been dealt with only by regional or local lords. John increased the professionalism of local sergeants and bailiffs, and extended the system of coroners first introduced by Hubert Walter in 1194, creating a new class of borough coroners. The King worked extremely hard to ensure that this system operated well, through judges he had appointed, by fostering legal specialists and expertise, and by intervening in cases himself. He continued to try relatively minor cases, even during military crises. Viewed positively, Lewis Warren considers that John discharged &quot;his royal duty of providing justice ... with a zeal and a tirelessness to which the English common law is greatly endebted&quot;. Seen more critically, John may have been motivated by the potential of the royal legal process to raise fees, rather than a desire to deliver simple justice; his legal system also applied only to free men, rather than to all of the population. Nonetheless, these changes were popular with many free tenants, who acquired a more reliable legal system that could bypass the barons, against whom such cases were often brought. John&#x27;s reforms were less popular with the barons themselves, especially as they remained subject to arbitrary and frequently vindictive royal justice.

===Economy===

One of John&#x27;s principal challenges was acquiring the large sums of money needed for his proposed campaigns to reclaim Normandy. The Angevin kings had three main sources of income available to them, namely revenue from their personal lands, or &quot;demesne&quot;; money raised through their rights as a feudal lord; and revenue from taxation. Revenue from the royal demesne was inflexible and had been diminishing slowly since the Norman conquest. Matters were not helped by Richard&#x27;s sale of many royal properties in 1189, and taxation played a much smaller role in royal income than in later centuries. English kings had widespread feudal rights which could be used to generate income, including the scutage system, in which feudal military service was avoided by a cash payment to the King. He derived income from fines, court fees and the sale of charters and other privileges. John intensified his efforts to maximise all possible sources of income, to the extent that he has been described as &quot;avaricious, miserly, extortionate and moneyminded&quot;. He also used revenue generation as a way of exerting political control over the barons: debts owed to the crown by the King&#x27;s favoured supporters might be forgiven; collection of those owed by enemies was more stringently enforced.
The result was a sequence of innovative but unpopular financial measures. John levied scutage payments eleven times in his seventeen years as king, as compared to eleven times in total during the reign of the preceding three monarchs. In many cases these were levied in the absence of any actual military campaign, which ran counter to the original idea that scutage was an alternative to actual military service. John maximised his right to demand relief payments when estates and castles were inherited, sometimes charging enormous sums, beyond barons&#x27; abilities to pay. Building on the successful sale of sheriff appointments in 1194, the King initiated a new round of appointments, with the new incumbents making back their investment through increased fines and penalties, particularly in the forests. Another innovation of Richard&#x27;s, increased charges levied on widows who wished to remain single, was expanded under John. John continued to sell charters for new towns, including the planned town of Liverpool, and charters were sold for markets across the kingdom and in Gascony. The King introduced new taxes and extended existing ones. The Jews, who held a vulnerable position in medieval England, protected only by the King, were subject to huge taxes; £44,000 was extracted from the community by the tallage of 1210; much of it was passed on to the Christian debtors of Jewish moneylenders. John created a new tax on income and movable goods in 1207—effectively a version of a modern income tax—that produced £60,000; he created a new set of import and export duties payable directly to the Crown. He found that these measures enabled him to raise further resources through the confiscation of the lands of barons who could not pay or refused to pay.

At the start of John&#x27;s reign there was a sudden change in prices, as bad harvests and high demand for food resulted in much higher prices for grain and animals. This inflationary pressure was to continue for the rest of the 13th century and had long-term economic consequences for England. The resulting social pressures were complicated by bursts of deflation that resulted from John&#x27;s military campaigns. It was usual at the time for the King to collect taxes in silver, which was then re-minted into new coins; these coins would then be put in barrels and sent to royal castles around the country, to be used to hire mercenaries or to meet other costs. At those times when John was preparing for campaigns in Normandy, for example, huge quantities of silver had to be withdrawn from the economy and stored for months, which unintentionally resulted in periods during which silver coins were simply hard to come by, commercial credit difficult to acquire and deflationary pressure placed on the economy. The result was political unrest across the country. John attempted to address some of the problems with the English currency in 1204 and 1205 by carrying out a radical overhaul of the coinage, improving its quality and consistency.

===Royal household and ===
John&#x27;s royal household was based around several groups of followers. One group was the , his immediate friends and knights who travelled around the country with him. They also played an important role in organising and leading military campaigns. Another section of royal followers were the ; these were the senior officials and agents of the King and were essential to his day-to-day rule. Being a member of these inner circles brought huge advantages, as it was easier to gain favours from the King, file lawsuits, marry a wealthy heiress or have one&#x27;s debts remitted. By the time of Henry II, these posts were increasingly being filled by &quot;new men&quot; from outside the normal ranks of the barons. This intensified under John&#x27;s rule, with many lesser nobles arriving from the continent to take up positions at court; many were mercenary leaders from Poitou. These men included soldiers who would become infamous in England for their uncivilised behaviour, including Falkes de Breauté, Gérard d&#x27;Athée, Engelard de Cigogné, and Philip Marc. Many barons perceived the King&#x27;s household as what Ralph Turner has characterised as a &quot;narrow clique enjoying royal favour at barons&#x27; expense&quot; staffed by men of lesser status.

This trend for the King to rely on his own men at the expense of the barons was exacerbated by the tradition of Angevin royal (&quot;anger and ill-will&quot;) and John&#x27;s own personality. From Henry II onwards, had come to describe the right of the King to express his anger and displeasure at particular barons or clergy, building on the Norman concept of —royal ill-will. In the Norman period, suffering the King&#x27;s ill-will meant difficulties in obtaining grants, honours or petitions; Henry II had infamously expressed his fury and ill-will towards Thomas Becket, which ultimately resulted in Becket&#x27;s death. John now had the additional ability to &quot;cripple his vassals&quot; on a significant scale using his new economic and judicial measures, which made the threat of royal anger all the more serious.

John was deeply suspicious of the barons, particularly those with sufficient power and wealth to potentially challenge him. Numerous barons were subjected to his , even including the famous knight William Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke, normally held up as a model of utter loyalty. The most infamous case, which went beyond anything considered acceptable at the time, was that of the powerful William de Braose, 4th Lord of Bramber, who held lands in Ireland. De Braose was subjected to punitive demands for money, and when he refused to pay a huge sum of 40,000 marks (equivalent to £26,666 at the time), his wife, Maud, and one of their sons were imprisoned by John, which resulted in their deaths. De Braose died in exile in 1211, and his grandsons remained in prison until 1218. John&#x27;s suspicions and jealousies meant that he rarely enjoyed good relationships with even the leading loyalist barons.

===Personal life===
John&#x27;s personal life greatly affected his reign. Contemporary chroniclers state that John was sinfully lustful and lacking in piety. It was common for kings and nobles of the period to keep mistresses, but chroniclers complained that John&#x27;s mistresses were married noblewomen, which was considered unacceptable. John had at least five children with mistresses during his first marriage, and two of those mistresses are known to have been noblewomen. John&#x27;s sexual behaviour after his second marriage is less clear, however. None of his known illegitimate children were born after he remarried, and there is no actual documentary proof of adultery after that point, although John certainly had female friends amongst the court throughout the period. The specific accusations made against John during the baronial revolts are now generally considered to have been invented for the purposes of justifying the revolt; nonetheless, most of John&#x27;s contemporaries seem to have held a poor opinion of his sexual behaviour.

The character of John&#x27;s relationship with his second wife, Isabella of Angoulême, is unclear. John married Isabella whilst she was relatively young—her exact date of birth is uncertain, and estimates place her between at most 15 and more probably towards nine years old at the time of her marriage. Even by the standards of the time, she was married whilst very young. John did not provide a great deal of money for his wife&#x27;s household and did not pass on much of the revenue from her lands, to the extent that historian Nicholas Vincent has described him as being &quot;downright mean&quot; towards Isabella. Vincent concluded that the marriage was not a particularly &quot;amicable&quot; one. Other aspects of their marriage suggest a closer, more positive relationship. Chroniclers recorded that John had a &quot;mad infatuation&quot; with Isabella, and certainly the King and Queen had conjugal relations between at least 1207 and 1215; they had five children. In contrast to Vincent, historian William Chester Jordan concludes that the pair were a &quot;companionable couple&quot; who had a successful marriage by the standards of the day.

John&#x27;s lack of religious conviction has been noted by contemporary chroniclers and later historians, with some suspecting that he was at best impious, or even atheistic, a very serious issue at the time. Contemporary chroniclers catalogued his various anti-religious habits at length, including his failure to take communion, his blasphemous remarks, and his witty but scandalous jokes about church doctrine, including jokes about the implausibility of the Resurrection of Jesus. They commented on the paucity of John&#x27;s charitable donations to the Church. Historian Frank McLynn argues that John&#x27;s early years at Fontevrault, combined with his relatively advanced education, may have turned him against the church. Other historians have been more cautious in interpreting this material, noting that chroniclers also reported his personal interest in the life of St Wulfstan and his friendships with several senior clerics, most especially with Hugh of Lincoln, who was later declared a saint. Financial records show a normal royal household engaged in the usual feasts and pious observances—albeit with many records showing John&#x27;s offerings to the poor to atone for routinely breaking church rules and guidance. The historian Lewis Warren has argued that the chronicler accounts were subject to considerable bias and the King was &quot;at least conventionally devout&quot;, citing his pilgrimages and interest in religious scripture and commentaries.

==Later reign (1204–1214)==

===Continental policy===


During the remainder of his reign, John focused on trying to retake Normandy. The available evidence suggests that he did not regard the loss of the Duchy as a permanent shift in Capetian power. Strategically, John faced several challenges: England itself had to be secured against possible French invasion, the sea-routes to Bordeaux needed to be secured following the loss of the land route to Aquitaine, and his remaining possessions in Aquitaine needed to be secured following the death of his mother, Eleanor, in April 1204. John&#x27;s preferred plan was to use Poitou as a base of operations, advance up the Loire Valley to threaten Paris, pin down the French forces and break Philip&#x27;s internal lines of communication before landing a maritime force in the Duchy itself. Ideally, this plan would benefit from the opening of a second front on Philip&#x27;s eastern frontiers with Flanders and Boulogne—effectively a re-creation of Richard&#x27;s old strategy of applying pressure from Germany. All of this would require a great deal of money and soldiers.

John spent much of 1205 securing England against a potential French invasion. As an emergency measure, he recreated a version of Henry II&#x27;s Assize of Arms of 1181, with each shire creating a structure to mobilise local levies. When the threat of invasion faded, John formed a large military force in England intended for Poitou, and a large fleet with soldiers under his own command intended for Normandy. To achieve this, John reformed the English feudal contribution to his campaigns, creating a more flexible system under which only one knight in ten would actually be mobilised, but would be financially supported by the other nine; knights would serve for an indefinite period. John built up a strong team of engineers for siege warfare and a substantial force of professional crossbowmen. The King was supported by a team of leading barons with military expertise, including William Longespée, 3rd Earl of Salisbury, William the Marshal, Roger de Lacy and, until he fell from favour, the marcher lord William de Braose.

John had already begun to improve his Channel forces before the loss of Normandy and he rapidly built up further maritime capabilities after its collapse. Most of these ships were placed along the Cinque Ports, but Portsmouth was also enlarged. By the end of 1204 he had around 50 large galleys available; another 54 vessels were built between 1209 and 1212. William of Wrotham was appointed &quot;keeper of the galleys&quot;, effectively John&#x27;s chief admiral. Wrotham was responsible for fusing John&#x27;s galleys, the ships of the Cinque Ports and pressed merchant vessels into a single operational fleet. John adopted recent improvements in ship design, including new large transport ships called &quot;buisses&quot; and removable forecastles for use in combat.

Baronial unrest in England prevented the departure of the planned 1205 expedition, and only a smaller force under William Longespée deployed to Poitou. In 1206 John departed for Poitou himself, but was forced to divert south to counter a threat to Gascony from Alfonso VIII of Castile. After a successful campaign against Alfonso, John headed north again, taking the city of Angers. Philip moved south to meet John; the year&#x27;s campaigning ended in stalemate and a two-year truce was made between the two rulers.

During the truce of 1206–1208, John focused on building up his financial and military resources in preparation for another attempt to recapture Normandy. John used some of this money to pay for new alliances on Philip&#x27;s eastern frontiers, where the growth in Capetian power was beginning to concern France&#x27;s neighbours. By 1212 John had successfully concluded alliances with his nephew Otto IV of Germany, a contender for the crown of Holy Roman Emperor, as well as with the counts Renaud of Boulogne and Ferdinand of Flanders. The invasion plans for 1212 were postponed because of fresh English baronial unrest about service in Poitou. Philip seized the initiative in 1213, sending his elder son, Louis, to invade Flanders with the intention of next launching an invasion of England. John was forced to postpone his own invasion plans to counter this threat. He launched his new fleet to attack the French at the harbour of Damme. The attack was a success, destroying Philip&#x27;s vessels and any chances of an invasion of England that year. John hoped to exploit this advantage by invading himself late in 1213, but baronial discontent again delayed his invasion plans until early 1214, in what was his final Continental campaign.

===Scotland, Ireland and Wales===

In the late 12th and early 13th centuries the border and political relationship between England and Scotland was disputed, with the kings of Scotland claiming parts of what is now northern England. Henry II had forced William the Lion to swear fealty to him at the Treaty of Falaise in 1174. This had been rescinded by Richard I in exchange for financial compensation in 1189, but the relationship remained uneasy. John began his reign by reasserting his sovereignty over the disputed northern counties. He refused William&#x27;s request for the earldom of Northumbria, but did not intervene in Scotland itself and focused on his continental problems. The two kings maintained a friendly relationship, meeting in 1206 and 1207, until it was rumoured in 1209 that William was intending to ally himself with Philip II of France. John invaded Scotland and forced William to sign the Treaty of Norham, which gave John control of William&#x27;s daughters and required a payment of £10,000. This effectively crippled William&#x27;s power north of the border, and by 1212 John had to intervene militarily to support William against his internal rivals. John made no efforts to reinvigorate the Treaty of Falaise, though, and William and his son Alexander II of Scotland in turn remained independent kings, supported by, but not owing fealty to, John.

John remained Lord of Ireland throughout his reign. He drew on the country for resources to fight his war with Philip on the continent. Conflict continued in Ireland between the Anglo-Norman settlers and the indigenous Irish chieftains, with John manipulating both groups to expand his wealth and power in the country. During Richard&#x27;s rule, John had successfully increased the size of his lands in Ireland, and he continued this policy as king. In 1210 the King crossed into Ireland with a large army to crush a rebellion by the Anglo-Norman lords; he reasserted his control of the country and used a new charter to order compliance with English laws and customs in Ireland. John stopped short of trying to actively enforce this charter on the native Irish kingdoms, but historian David Carpenter suspects that he might have done so, had the baronial conflict in England not intervened. Simmering tensions remained with the native Irish leaders even after John left for England.

Royal power in Wales was unevenly applied, with the country divided between the marcher lords along the borders, royal territories in Pembrokeshire and the more independent native Welsh lords of North Wales. John took a close interest in Wales and knew the country well, visiting every year between 1204 and 1211 and marrying his illegitimate daughter, Joan, to the Welsh prince Llywelyn the Great. The King used the marcher lords and the native Welsh to increase his own territory and power, striking a sequence of increasingly precise deals backed by royal military power with the Welsh rulers. A major royal expedition to enforce these agreements occurred in 1211, after Llywelyn attempted to exploit the instability caused by the removal of William de Braose, through the Welsh uprising of 1211. John&#x27;s invasion, striking into the Welsh heartlands, was a military success. Llywelyn came to terms that included an expansion of John&#x27;s power across much of Wales, albeit only temporarily.

===Dispute with the Pope and excommunication===

When the Archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert Walter, died on 13 July 1205, John became involved in a dispute with Pope Innocent III that would lead to the King&#x27;s excommunication. The Norman and Angevin kings had traditionally exercised a great deal of power over the church within their territories. From the 1040s onwards, however, successive popes had put forward a reforming message that emphasised the importance of the Church being &quot;governed more coherently and more hierarchically from the centre&quot; and established &quot;its own sphere of authority and jurisdiction, separate from and independent of that of the lay ruler&quot;, in the words of historian Richard Huscroft. After the 1140s, these principles had been largely accepted within the English Church, albeit with an element of concern about centralising authority in Rome. These changes brought the customary rights of lay rulers such as John over ecclesiastical appointments into question. Pope Innocent was, according to historian Ralph Turner, an &quot;ambitious and aggressive&quot; religious leader, insistent on his rights and responsibilities within the church.

John wanted John de Gray, the Bishop of Norwich and one of his own supporters, to be appointed Archbishop of Canterbury, but the cathedral chapter for Canterbury Cathedral claimed the exclusive right to elect the Archbishop. They favoured Reginald, the chapter&#x27;s sub-prior. To complicate matters, the bishops of the province of Canterbury also claimed the right to appoint the next archbishop. The chapter secretly elected Reginald and he travelled to Rome to be confirmed; the bishops challenged the appointment and the matter was taken before Innocent. John forced the Canterbury chapter to change their support to John de Gray, and a messenger was sent to Rome to inform the papacy of the new decision. Innocent disavowed both Reginald and John de Gray, and instead appointed his own candidate, Stephen Langton. John refused Innocent&#x27;s request that he consent to Langton&#x27;s appointment, but the Pope consecrated Langton anyway in June 1207.

John was incensed about what he perceived as an abrogation of his customary right as monarch to influence the election. He complained both about the choice of Langton as an individual, as John felt he was overly influenced by the Capetian court in Paris, and about the process as a whole. He barred Langton from entering England and seized the lands of the archbishopric and other papal possessions. Innocent set a commission in place to try to convince John to change his mind, but to no avail. Innocent then placed an interdict on England in March 1208, prohibiting clergy from conducting religious services, with the exception of baptisms for the young, and confessions and absolutions for the dying.
John treated the interdict as &quot;the equivalent of a papal declaration of war&quot;. He responded by attempting to punish Innocent personally and to drive a wedge between the English clergymen who might support John and those allying themselves firmly with the authorities in Rome. John seized the lands of the clergymen unwilling to conduct services, as well as estates linked to Innocent himself; he arrested the illicit concubines that many clerics kept during the period, releasing them only after the payment of fines; he seized the lands of members of the church who had fled England, and he promised protection for those willing to remain loyal to him. In many cases, individual institutions were able to negotiate terms for managing their own properties and keeping the produce of their estates. By 1209 the situation showed no signs of resolution, and Innocent threatened to excommunicate John if he did not acquiesce to Langton&#x27;s appointment. When this threat failed, Innocent excommunicated the King in November 1209. Although theoretically a significant blow to John&#x27;s legitimacy, this did not appear to worry the King greatly. Two of John&#x27;s close allies, Emperor Otto IV and Count Raymond VI of Toulouse, had already suffered the same punishment themselves, and the significance of excommunication had been somewhat devalued. John simply tightened his existing measures and accrued significant sums from the income of vacant sees and abbeys. One 1213 estimate, for example, suggested the church had lost an estimated 100,000 marks (equivalent to ~£67,000 at the time) to John. Official figures suggest that around 14% of the annual income from the English church was being appropriated by John.

Innocent gave some dispensations as the crisis progressed. Monastic communities were allowed to celebrate Mass in private from 1209 onwards, and late in 1212 the Holy Viaticum for the dying was authorised. The rules on burials and lay access to churches appear to have been steadily circumvented, at least unofficially. Although the interdict was a burden to much of the population, it did not result in rebellion against John. By 1213, though, John was increasingly worried about the threat of a French invasion. Some contemporary chroniclers suggest that in January of that year, Philip II of France had been charged with deposing John on behalf of the papacy, although it appears that the Pope had merely prepared secret letters in case he needed to claim the credit if Philip successfully invaded England.

Under mounting political pressure, John finally negotiated terms for a reconciliation, and the papal terms for submission were accepted in the presence of the papal legate Pandulf Verraccio in May 1213 at the Templar Church at Dover. As part of the deal, John offered to surrender the Kingdom of England to the papacy for a feudal service of 1,000 marks (equivalent to ~£700 at the time) annually; 700 marks (~£500) for England and 300 marks (~£200) for Ireland, as well as compensation to the Church for any revenue lost during the crisis. The agreement was formalised in the , or Golden Bull. This resolution produced mixed responses. Although some chroniclers felt that John had been humiliated by the sequence of events, there was little public reaction. The Pope benefited from the resolution of his long-standing English problem, but John probably gained more, as Innocent became a firm supporter of John for the rest of his reign. Backing him in both domestic and continental policy issues. Innocent immediately turned against Philip, calling upon him to reject plans to invade England and to sue for peace. John paid some of the compensation money he had promised the Church, but he ceased making payments in late 1214, leaving two-thirds of the sum unpaid; Innocent appears to have conveniently forgotten this debt for the good of the wider relationship.

==Failure in France and the First Barons&#x27; War (1215–1216)==
===Tensions and discontent===
Tensions between John and the barons had been growing for several years, as demonstrated by the 1212 plot against the King. Many of the disaffected barons came from the north of England; that faction was often labelled by contemporaries and historians as &quot;the Northerners&quot;. The northern barons rarely had any personal stake in the conflict in France, and many of them owed large sums of money to John; the revolt has been characterised as &quot;a rebellion of the king&#x27;s debtors&quot;. Many of John&#x27;s military household joined the rebels, particularly amongst those that John had appointed to administrative roles across England; their local links and loyalties outweighed their personal loyalty to John. Tension also grew across North Wales, where opposition to the 1211 treaty between John and Llywelyn was turning into open conflict. For some the appointment of Peter des Roches as justiciar was an important factor, as he was considered an &quot;abrasive foreigner&quot; by many of the barons. The failure of John&#x27;s French military campaign in 1214 was probably the final straw that precipitated the baronial uprising during John&#x27;s final years as king; James Holt describes the path to civil war as &quot;direct, short and unavoidable&quot; following the defeat at Bouvines.

===Failure of the 1214 French campaign===
In 1214 John began his final campaign to reclaim Normandy from Philip. He was optimistic, as he had successfully built up alliances with Emperor Otto IV, Renaud of Boulogne and Ferdinand of Flanders; he was enjoying papal favour; and he had successfully built up substantial funds to pay for the deployment of his experienced army. Nonetheless, when John left for Poitou in February 1214, many barons refused to provide military service; mercenary knights had to fill the gaps. John&#x27;s plan was to split Philip&#x27;s forces by pushing north-east from Poitou towards Paris, whilst Otto, Renaud and Ferdinand, supported by William Longespée, marched south-west from Flanders.

The first part of the campaign went well, with John outmanoeuvring the forces under the command of Prince Louis and retaking the county of Anjou by the end of June. John besieged the castle of Roche-au-Moine, a key stronghold, forcing Louis to give battle against John&#x27;s larger army. The local Angevin nobles refused to advance with John; left at something of a disadvantage, John retreated back to La Rochelle. Shortly afterwards, King Philip won the hard-fought battle of Bouvines in the north against Otto and John&#x27;s other allies, bringing an end to John&#x27;s hopes of retaking Normandy. A peace agreement was signed in which John returned Anjou to Philip and paid him compensation; the truce was intended to last for six years. John arrived back in England in October.

===Pre-war tensions and Magna Carta===
Within a few months of John&#x27;s return, rebel barons in the north and east of England were organising resistance to his rule. John held a council in London in January 1215 to discuss potential reforms and sponsored discussions in Oxford between his agents and the rebels during the spring. He appears to have been playing for time until Pope Innocent III could send letters giving him explicit papal support. This was particularly important for John, as a way of pressuring the barons but also as a way of controlling Stephen Langton, the Archbishop of Canterbury. In the meantime, John began to recruit fresh mercenary forces from Poitou, although some were later sent back to avoid giving the impression that John was escalating the conflict. The King announced his intent to become a crusader, a move which gave him additional political protection under church law.

Letters of support from the Pope arrived in April but by then the rebel barons had organised. They congregated at Northampton in May and renounced their feudal ties to John, appointing Robert fitz Walter as their military leader. This self-proclaimed &quot;Army of God&quot; marched on London, taking the capital as well as Lincoln and Exeter. John&#x27;s efforts to appear moderate and conciliatory had been largely successful, but once the rebels held London they attracted a fresh wave of defectors from John&#x27;s royalist faction. John instructed Langton to organise peace talks with the rebel barons.

John met the rebel leaders at Runnymede, near Windsor Castle, on 15 June 1215. Langton&#x27;s efforts at mediation created a charter capturing the proposed peace agreement; it was later renamed Magna Carta, or &quot;Great Charter&quot;. The charter went beyond simply addressing specific baronial complaints, and formed a wider proposal for political reform, albeit one focusing on the rights of free men, not serfs and unfree labour. It promised the protection of church rights, protection from illegal imprisonment, access to swift justice, new taxation only with baronial consent and limitations on scutage and other feudal payments. A council of twenty-five barons would be created to monitor and ensure John&#x27;s future adherence to the charter, whilst the rebel army would stand down and London would be surrendered to the King.

Neither John nor the rebel barons seriously attempted to implement the peace accord. The rebel barons suspected that the proposed baronial council would be unacceptable to John and that he would challenge the legality of the charter; they packed the baronial council with their own hardliners and refused to demobilise their forces or surrender London as agreed. Despite his promises to the contrary, John appealed to Innocent for help, observing that the charter compromised the Pope&#x27;s rights under the 1213 agreement that had appointed him John&#x27;s feudal lord. Innocent obliged; he declared the charter &quot;not only shameful and demeaning, but illegal and unjust&quot; and excommunicated the rebel barons. The failure of the agreement led rapidly to the First Barons&#x27; War.

===War with the barons===
The rebels made the first move in the war, seizing the strategic Rochester Castle, owned by Langton but left almost unguarded by the archbishop. John was well prepared for a conflict. He had stockpiled money to pay for mercenaries and ensured the support of the powerful marcher lords with their own feudal forces, such as William Marshal and Ranulf de Blondeville, 6th Earl of Chester. The rebels lacked the engineering expertise or heavy equipment necessary to assault the network of royal castles that cut off the northern rebel barons from those in the south. John&#x27;s strategy was to isolate the rebel barons in London, protect his own supply lines to his key source of mercenaries in Flanders, prevent the French from landing in the south-east, and then win the war through slow attrition. John put off dealing with the badly deteriorating situation in North Wales, where Prince Llywelyn was leading a rebellion against the 1211 settlement.

John&#x27;s campaign started well. In November John retook Rochester Castle from rebel baron William d&#x27;Aubigny in a sophisticated assault. One chronicler had not seen &quot;a siege so hard pressed or so strongly resisted&quot;, whilst historian Reginald Brown describes it as &quot;one of the greatest [siege] operations in England up to that time&quot;. Having regained the south-east John split his forces, sending William Longespée to retake the north side of London and East Anglia, whilst John himself headed north via Nottingham to attack the estates of the northern barons. Both operations were successful and the majority of the remaining rebels were pinned down in London. In January 1216 John marched against Alexander II of Scotland, who had allied himself with the rebel cause. John took back Alexander&#x27;s possessions in northern England in a rapid campaign and pushed up towards Edinburgh over a ten-day period.

The rebel barons responded by inviting Prince Louis of France to lead them: Louis had a claim to the English throne by virtue of his marriage to Blanche of Castile, a granddaughter of Henry II. Philip may have provided his son with private support but refused to openly support Louis, who was excommunicated by Innocent for taking part in the war against John. Louis&#x27; planned arrival in England presented a significant problem for John, as Louis would bring with him naval vessels and siege engines essential to the rebel cause. Once John contained Alexander in Scotland, he marched south to deal with the challenge of the coming invasion.

Louis intended to land in the south of England in May 1216, and John assembled a naval force to intercept him. Unfortunately for John, his fleet was dispersed by bad storms and Louis landed unopposed in Kent. John hesitated and decided not to attack Louis immediately, either due to the risks of open battle or over concerns about the loyalty of his own men. Louis and the rebel barons advanced west and John retreated, spending the summer reorganising his defences across the rest of the kingdom. John saw several of his military household desert to the rebels, including his half-brother, William Longespée. By the end of the summer the rebels had regained the south-east of England and parts of the north.

==Death==

In September 1216, John began a fresh, vigorous attack. He marched from the Cotswolds, feigned an offensive to relieve the besieged Windsor Castle, and attacked eastwards around London to Cambridge to separate the rebel-held areas of Lincolnshire and East Anglia. From there he travelled north to relieve the rebel siege at Lincoln and back east to Lynn, probably to order further supplies from the continent. In Lynn, John contracted dysentery, which would ultimately prove fatal. Meanwhile, Alexander II invaded northern England again, taking Carlisle in August and then marching south to give homage to Prince Louis for his English possessions; John narrowly missed intercepting Alexander along the way. Tensions between Louis and the English barons began to increase, prompting a wave of desertions, including William Marshal&#x27;s son William and William Longespée, who both returned to John&#x27;s faction.

=== Crown Jewels ===
John returned west but is said to have lost much of his baggage train along the way. Roger of Wendover provides the most graphic account of this, suggesting that the King&#x27;s belongings, including the English Crown Jewels, were lost as he crossed one of the tidal estuaries which empties into the Wash, being sucked in by quicksand and whirlpools. Accounts of the incident vary considerably between the various chroniclers and the exact location of the incident has never been confirmed; the losses may have involved only a few of his pack-horses. Modern historians assert that by October 1216 John faced a &quot;stalemate&quot;, &quot;a military situation uncompromised by defeat&quot;.

John&#x27;s illness grew worse and by the time he reached Newark Castle, Nottinghamshire, he was unable to travel any farther; he died on the night of 18/19 October. Numerous—probably fictitious—accounts circulated soon after his death that he had been killed by poisoned ale, poisoned plums or a &quot;surfeit of peaches&quot;. His body was escorted south by a company of mercenaries and he was buried in Worcester Cathedral in front of the altar of St Wulfstan. A new sarcophagus with an effigy was made for him in 1232, in which his remains now rest.

==Legacy==
In the aftermath of John&#x27;s death, William Marshal was declared the protector of the nine-year-old Henry III. The civil war continued until royalist victories at the battles of Lincoln and Dover in 1217. Louis gave up his claim to the English throne and signed the Treaty of Lambeth. The failed Magna Carta agreement was resuscitated by Marshal&#x27;s administration and reissued in an edited form in 1217 as a basis for future government. Henry III continued his attempts to reclaim Normandy and Anjou until 1259, but John&#x27;s continental losses and the consequent growth of Capetian power in the 13th century proved to mark a &quot;turning point in European history&quot;.

John&#x27;s niece Eleanor would remain honorably treated due a princess, but according to his will, she would never be released from prison, for she might have a potential claim to the throne of Henry III.

John&#x27;s first wife, Isabella of Gloucester, was released from imprisonment in 1214; she remarried twice, and died in 1217. John&#x27;s second wife, Isabella of Angoulême, left England for Angoulême soon after the King&#x27;s death; she became a powerful regional leader, but largely abandoned the children that she had borne to John. Their eldest son, Henry III, ruled as King of England for the majority of the 13th century. Their other son, Richard of Cornwall, became a noted European leader and ultimately the King of the Romans in the Holy Roman Empire. Their daughter Joan became Queen of Scotland on her marriage to Alexander II. Another daughter, Isabella, was Holy Roman Empress as the wife of Emperor Frederick II. The youngest daughter, Eleanor, married William Marshal&#x27;s son, also called William, and later the famous English rebel Simon de Montfort.

By various mistresses, John had eight, possibly nine, sons—Richard, Oliver, John, Geoffrey, Henry, Osbert Gifford, Eudes, Bartholomew and probably Philip—and two or three daughters—Joan, Maud and probably Isabel. Of these, Joan became the most famous, marrying Prince Llywelyn the Great of Wales.

===Historiography===

Historical interpretations of John have been subject to considerable change over the centuries. Medieval chroniclers provided the first contemporary, or near contemporary, histories of John&#x27;s reign. One group of chroniclers wrote early in John&#x27;s life, or around the time of his accession, including Richard of Devizes, William of Newburgh, Roger of Hoveden and Ralph de Diceto. These historians were generally unsympathetic to John&#x27;s behaviour under Richard&#x27;s rule, but slightly more positive towards the very earliest years of John&#x27;s reign.

Reliable accounts of the middle and later parts of John&#x27;s reign are more limited, with Gervase of Canterbury and Ralph of Coggeshall writing the main accounts; neither of them were positive about John&#x27;s performance as king. Much of John&#x27;s later, negative reputation was established by two chroniclers writing after his death, Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris, the latter claiming that John attempted conversion to Islam in exchange for military aid from the Almohad ruler Muhammad al-Nasir—a story modern historians consider untrue.

In the 16th century, political and religious changes altered the attitude of historians towards John. Tudor historians were generally favourably inclined towards the King, focusing on his opposition to the Papacy and his promotion of the special rights and prerogatives of a king. Revisionist histories written by John Foxe, William Tyndale and Robert Barnes portrayed John as an early Protestant hero, and Foxe included the King in his &quot;Book of Martyrs&quot;. John Speed&#x27;s &quot;Historie of Great Britaine&quot; in 1632 praised John&#x27;s &quot;great renown&quot; as a king; he blamed the bias of medieval chroniclers for the King&#x27;s poor reputation.
By the Victorian period in the 19th century, historians were more inclined to draw on the judgements of the chroniclers and to focus on John&#x27;s moral personality. Kate Norgate, for example, argued that John&#x27;s downfall had been due not to his failure in war or strategy, but due to his &quot;almost superhuman wickedness&quot;, whilst James Ramsay blamed John&#x27;s family background and his cruel personality for his downfall. Historians in the &quot;Whiggish&quot; tradition, focusing on documents such as the Domesday Book and Magna Carta, trace a progressive and universalist course of political and economic development in England over the medieval period.

These historians were often inclined to see John&#x27;s reign, and his signing of Magna Carta in particular, as a positive step in the constitutional development of England, despite the flaws of the King himself. Winston Churchill, for example, argued that &quot;[w]hen the long tally is added, it will be seen that the British nation and the English-speaking world owe far more to the vices of John than to the labours of virtuous sovereigns&quot;.

In the 1940s, new interpretations of John&#x27;s reign began to be published, based on research into documents dating to his reign, such as pipe rolls, charters, court documents and similar primary records. Notably, an essay by Vivian Galbraith in 1945 proposed a &quot;new approach&quot; to understanding the ruler. The use of recorded evidence was combined with an increased scepticism about two of the most colourful chroniclers of John&#x27;s reign, Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris. In many cases, the detail provided by these chroniclers, both writing after John&#x27;s death, was challenged by modern historians.

Interpretations of Magna Carta and the role of the rebel barons in 1215 have been significantly revised: Although the charter&#x27;s symbolic, constitutional value for later generations is unquestionable, in the context of John&#x27;s reign, most historians now consider it a failed peace agreement between &quot;partisan&quot; factions. There has been increasing debate about the nature of John&#x27;s Irish policies. Specialists in Irish medieval history, such as Sean Duffy, have challenged the conventional narrative established by Lewis Warren, suggesting that Ireland was less stable by 1216 than was previously supposed.

Most historians today, including John&#x27;s recent biographers Ralph Turner and Lewis Warren, argue that John was an unsuccessful monarch, but note that his failings were exaggerated by 12th- and 13th-century chroniclers. Jim Bradbury notes the current consensus that John was a &quot;hard-working administrator, an able man, an able general&quot;, albeit, as Turner suggests, with &quot;distasteful, even dangerous personality traits&quot;, including pettiness, spitefulness and cruelty. John Gillingham, author of a major biography of Richard I, follows this line too, although he considers John a less effective general than do Turner or Warren, and describes him &quot;one of the worst kings ever to rule England&quot;.

Bradbury takes a moderate line, but suggests that in recent years modern historians have been overly lenient towards John&#x27;s numerous faults. Popular historian Frank McLynn maintains a counter-revisionist perspective on John, arguing that the King&#x27;s modern reputation amongst historians is &quot;bizarre&quot;, and that, as a monarch, John &quot;fails almost all those [tests] that can be legitimately set&quot;. According to C. Warren Hollister, &quot;The dramatic ambivalence of his personality, the passions that he stirred among his own contemporaries, the very magnitude of his failures, have made him an object of endless fascination to historians and biographers.&quot;

===Popular representations===
Popular representations of John first began to emerge during the Tudor period, mirroring the revisionist histories of the time. The anonymous play &quot;The Troublesome Reign of King John&quot; portrayed the King as a &quot;proto-Protestant martyr&quot;, similar to that shown in John Bale&#x27;s morality play &quot;Kynge Johan&quot;, in which John attempts to save England from the &quot;evil agents of the Roman Church&quot;. By contrast, Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;King John&quot;, a relatively anti-Catholic play that draws on &quot;The Troublesome Reign&quot; for its source material, offers a more &quot;balanced, dual view of a complex monarch as both a proto-Protestant victim of Rome&#x27;s machinations and as a weak, selfishly motivated ruler&quot;.

Anthony Munday&#x27;s play &quot;The Downfall and The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington&quot; portrays many of John&#x27;s negative traits, but adopts a positive interpretation of the King&#x27;s stand against the Roman Catholic Church, in line with the contemporary views of the Tudor monarchs. By the middle of the 17th century, plays such as Robert Davenport&#x27;s &quot;King John and Matilda&quot;, although based largely on the earlier Elizabethan works, were transferring the role of Protestant champion to the barons and focusing more on the tyrannical aspects of John&#x27;s behaviour.

Nineteenth-century fictional depictions of John were heavily influenced by Sir Walter Scott&#x27;s historical romance, &quot;Ivanhoe&quot;, which presented &quot;an almost totally unfavourable picture&quot; of the King; the work drew on 19th-century histories of the period and on Shakespeare&#x27;s play. Scott&#x27;s work influenced the late-19th-century children&#x27;s writer Howard Pyle&#x27;s book &quot;The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood&quot;, which in turn established John as the principal villain within the traditional Robin Hood narrative.

During the 20th century, John was normally depicted in fictional books and films alongside Robin Hood. Sam De Grasse&#x27;s role as John in the black-and-white 1922 film version shows John committing numerous atrocities and acts of torture. Claude Rains played John in the 1938 colour version alongside Errol Flynn, starting a trend for films to depict John as an &quot;effeminate ... arrogant and cowardly stay-at-home&quot;. The character of John acts either to highlight the virtues of King Richard, or contrasts with the Sheriff of Nottingham, who is usually the &quot;swashbuckling villain&quot; opposing Robin.

An extreme version of this trend can be seen in the 1973 Disney cartoon version, for example, which depicts John, voiced by Peter Ustinov, as a &quot;cowardly, thumbsucking lion&quot;. Popular works that depict John beyond the Robin Hood legends, such as James Goldman&#x27;s play and later film, &quot;The Lion in Winter&quot;, set in 1183, commonly present him as an &quot;effete weakling&quot;, in this instance contrasted with the more masculine Henry II, or as a tyrant, as in A. A. Milne&#x27;s poem for children, &quot;King John&#x27;s Christmas&quot;.

==Issue==
John and Isabella of Angoulême had five children:

# Henry III, King of England (1 October 1207 – 16 November 1272)
# Richard, King of the Romans (5 January 1209 – 2 April 1272)
# Joan, Queen of Scotland (22 July 1210 – 4 March 1238)
# Isabella, Holy Roman Empress (1214 – 1 December 1241)
# Eleanor, Countess of Pembroke (1215 – 13 April 1275)

John had several mistresses, including one named Suzanne. His known illegitimate children are:

# Richard FitzRoy ( – June 1246), whose mother was Adela de Warenne, John&#x27;s half-first cousin
# Joan, Lady of Wales ( – February 1237), also known by her Welsh name of Siwan
# John (fl. 1201), who became a clerk
# Geoffrey (died 1205), held the honour of Perche
# Oliver fitz Regis (bef. 1199 – 1218/1219), whose mother was Hawise, sister of Fulk FitzWarin
# Osbert Giffard

==Genealogical table==
==See also==
* List of earls in the reign of King John

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* in 
* in 
* in 
*: in 
* 
* 
*: 
* in 
* in 
* 
* in 
* in 
* 
* 
* in 
* 
*: in 
* 
* in 
* 
* 
*: in 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in 
* 
* in 
*: 
* 
* in 
* 
* in 
* 
* in 
* in 


==External links==
* John Lackland at the official website of the British monarchy






|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="0" end="4" title="John, King of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="46" end="61" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="109" end="126" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="170" end="189" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="224" end="238" title="Angevin Empire" label="Angevin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179544" start="304" end="320" title="Capetian dynasty" label="Capetian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="350" end="365" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="baronial revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="420" end="431" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="504" end="538" title="constitution of the United Kingdom" label="constitution of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="575" end="594" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q178525" start="607" end="627" title="Eleanor of Aquitaine" label="Eleanor of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="646" end="659" title="John, King of England" label="John Lackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345927" start="800" end="819" title="revolt of 1173–1174" label="revolt of 1173–1174"/>
<link wikidata="Q235238" start="836" end="856" title="Henry the Young King" label="Henry the Young King"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="858" end="865" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q314550" start="871" end="879" title="Geoffrey II, Duke of Brittany" label="Geoffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="921" end="936" title="Lord of Ireland" label="Lord of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="1161" end="1174" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q449076" start="1362" end="1381" title="treaty of Le Goulet" label="treaty of Le Goulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="1526" end="1532" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q309197" start="1534" end="1540" title="Bretons" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991084" start="1546" end="1551" title="County of Anjou" label="Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933898" start="1575" end="1616" title="Invasion of Normandy by Philip II of France" label="collapse of his empire in northern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="1830" end="1848" title="English common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="1928" end="1945" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="1967" end="1991" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q465329" start="1992" end="2007" title="Stephen Langton" label="Stephen Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q112338867" start="2019" end="2042" title="Papal interdict of 1208" label="Papal interdict of 1208"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="2116" end="2131" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q830626" start="2303" end="2321" title="Battle of Bouvines" label="Battle of Bouvines"/>
<link wikidata="Q187021" start="2424" end="2439" title="fiscal policies" label="fiscal policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="2717" end="2739" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Prince Louis of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="2790" end="2799" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="2884" end="2893" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178743" start="3196" end="3208" title="Jim Bradbury" label="Jim Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129632" start="3510" end="3522" title="Ralph H. Turner" label="Ralph Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="3722" end="3735" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="3834" end="3844" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="3980" end="3999" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991084" start="4069" end="4074" title="County of Anjou" label="Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="4076" end="4084" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4089" end="4096" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q71747" start="4137" end="4145" title="Duchy of Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q178525" start="4170" end="4177" title="Eleanor of Aquitaine" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q429599" start="4192" end="4212" title="duchess of Aquitaine" label="duchess of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334322" start="4241" end="4249" title="County of Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="4254" end="4262" title="County of Auvergne" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="4275" end="4281" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="4314" end="4333" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="4383" end="4397" title="Angevin Empire" label="Angevin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q770768" start="4442" end="4456" title="Count of Anjou" label="Count of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="4493" end="4499" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="5083" end="5096" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="5530" end="5536" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937731" start="5584" end="5598" title="House of Capet" label="House of Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="5640" end="5658" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="5803" end="5812" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616" start="5888" end="5896" title="Poitiers" label="Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q235418" start="5953" end="5957" title="Joan of England, Queen of Sicily" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q283254" start="5967" end="5984" title="Fontevrault Abbey" label="Fontevrault Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053636" start="6470" end="6488" title="Ranulf de Glanvill" label="Ranulf de Glanvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q235238" start="6602" end="6622" title="Henry the Young King" label="Henry the Young King"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="6864" end="6870" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q11411" start="7002" end="7012" title="backgammon" label="backgammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="7863" end="7870" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q314550" start="7957" end="7965" title="Geoffrey II, Duke of Brittany" label="Geoffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q664561" start="8293" end="8313" title="Humbert III of Savoy" label="Humbert III of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="8385" end="8390" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242274" start="8402" end="8411" title="Maurienne" label="Maurienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q912447" start="8542" end="8548" title="Château de Chinon" label="Chinon"/>
<link wikidata="Q829358" start="8550" end="8556" title="Loudun" label="Loudun"/>
<link wikidata="Q753745" start="8561" end="8569" title="Mirebeau" label="Mirebeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345927" start="9168" end="9193" title="rebellion of 1173 to 1174" label="rebellion of 1173 to 1174"/>
<link wikidata="Q638668" start="9684" end="9693" title="Montlouis-sur-Loire" label="Montlouis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363727" start="10377" end="10393" title="Reginald de Dunstanville, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Earl of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q242636" start="10471" end="10493" title="Isabella of Gloucester" label="Isabella of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009087" start="10630" end="10648" title="William FitzAldelm" label="William FitzAldelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="10656" end="10671" title="Lord of Ireland" label="Lord of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="10915" end="10924" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217306" start="11582" end="11604" title="John&amp;#x27;s first expedition to Ireland" label="first visit to Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182474" start="11735" end="11750" title="Pope Lucius III" label="Pope Lucius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932026" start="12019" end="12037" title="List of Irish kingdoms" label="local Irish rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634638" start="12267" end="12279" title="Hugh de Lacy, Lord of Meath" label="Hugh de Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q363800" start="12450" end="12456" title="Arthur I, Duke of Brittany" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091197" start="12481" end="12488" title="Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="12682" end="12689" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="13378" end="13391" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q960232" start="13616" end="13632" title="Count of Mortain" label="Count of Mortain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="13747" end="13755" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="13757" end="13762" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="13771" end="13777" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="13779" end="13789" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="13794" end="13802" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="14263" end="14269" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q965843" start="14403" end="14417" title="Hugh de Puiset" label="Hugh de Puiset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581200" start="14422" end="14462" title="William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex" label="William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q684958" start="14473" end="14490" title="William Longchamp" label="William Longchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q461013" start="14496" end="14509" title="Bishop of Ely" label="Bishop of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="15274" end="15289" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q783357" start="15459" end="15478" title="Walter of Coutances" label="Walter of Coutances"/>
<link wikidata="Q569265" start="15484" end="15503" title="Archbishop of Rouen" label="Archbishop of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="15868" end="15887" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q319713" start="16672" end="16697" title="Duke Leopold V of Austria" label="Duke Leopold V of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="16721" end="16737" title="Emperor Henry VI" label="Emperor Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q235462" start="16941" end="16945" title="Alys, Countess of the Vexin" label="Alys"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="17813" end="17821" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431527" start="17823" end="17831" title="County of Boulogne" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="17840" end="17857" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171800" start="17965" end="17971" title="Évreux" label="Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q157110" start="18090" end="18098" title="Gamaches" label="Gamaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q174257" start="18164" end="18172" title="Beauvais" label="Beauvais"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252870" start="18509" end="18520" title="proximity of blood" label="whose claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050483" start="19462" end="19474" title="Loire Valley" label="Loire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="19483" end="19489" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q288" start="19546" end="19551" title="Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090492" start="19851" end="19867" title="Château Gaillard" label="Château Gaillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q517284" start="20358" end="20368" title="Brabançons" label="Brabançons"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="20379" end="20395" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Duchy of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q298896" start="21003" end="21025" title="Baldwin IX of Flanders" label="Baldwin IX of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q926335" start="21030" end="21048" title="Renaud of Boulogne" label="Renaud of Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q267040" start="21159" end="21177" title="William des Roches" label="William des Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q449076" start="21689" end="21708" title="Treaty of Le Goulet" label="Treaty of Le Goulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q231788" start="22463" end="22484" title="Isabella of Angoulême" label="Isabella of Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q564137" start="22657" end="22675" title="papal dispensation" label="papal dispensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q939520" start="23386" end="23405" title="Hugh IX of Lusignan" label="Hugh IX of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q435204" start="23471" end="23491" title="Raoul I, Count of Eu" label="Raoul I, Count of Eu"/>
<link wikidata="Q378193" start="23674" end="23683" title="Lusignans" label="Lusignans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138622" start="25435" end="25444" title="seneschal" label="seneschal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871743" start="25598" end="25616" title="battle of Mirebeau" label="battle of Mirebeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="26540" end="26548" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="26840" end="26857" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894788" start="27311" end="27323" title="Margam Abbey" label="Margam Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="27544" end="27549" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091197" start="27676" end="27683" title="Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090492" start="27847" end="27863" title="Château Gaillard" label="Château Gaillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509935" start="27880" end="27898" title="Siege of Château Gaillard" label="besieged by Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="30210" end="30224" title="Divine right of kings" label="divine majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="30892" end="30905" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31179" end="31187" title="Chancery (medieval office)#In England" label="Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408803" start="31250" end="31259" title="Exchequer" label="Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q620877" start="31414" end="31427" title="Hubert Walter" label="Hubert Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="31779" end="31786" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809102" start="32303" end="32318" title="novel disseisin" label="novel disseisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809100" start="32335" end="32355" title="mort d&amp;#x27;ancestor" label="mort d&amp;#x27;ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945784" start="32990" end="33002" title="Lewis Warren" label="Lewis Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="34020" end="34027" title="demesne" label="demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="34202" end="34217" title="Norman conquest" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131887" start="34478" end="34485" title="scutage" label="scutage"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="34627" end="34634" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="36091" end="36100" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="36163" end="36170" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36251" end="36270" title="Economy of England in the Middle Ages#Jewish contribution to the English economy" label="vulnerable position"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550231" start="36396" end="36403" title="tallage" label="tallage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36894" end="36917" title="Economy of England in the Middle Ages#Development of estate management" label="sudden change in prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q161081" start="37204" end="37213" title="deflation" label="deflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q330580" start="39114" end="39131" title="Falkes de Breauté" label="Falkes de Breauté"/>
<link wikidata="Q5626031" start="39133" end="39152" title="Gérard d&amp;#x27;Athée" label="Gérard d&amp;#x27;Athée"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377487" start="39154" end="39173" title="Engelard de Cigogné" label="Engelard de Cigogné"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184027" start="39179" end="39190" title="Philip Marc" label="Philip Marc"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="39951" end="39964" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q348911" start="40413" end="40450" title="William Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke" label="William Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779058" start="40609" end="40647" title="William de Braose, 4th Lord of Bramber" label="William de Braose, 4th Lord of Bramber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281830" start="40779" end="40784" title="Mark (money)" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q942269" start="40832" end="40836" title="Maud de Braose" label="Maud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="41276" end="41281" title="piety" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="43502" end="43511" title="atheistic" label="atheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="43800" end="43821" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="Resurrection of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488350" start="43914" end="43926" title="Frank McLynn" label="Frank McLynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272586" start="44215" end="44226" title="St Wulfstan" label="St Wulfstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q924107" start="44297" end="44312" title="Hugh of Lincoln" label="Hugh of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="44743" end="44754" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="pilgrimages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050483" start="45481" end="45493" title="Loire Valley" label="Loire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q742754" start="46079" end="46101" title="Assize of Arms of 1181" label="Assize of Arms of 1181"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="46113" end="46118" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121970" start="46820" end="46860" title="William Longespée, 3rd Earl of Salisbury" label="William Longespée, 3rd Earl of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q348911" start="46862" end="46881" title="William the Marshal" label="William the Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359198" start="46883" end="46896" title="Roger de Lacy (1170–1211)" label="Roger de Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756973" start="46933" end="46945" title="marcher lord" label="marcher lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="47004" end="47011" title="English Channel" label="Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q748895" start="47163" end="47175" title="Cinque Ports" label="Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888079" start="47181" end="47191" title="HMNB Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="47253" end="47259" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020908" start="47325" end="47343" title="William of Wrotham" label="William of Wrotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="47706" end="47716" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="47986" end="47993" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q295268" start="47999" end="48022" title="Alfonso VIII of Castile" label="Alfonso VIII of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q151457" start="48652" end="48670" title="Otto IV of Germany" label="Otto IV of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="48701" end="48719" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q469622" start="48771" end="48792" title="Ferdinand of Flanders" label="Ferdinand of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="48964" end="48969" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q323408" start="49191" end="49196" title="Damme" label="Damme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991077" start="49578" end="49588" title="Anglo-Scottish border" label="the border"/>
<link wikidata="Q312594" start="49754" end="49770" title="William the Lion" label="William the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298878" start="49801" end="49818" title="Treaty of Falaise" label="Treaty of Falaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="50093" end="50104" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q237889" start="50774" end="50798" title="Alexander II of Scotland" label="Alexander II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q427862" start="51947" end="51960" title="Welsh Marches" label="marcher lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="52001" end="52014" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091368" start="52220" end="52224" title="Joan, Lady of Wales" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q467685" start="52246" end="52264" title="Llywelyn the Great" label="Llywelyn the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982039" start="52643" end="52665" title="Welsh uprising of 1211" label="Welsh uprising of 1211"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="52926" end="52950" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="53081" end="53096" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q154764" start="53766" end="53779" title="Investiture Controversy" label="These changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809685" start="54075" end="54087" title="John de Gray" label="John de Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837285" start="54093" end="54110" title="Bishop of Norwich" label="Bishop of Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184737" start="54192" end="54209" title="cathedral chapter" label="cathedral chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="54214" end="54234" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207742" start="54302" end="54310" title="Reginald (sub-prior)" label="Reginald"/>
<link wikidata="Q830337" start="54331" end="54340" title="sub-prior" label="sub-prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113985" start="54384" end="54406" title="province of Canterbury" label="province of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q465329" start="54866" end="54881" title="Stephen Langton" label="Stephen Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q112338867" start="55539" end="55551" title="Papal Interdict of 1208" label="an interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q356564" start="56938" end="56960" title="Raymond VI of Toulouse" label="Raymond VI of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856158" start="57615" end="57628" title="Holy Viaticum" label="Holy Viaticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="58423" end="58435" title="papal legate" label="papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130766" start="58436" end="58453" title="Pandulf Verraccio" label="Pandulf Verraccio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58473" end="58487" title="Knights Templar in England#Churches" label="Templar Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="58491" end="58496" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="58853" end="58857" title="Papal bull" label="Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648032" start="60609" end="60625" title="Peter des Roches" label="Peter des Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714329" start="60629" end="60638" title="justiciar" label="justiciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14865013" start="60911" end="60921" title="J. C. Holt" label="James Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575254" start="61949" end="61963" title="Roche-au-Moine" label="Roche-au-Moine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82185" start="62160" end="62171" title="La Rochelle" label="La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q830626" start="62225" end="62243" title="battle of Bouvines" label="battle of Bouvines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="63568" end="63579" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169789" start="63639" end="63657" title="Robert fitz Walter" label="Robert fitz Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="63778" end="63785" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="63790" end="63796" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483542" start="64093" end="64102" title="Runnymede" label="Runnymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="64109" end="64123" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="64257" end="64268" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="64483" end="64496" title="unfree labour" label="unfree labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q131887" start="64665" end="64672" title="scutage" label="scutage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="65668" end="65690" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125527" start="65784" end="65800" title="Rochester Castle" label="Rochester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756973" start="65990" end="66003" title="marcher lords" label="marcher lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q984430" start="66062" end="66104" title="Ranulf de Blondeville, 6th Earl of Chester" label="Ranulf de Blondeville, 6th Earl of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020739" start="66763" end="66785" title="William d&amp;#x27;Aubigny (rebel)" label="William d&amp;#x27;Aubigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="67199" end="67209" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="67571" end="67580" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q353" start="67750" end="67768" title="Blanche of Castile" label="Blanche of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="68454" end="68458" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="69048" end="69057" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="69160" end="69169" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="69206" end="69218" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157341" start="69321" end="69325" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn" label="Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="69407" end="69416" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q731389" start="69813" end="69820" title="William Marshal, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q727241" start="69993" end="70010" title="Roger of Wendover" label="Roger of Wendover"/>
<link wikidata="Q918264" start="70112" end="70132" title="English Crown Jewels" label="English Crown Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463998" start="70204" end="70212" title="the Wash" label="the Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q224090" start="70233" end="70242" title="quicksand" label="quicksand"/>
<link wikidata="Q607538" start="70247" end="70256" title="whirlpool" label="whirlpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970132" start="70658" end="70688" title="Newark Castle, Nottinghamshire" label="Newark Castle, Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630367" start="71006" end="71025" title="Worcester Cathedral" label="Worcester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="71070" end="71081" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899864" start="71090" end="71096" title="effigy" label="effigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855461" start="71347" end="71354" title="Battle of Lincoln (1217)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136870" start="71359" end="71364" title="Battle of Dover (1217)" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172884" start="71435" end="71452" title="Treaty of Lambeth" label="Treaty of Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091197" start="71867" end="71874" title="Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q134346" start="72248" end="72257" title="Angoulême" label="Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="72503" end="72522" title="Richard of Cornwall" label="Richard of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="72574" end="72592" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q242287" start="72634" end="72638" title="Joan of England, Queen of Scotland" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237858" start="72715" end="72723" title="Isabella of England" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="72763" end="72783" title="Emperor Frederick II" label="Emperor Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q271382" start="72808" end="72815" title="Eleanor of England, Countess of Leicester" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="72909" end="72926" title="Simon de Montfort" label="Simon de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430764" start="72988" end="72995" title="Richard FitzRoy" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="73354" end="73363" title="chronicle" label="chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368376" start="73558" end="73576" title="Richard of Devizes" label="Richard of Devizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234687" start="73578" end="73597" title="William of Newburgh" label="William of Newburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231843" start="73599" end="73615" title="Roger of Hoveden" label="Roger of Hoveden"/>
<link wikidata="Q302402" start="73620" end="73635" title="Ralph de Diceto" label="Ralph de Diceto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104436" start="73909" end="73930" title="Gervase of Canterbury" label="Gervase of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q721636" start="73935" end="73954" title="Ralph of Coggeshall" label="Ralph of Coggeshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q727241" start="74158" end="74175" title="Roger of Wendover" label="Roger of Wendover"/>
<link wikidata="Q369366" start="74180" end="74193" title="Matthew Paris" label="Matthew Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="74293" end="74300" title="Almohad" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q715749" start="74307" end="74324" title="Muhammad al-Nasir" label="Muhammad al-Nasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="74471" end="74476" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q380961" start="74683" end="74692" title="John Foxe" label="John Foxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219639" start="74694" end="74709" title="William Tyndale" label="William Tyndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237075" start="74714" end="74727" title="Robert Barnes (martyr)" label="Robert Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740670" start="74812" end="74827" title="Book of Martyrs" label="Book of Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245028" start="74835" end="74845" title="John Speed" label="John Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193974" start="75203" end="75215" title="Kate Norgate" label="Kate Norgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660437" start="75497" end="75505" title="Whiggish" label="Whiggish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="75557" end="75570" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="75612" end="75624" title="universalist" label="universalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="75921" end="75938" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q614407" start="76299" end="76308" title="pipe roll" label="pipe roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561557" start="76387" end="76403" title="Vivian Galbraith" label="Vivian Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945784" start="77319" end="77331" title="Lewis Warren" label="Lewis Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178743" start="77635" end="77647" title="Jim Bradbury" label="Jim Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235387" start="77902" end="77917" title="John Gillingham" label="John Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488350" start="78302" end="78314" title="Frank McLynn" label="Frank McLynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006968" start="78573" end="78592" title="C. Warren Hollister" label="C. Warren Hollister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770500" start="79008" end="79042" title="The Troublesome Reign of King John" label="The Troublesome Reign of King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292614" start="79079" end="79095" title="proto-Protestant" label="proto-Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234985" start="79135" end="79144" title="John Bale" label="John Bale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79172" end="79183" title="John Bale#Kynge Johan" label="Kynge Johan"/>
<link wikidata="Q661222" start="79322" end="79331" title="King John (play)" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q154120" start="79616" end="79630" title="Anthony Munday" label="Anthony Munday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730789" start="79649" end="79704" title="The Downfall and The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington" label="The Downfall and The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620071" start="79962" end="79978" title="Robert Davenport (dramatist)" label="Robert Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411772" start="79992" end="80013" title="King John and Matilda" label="King John and Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="80292" end="80304" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q840974" start="80338" end="80345" title="Ivanhoe" label="Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q525713" start="80593" end="80604" title="Howard Pyle" label="Howard Pyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751092" start="80623" end="80657" title="The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood" label="The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="80744" end="80754" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q350905" start="80870" end="80883" title="Sam De Grasse" label="Sam De Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159851" start="80927" end="80944" title="Douglas Fairbanks in Robin Hood" label="1922 film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q318734" start="81008" end="81020" title="Claude Rains" label="Claude Rains"/>
<link wikidata="Q201234" start="81040" end="81059" title="The Adventures of Robin Hood" label="1938 colour version"/>
<link wikidata="Q93188" start="81070" end="81081" title="Errol Flynn" label="Errol Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712262" start="81292" end="81313" title="Sheriff of Nottingham" label="Sheriff of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19090" start="81442" end="81464" title="Robin Hood (1973 film)" label="Disney cartoon version"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="81509" end="81522" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q541868" start="81640" end="81653" title="James Goldman" label="James Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q615544" start="81688" end="81706" title="The Lion in Winter" label="The Lion in Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207036" start="81867" end="81878" title="A. A. Milne" label="A. A. Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="82009" end="82035" title="Henry III, King of England" label="Henry III, King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="82074" end="82101" title="Richard, King of the Romans" label="Richard, King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q242287" start="82136" end="82159" title="Joan of England, Queen of Scotland" label="Joan, Queen of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q237858" start="82192" end="82220" title="Isabella of England" label="Isabella, Holy Roman Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q271382" start="82248" end="82277" title="Eleanor, Countess of Pembroke" label="Eleanor, Countess of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430764" start="82400" end="82415" title="Richard FitzRoy" label="Richard FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75384713" start="82449" end="82465" title="Adela de Warenne" label="Adela de Warenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091368" start="82499" end="82518" title="Joan, Lady of Wales" label="Joan, Lady of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530535" start="82667" end="82684" title="Oliver fitz Regis" label="Oliver fitz Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507946" start="82745" end="82759" title="Fulk FitzWarin" label="Fulk FitzWarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518583" start="82816" end="82855" title="List of earls in the reign of King John" label="List of earls in the reign of King John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16551" wikidata="Q587741" url="?curid=16551" title="Jule Styne">
<text>Jule Styne ( ; born Julius Kerwin Stein; December 31, 1905 – September 20, 1994) was an English-American songwriter and composer widely known for a series of Broadway musicals, including several famous frequently-revived shows that also became successful films: &quot;Gypsy,&quot; &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes,&quot; and &quot;Funny Girl.&quot;

==Early life==
Styne was born to a Jewish family in London, England. His parents, Anna Kertman and Isadore Stein, were emigrants from Ukraine, the Russian Empire, and ran a small grocery. Even before his family left Britain, he did impressions on the stage of well-known singers, including Harry Lauder, who saw him perform and advised him to take up the piano. At the age of eight, he moved with his family to Chicago, where he began taking piano lessons. He proved to be a prodigy and performed with the Chicago, St. Louis, and Detroit symphonies before he was 10 years old.

==Career==
Before Styne attended Chicago Musical College, he had already attracted the attention of another teenager, Mike Todd, later a successful film producer, who commissioned him to write a song for a musical act that he was creating. It was the first of over 1,500 published songs Styne composed in his career. His first hit, &quot;Sunday&quot;, was written in 1926.

In 1929, Styne was playing with the Ben Pollack band.

Styne was a vocal coach for 20th Century Fox until Darryl F. Zanuck fired him because vocal coaching was &quot;a luxury, and we&#x27;re cutting out those luxuries.&quot; Zanuck told him he should write songs because &quot;that&#x27;s forever.&quot; Styne established his own dance band, which got him noticed in Hollywood, where he was championed by Frank Sinatra and began a collaboration with lyricist Sammy Cahn. He and Cahn wrote many songs for the movies, including &quot;It&#x27;s Been a Long, Long Time&quot; (No. 1 for three weeks for Harry James and His Orchestra in 1945), &quot;Five Minutes More&quot;, and the Oscar-winning title song for &quot;Three Coins in the Fountain&quot; (1954). Ten of his songs were Oscar-nominated, many of them written with Cahn, including &quot;I&#x27;ve Heard That Song Before&quot; (No. 1 for 13 weeks for Harry James and His Orchestra in 1943), &quot;I&#x27;ll Walk Alone&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s Magic&quot; (a No. 2 hit for Doris Day in 1948), and &quot;I Fall In Love Too Easily&quot;. He collaborated with Leo Robin on the score for the 1955 musical film &quot;My Sister Eileen.&quot;

In 1947, Styne wrote his first score for a Broadway musical, &quot;High Button Shoes,&quot; with Cahn, and over the next several decades wrote the scores for many Broadway shows, most notably &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes,&quot; &quot;Peter Pan&quot; (additional music), &quot;Bells Are Ringing,&quot; &quot;,&quot; &quot;Do Re Mi,&quot; &quot;Funny Girl,&quot; &quot;Lorelei,&quot; &quot;Sugar&quot; (with a story based on the movie &quot;Some Like It Hot,&quot; but all new music), and the Tony-winning &quot;Hallelujah, Baby!.&quot;

Styne wrote original music for the short-lived themed amusement park Freedomland U.S.A. that opened on June 19, 1960.

His collaborators included Sammy Cahn, Leo Robin, Betty Comden and Adolph Green, Stephen Sondheim, Bob Hilliard, and Bob Merrill. 
He wrote career-altering Broadway scores for a wide variety of major stars, including Phil Silvers, Carol Channing, Mary Martin, Judy Holliday, Ethel Merman, and an up-and-coming Barbra Streisand.

He was the subject of &quot;This Is Your Life&quot; for British television in 1978 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews in New York&#x27;s Time Square.

==Personal life and death==
Styne married Englishwoman Margaret Brown (born in Torquay) and they remained married until his death. Styne died of heart failure in New York City at the age of 88. His archiveincluding original hand-written compositions, letters, and production materialsis housed at the Harry Ransom Center.

Margaret Styne oversaw Styne&#x27;s estate until she died on February 20, 2022.

==Awards==
Styne was elected to the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1972 and the American Theatre Hall of Fame in 1981, and he was a recipient of a Drama Desk Special Award and the Kennedy Center Honors in 1990. Additionally, Styne won the 1955 Oscar for Best Music, Original Song for &quot;Three Coins in the Fountain&quot;, and &quot;Hallelujah, Baby!&quot; won the 1968 Tony Award for Best Original Score.

==Songs==
A selection of the many songs that Styne wrote:
* &quot;The Christmas Waltz&quot;
* &quot;Conchita Marquita Lolita Pepita Rosita Juanita Lopez&quot;
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Rain on My Parade&quot; (from &quot;Funny Girl&quot;)
* &quot;Diamonds Are a Girl&#x27;s Best Friend&quot; (from &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot;)
* &quot;Everything&#x27;s Coming Up Roses&quot; (from &quot;&quot;)
* &quot;Every Street&#x27;s a Boulevard in Old New York&quot; (from &quot;Hazel Flagg&quot;)
* &quot;Fiddle Dee Dee&quot;
* &quot;Guess I&#x27;ll Hang My Tears Out to Dry&quot;
* &quot;How Do You Speak to an Angel&quot;
* &quot;I Don&#x27;t Want to Walk Without You&quot;
* &quot;I Fall in Love Too Easily&quot; (from &quot;Anchors Aweigh&quot;)
* &quot;I Still Get Jealous&quot; (High Button Shoes)
* &quot;I&#x27;ll Walk Alone&quot;
* &quot;It&#x27;s Been a Long, Long Time&quot;
* &quot;It&#x27;s Magic&quot; (from &quot;Romance on the High Seas&quot;)
* &quot;It&#x27;s You or No One&quot;
* &quot;I&#x27;ve Heard That Song Before&quot;
* &quot;Just in Time&quot; (from &quot;Bells Are Ringing&quot;)
* &quot;Let Me Entertain You&quot; (from &quot;Gypsy&quot;)
* &quot;Let It Snow! Let It Snow! Let It Snow!&quot;
* &quot;Long Before I Knew You&quot;
* &quot;Make Someone Happy&quot; (from &quot;Do Re Mi&quot;)
* &quot;Money Burns a Hole in My Pocket&quot; (from &quot;Living It Up&quot;)
* &quot;Neverland&quot;
* &quot;Papa, Won’t You Dance with Me?&quot;
* &quot;The Party&#x27;s Over&quot; (from &quot;Bells Are Ringing&quot;)
* &quot;People&quot; (from &quot;Funny Girl&quot;)
* &quot;Pico and Sepulveda&quot;
* &quot;Saturday Night (Is the Loneliest Night of the Week)&quot; sung by Frank Sinatra
* &quot;Small World&quot;, from &quot;Gypsy&quot;, which became a moderate hit when sung by Johnny Mathis in 1959
* &quot;Sunday&quot; with Ned Miller
* &quot;The Things We Did Last Summer&quot;
* &quot;Time After Time&quot; (from &quot;It Happened in Brooklyn&quot;)
* &quot;Three Coins in the Fountain&quot;, Oscar-winning song from the film of the same name
* &quot;Together (Wherever We Go)&quot; (from &quot;Gypsy&quot;)
* &quot;Winter Was Warm&quot; (from &quot;Mr. Magoo&#x27;s Christmas Carol&quot;)

===Credits===
* &quot;Ice Capades of 1943&quot; (1942) – Styne contributed one song
* &quot;Glad to See You!&quot; (1944) – closed in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, during tryout
* &quot;High Button Shoes&quot; (1947)
* &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Michael Todd&#x27;s Peep Show&quot; (1950) – Styne contributed 2 numbers
* &quot;Two on the Aisle&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Hazel Flagg&quot; (1953)
* &quot;Peter Pan&quot; (1954) (additional music)
* &quot;My Sister Eileen&quot; (1955)
* &quot;Bells Are Ringing&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Say, Darling&quot; (1958)
* &quot;A Party with Betty Comden and Adolph Green&quot; (1958)
* &quot;First Impressions&quot; (1959) (produced by)
* &quot;&quot; (1959)
* &quot;Do Re Mi&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Subways Are for Sleeping&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Mr. Magoo&#x27;s Christmas Carol&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Arturo Ui&quot; (1963) – Styne contributed incidental music to this Bertolt Brecht play
* &quot;Funny Girl&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Wonderworld&quot; (1964) – lyrics by Styne&#x27;s son, Stanley
* &quot;Fade Out – Fade In&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Something More!&quot; (1964) – directed by Styne
* &quot;The Dangerous Christmas of Red Riding Hood&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Hallelujah, Baby!&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Darling of the Day&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Look to the Lilies&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Night the Animals Talked&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Prettybelle&quot; (1971) – closed in Boston
* &quot;Sugar&quot; (1972) (revised as &quot;Some Like It Hot: The Musical&quot; for a 2002–03 national US tour starring Tony Curtis as Osgood Fielding, Jr.)
* &quot;Lorelei&quot; (1974) – essentially a sequel/revival of &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot;
* &quot;Hellzapoppin&#x27;!&quot; (1976) – closed in Baltimore during pre-Broadway tryout
* &quot;Side by Side by Sondheim&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Bar Mitzvah Boy&quot; (1978)
* &quot;One Night Stand&quot; (1980) – closed during preview period
* &quot;Pieces of Eight&quot; (1985)
* &quot;The Red Shoes&quot; (1993)

==References==
==Further reading==
* Suskin, Steven (1986). &quot;Show Tunes 1905-1985: The Songs, Shows and Careers of Broadway&#x27;s Major Composers&quot;, New York: Dodd, Mead and Company, 1986.
* Suskin, Steven (2009). &quot;The Sound of Broadway Music&quot;, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
* Taylor, Theodore. &quot;Jule: The Story of Composer Jule Styne&quot;, New York: Random House, 1979.

==External links==
* Jule Styne Papers at the Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas at Austin
* 
* Jule Styne at the Kennedy Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q587741" start="0" end="10" title="Jule Styne" label="Jule Styne"/>
<link wikidata="Q587741" start="20" end="39" title="Jule Styne" label="Julius Kerwin Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="105" end="115" title="songwriter" label="songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="120" end="128" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="158" end="166" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="167" end="175" title="musical theatre" label="musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321588" start="268" end="273" title="Gypsy (1962 film)" label="Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736979" start="287" end="311" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (musical)" label="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474747" start="329" end="339" title="Funny Girl (musical)" label="Funny Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="383" end="389" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="400" end="406" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="495" end="509" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127854" start="638" end="650" title="Harry Lauder" label="Harry Lauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="759" end="766" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="790" end="795" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="823" end="830" title="Child prodigy" label="prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="863" end="872" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="878" end="885" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095713" start="959" end="982" title="Chicago Musical College" label="Chicago Musical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q240566" start="1044" end="1053" title="Mike Todd" label="Mike Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q816581" start="1336" end="1347" title="Ben Pollack" label="Ben Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="1383" end="1399" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q364342" start="1406" end="1422" title="Darryl F. Zanuck" label="Darryl F. Zanuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="1705" end="1718" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q470040" start="1759" end="1769" title="Sammy Cahn" label="Sammy Cahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q163861" start="1898" end="1909" title="Harry James" label="Harry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1977" end="1982" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797393" start="1991" end="2001" title="Three Coins in the Fountain (song)" label="title song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440194" start="2012" end="2039" title="Three Coins in the Fountain (film)" label="Three Coins in the Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967335" start="2141" end="2173" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Heard That Song Before" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Heard That Song Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966064" start="2250" end="2270" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Walk Alone" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Walk Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090280" start="2284" end="2299" title="It&amp;#x27;s Magic" label="It&amp;#x27;s Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="2323" end="2332" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864253" start="2353" end="2378" title="I Fall In Love Too Easily" label="I Fall In Love Too Easily"/>
<link wikidata="Q364124" start="2407" end="2416" title="Leo Robin" label="Leo Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273584" start="2462" end="2478" title="My Sister Eileen" label="My Sister Eileen"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2530" end="2538" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754993" start="2554" end="2571" title="High Button Shoes" label="High Button Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q736979" start="2685" end="2709" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (musical)" label="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376796" start="2723" end="2732" title="Peter Pan (1954 musical)" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q922373" start="2765" end="2782" title="Bells Are Ringing (musical)" label="Bells Are Ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286211" start="2810" end="2818" title="Do Re Mi (musical)" label="Do Re Mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474747" start="2832" end="2842" title="Funny Girl (musical)" label="Funny Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680327" start="2856" end="2863" title="Lorelei (musical)" label="Lorelei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496796" start="2877" end="2882" title="Sugar (musical)" label="Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190086" start="2928" end="2944" title="Some Like It Hot" label="Some Like It Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642856" start="2999" end="3016" title="Hallelujah, Baby!" label="Hallelujah, Baby!"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="3079" end="3093" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500854" start="3094" end="3112" title="Freedomland U.S.A." label="Freedomland U.S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q470040" start="3171" end="3181" title="Sammy Cahn" label="Sammy Cahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q364124" start="3183" end="3192" title="Leo Robin" label="Leo Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q175078" start="3194" end="3206" title="Betty Comden" label="Betty Comden"/>
<link wikidata="Q329849" start="3211" end="3223" title="Adolph Green" label="Adolph Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="3225" end="3241" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907714" start="3243" end="3255" title="Bob Hilliard" label="Bob Hilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641319" start="3261" end="3272" title="Bob Merrill" label="Bob Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q601358" start="3361" end="3373" title="Phil Silvers" label="Phil Silvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q237287" start="3375" end="3389" title="Carol Channing" label="Carol Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q285483" start="3391" end="3402" title="Mary Martin" label="Mary Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q253298" start="3404" end="3417" title="Judy Holliday" label="Judy Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q129087" start="3419" end="3431" title="Ethel Merman" label="Ethel Merman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="3454" end="3470" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="3501" end="3518" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778021" start="3581" end="3595" title="Eamonn Andrews" label="Eamonn Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="3930" end="3949" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="4069" end="4093" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="4110" end="4139" title="American Theatre Hall of Fame" label="American Theatre Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305730" start="4177" end="4201" title="Drama Desk Special Award" label="Drama Desk Special Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="4210" end="4231" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797393" start="4320" end="4347" title="Three Coins in the Fountain (song)" label="Three Coins in the Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722776" start="4505" end="4524" title="The Christmas Waltz" label="The Christmas Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158637" start="4539" end="4591" title="Conchita Marquita Lolita Pepita Rosita Juanita Lopez" label="Conchita Marquita Lolita Pepita Rosita Juanita Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473480" start="4606" end="4634" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Rain on My Parade" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Rain on My Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474747" start="4653" end="4663" title="Funny Girl (musical)" label="Funny Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910654" start="4679" end="4717" title="Diamonds Are a Girl&amp;#x27;s Best Friend" label="Diamonds Are a Girl&amp;#x27;s Best Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q736979" start="4736" end="4760" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (musical)" label="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735547" start="4776" end="4809" title="Everything&amp;#x27;s Coming Up Roses" label="Everything&amp;#x27;s Coming Up Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687899" start="4844" end="4891" title="Every Street&amp;#x27;s a Boulevard in Old New York" label="Every Street&amp;#x27;s a Boulevard in Old New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687899" start="4910" end="4921" title="Hazel Flagg" label="Hazel Flagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9282564" start="4966" end="5006" title="Guess I&amp;#x27;ll Hang My Tears Out to Dry" label="Guess I&amp;#x27;ll Hang My Tears Out to Dry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977042" start="5064" end="5101" title="I Don&amp;#x27;t Want to Walk Without You" label="I Don&amp;#x27;t Want to Walk Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864253" start="5116" end="5141" title="I Fall in Love Too Easily" label="I Fall in Love Too Easily"/>
<link wikidata="Q542988" start="5160" end="5174" title="Anchors Aweigh (film)" label="Anchors Aweigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966064" start="5244" end="5264" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Walk Alone" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Walk Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089953" start="5279" end="5311" title="It&amp;#x27;s Been a Long, Long Time" label="It&amp;#x27;s Been a Long, Long Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090280" start="5326" end="5341" title="It&amp;#x27;s Magic" label="It&amp;#x27;s Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148469" start="5360" end="5384" title="Romance on the High Seas" label="Romance on the High Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657042" start="5400" end="5423" title="It&amp;#x27;s You or No One" label="It&amp;#x27;s You or No One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967335" start="5438" end="5470" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Heard That Song Before" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Heard That Song Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316668" start="5485" end="5497" title="Just in Time (song)" label="Just in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q922373" start="5516" end="5533" title="Bells Are Ringing (musical)" label="Bells Are Ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089150" start="5609" end="5647" title="Let It Snow! Let It Snow! Let It Snow!" label="Let It Snow! Let It Snow! Let It Snow!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5699" end="5717" title="Do Re Mi (musical)#Make Someone Happy" label="Make Someone Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286211" start="5736" end="5744" title="Do Re Mi (musical)" label="Do Re Mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199661" start="5810" end="5822" title="Living It Up" label="Living It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756203" start="5907" end="5928" title="The Party&amp;#x27;s Over (1956 song)" label="The Party&amp;#x27;s Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q922373" start="5947" end="5964" title="Bells Are Ringing (musical)" label="Bells Are Ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899333" start="5980" end="5986" title="People (1964 song)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474747" start="6005" end="6015" title="Funny Girl (musical)" label="Funny Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191022" start="6031" end="6049" title="Pico and Sepulveda" label="Pico and Sepulveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426655" start="6064" end="6115" title="Saturday Night (Is the Loneliest Night of the Week)" label="Saturday Night (Is the Loneliest Night of the Week)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="6130" end="6143" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q449612" start="6236" end="6249" title="Johnny Mathis" label="Johnny Mathis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043308" start="6266" end="6272" title="Sunday (Chester Conn song)" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968836" start="6284" end="6294" title="Nathan &amp;quot;Ned&amp;quot; Miller" label="Ned Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768760" start="6303" end="6332" title="The Things We Did Last Summer" label="The Things We Did Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970756" start="6347" end="6362" title="Time After Time (1947 song)" label="Time After Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897412" start="6381" end="6404" title="It Happened in Brooklyn" label="It Happened in Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797393" start="6420" end="6447" title="Three Coins in the Fountain (song)" label="Three Coins in the Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440194" start="6483" end="6504" title="Three Coins in the Fountain (film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992204" start="6513" end="6538" title="Together (Wherever We Go)" label="Together (Wherever We Go)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880179" start="6612" end="6644" title="Mr. Magoo&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol" label="Mr. Magoo&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335503" start="6675" end="6686" title="Ice Capades" label="Ice Capades"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6745" end="6761" title="Glad to See You!" label="Glad to See You!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754993" start="6837" end="6854" title="High Button Shoes" label="High Button Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q736979" start="6876" end="6900" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (musical)" label="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981959" start="6922" end="6951" title="Michael Todd&amp;#x27;s Peep Show" label="Michael Todd&amp;#x27;s Peep Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859432" start="7003" end="7019" title="Two on the Aisle" label="Two on the Aisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687899" start="7041" end="7052" title="Hazel Flagg" label="Hazel Flagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376796" start="7074" end="7083" title="Peter Pan (1954 musical)" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754849" start="7124" end="7140" title="My Sister Eileen (1955 film)" label="My Sister Eileen"/>
<link wikidata="Q922373" start="7162" end="7179" title="Bells Are Ringing (musical)" label="Bells Are Ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428895" start="7201" end="7213" title="Say, Darling" label="Say, Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658713" start="7235" end="7277" title="A Party with Betty Comden and Adolph Green" label="A Party with Betty Comden and Adolph Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072938" start="7299" end="7316" title="First Impressions (musical)" label="First Impressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286211" start="7374" end="7382" title="Do Re Mi (musical)" label="Do Re Mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632501" start="7404" end="7428" title="Subways Are for Sleeping" label="Subways Are for Sleeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880179" start="7450" end="7482" title="Mr. Magoo&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol" label="Mr. Magoo&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198320" start="7504" end="7513" title="Arturo Ui" label="Arturo Ui"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="7572" end="7586" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474747" start="7600" end="7610" title="Funny Girl (musical)" label="Funny Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031938" start="7632" end="7643" title="Wonderworld (musical)" label="Wonderworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429172" start="7703" end="7721" title="Fade Out – Fade In" label="Fade Out – Fade In"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560136" start="7743" end="7758" title="Something More!" label="Something More!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7800" end="7842" title="The Dangerous Christmas of Red Riding Hood" label="The Dangerous Christmas of Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642856" start="7864" end="7881" title="Hallelujah, Baby!" label="Hallelujah, Baby!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223943" start="7903" end="7921" title="Darling of the Day (musical)" label="Darling of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675184" start="7943" end="7961" title="Look to the Lilies" label="Look to the Lilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955200" start="7983" end="8011" title="The Night the Animals Talked" label="The Night the Animals Talked"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242308" start="8033" end="8044" title="Prettybelle" label="Prettybelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496796" start="8085" end="8090" title="Sugar (musical)" label="Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q162389" start="8198" end="8209" title="Tony Curtis" label="Tony Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680327" start="8243" end="8250" title="Lorelei (musical)" label="Lorelei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508319" start="8433" end="8457" title="Side by Side by Sondheim" label="Side by Side by Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279588" start="8479" end="8494" title="Bar Mitzvah Boy (musical)" label="Bar Mitzvah Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093048" start="8516" end="8531" title="One Night Stand (musical)" label="One Night Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191401" start="8584" end="8599" title="Pieces of Eight (1985 musical)" label="Pieces of Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759937" start="8621" end="8634" title="The Red Shoes (musical)" label="The Red Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="9102" end="9121" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="9123" end="9152" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="9176" end="9190" title="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts" label="Kennedy Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16552" wikidata="Q64399647" url="?curid=16552" title="Jean Gray">
<text>Jean Gray may refer to:

* Jean Vivra Gray (1924–2016), Australian television and film actress
* Jean Grey, fictional superhero originating in 1963
* Jean Grae (born 1976), American hip hop recording artist
* Jean Gray (academic) (b. 1942), Canadian academic and physician</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4015651" start="27" end="42" title="Jean Vivra Gray" label="Jean Vivra Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350072" start="97" end="106" title="Jean Grey" label="Jean Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q455304" start="150" end="159" title="Jean Grae" label="Jean Grae"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442710" start="209" end="229" title="Jean Gray (academic)" label="Jean Gray (academic)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16553" wikidata="Q40523" url="?curid=16553" title="Julia Roberts">
<text>Julia Fiona Roberts (born October 28, 1967) is an American actress. Known for her leading roles in films encompassing a variety of genres, she has received multiple accolades, including an Academy Award, a British Academy Film Award, and three Golden Globe Awards. The films in which she has starred have collectively grossed over $3.9 billion globally, making her one of Hollywood&#x27;s most bankable stars. After an early breakthrough with appearances in &quot;Mystic Pizza&quot; (1988) and &quot;Steel Magnolias&quot; (1989), Roberts established herself as a leading actress when she headlined the top-grossing romantic comedy &quot;Pretty Woman&quot; (1990).

She starred in numerous commercially successful films throughout the 1990s, including the romantic comedies &quot;My Best Friend&#x27;s Wedding&quot; (1997), &quot;Notting Hill&quot; (1999) and &quot;Runaway Bride&quot; (1999). She won the Academy Award for Best Actress for playing the title role in the biographical drama &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; (2000). Roberts achieved further film success in the following decades with &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Eleven&quot; (2001), &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Twelve&quot; (2004), &quot;Charlie Wilson&#x27;s War&quot; (2007), &quot;Valentine&#x27;s Day&quot; (2010), &quot;Eat Pray Love&quot; (2010), &quot;&quot; (2013), &quot;Wonder&quot; (2017), &quot;Ticket to Paradise&quot; (2022), and &quot;Leave the World Behind&quot; (2023). Roberts also received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for the HBO television film &quot;The Normal Heart&quot; (2014), had her first regular television role in the first season of the Amazon Prime Video psychological thriller series &quot;Homecoming&quot; (2018), and portrayed Martha Mitchell in the Starz political limited series &quot;Gaslit&quot; (2022).

In addition to acting, Roberts runs the production company Red Om Films, through which she has served as an executive producer for various projects she has starred in, as well as for the first four films of the &quot;American Girl&quot; franchise (2004–2008). She has acted as the global ambassador for Lancôme since 2009. She was the world&#x27;s highest-paid actress throughout the majority of the 1990s and the first half of the 2000s. She received a then-unprecedented fees of $20 million and $25 million for her roles in &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; (2000) and &quot;Mona Lisa Smile&quot; (2003), respectively. , Roberts&#x27;s net worth was estimated to be $250 million. &quot;People&quot; magazine has named her the most beautiful woman in the world a record five times.

==Early life and family==
Julia Fiona Roberts was born on October 28, 1967, in Smyrna, Georgia, a suburb of Atlanta, to Betty Lou Bredemus and Walter Grady Roberts. She is of English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, German, and Swedish descent. Her father was a Baptist, her mother Catholic. Roberts was raised Catholic. Her older brother Eric Roberts (b. 1956), from whom she was estranged for several years until 2004, older sister Lisa Roberts Gillan (b. 1965), and niece Emma Roberts, are also actors. She also had a younger half-sister named Nancy Motes.

Roberts&#x27;s parents, one-time actors and playwrights, met while performing in theatrical productions for the United States Armed Forces. They later co-founded the Atlanta Actors and Writers Workshop in Atlanta, off Juniper Street in Midtown. They ran a children&#x27;s acting school in Decatur, Georgia, while they were expecting Julia. The children of Coretta and Martin Luther King Jr. attended the school; Walter Roberts served as acting coach for their daughter, Yolanda. In gratitude for his service running the only racially integrated theater troupe in the region and due to the Roberts&#x27;s financial difficulties, Coretta King paid the Roberts&#x27;s hospital bill when Julia was born.

Roberts&#x27;s parents married in 1955. Her mother filed for divorce in 1971; the divorce was finalized in early 1972. From 1972, Roberts lived in Smyrna, Georgia, where she attended Fitzhugh Lee Elementary School, Griffin Middle School, and Campbell High School. In 1972, her mother married Michael Motes, who was abusive and often unemployed; Roberts despised him. The couple had a daughter, Nancy, who died at 37 on February 9, 2014, of an apparent drug overdose. The marriage ended in 1983, with Betty Lou divorcing Motes on cruelty grounds; she had stated that marrying him was the biggest mistake of her life. Roberts&#x27;s own father died of cancer when she was ten.

Roberts wanted to be a veterinarian as a child. She played the clarinet in her school band. After graduating from Smyrna&#x27;s Campbell High School, she headed to New York City to pursue a career in acting. Once there, she signed with the Click Modeling Agency and enrolled in acting classes.

==Career==
===1980s===
Following her first television appearance as a juvenile rape victim in the first season of the series &quot;Crime Story&quot;, with Dennis Farina, in the episode &quot;The Survivor&quot;, broadcast on February 13, 1987, Roberts made her big screen debut in the dramedy &quot;Satisfaction&quot; (1988), alongside Liam Neeson and Justine Bateman, as a band member looking for a summer gig. (She had filmed a small role in 1987 opposite her brother Eric, in &quot;Blood Red&quot;, though she only had two words of dialogue, and it was not released until 1989.) In 1988, Roberts had a role in the fourth-season finale of &quot;Miami Vice&quot; and her first critical success with moviegoers came with the independent romantic comedy &quot;Mystic Pizza&quot;, in which she played a Portuguese-American teenage girl working as a waitress at a pizza parlor. Roger Ebert found Roberts to be a &quot;major beauty with a fierce energy&quot; and observed that the film &quot;may someday become known for the movie stars it showcased back before they became stars. All of the young actors in this movie have genuine gifts&quot;.

In &quot;Steel Magnolias&quot; (1989), a film adaptation of Robert Harling&#x27;s 1987 play of the same name, Roberts starred as a young bride with diabetes, alongside Sally Field, Dolly Parton, Shirley MacLaine and Daryl Hannah. The filmmakers were looking at both Laura Dern and Winona Ryder when the casting director insisted they see Roberts, who was then filming &quot;Mystic Pizza&quot;. Harling stated: &quot;She walked into the room and that smile lit everything up and I said &#x27;that&#x27;s my sister&#x27;, so she joined the party and she was magnificent&quot;. Director Herbert Ross was notoriously tough on newcomer Roberts, with Sally Field admitting that he &quot;went after Julia with a vengeance. This was pretty much her first big film&quot;. Nevertheless, the film was a critical and commercial darling when it was released, and Roberts received both her first Academy Award nomination (as Best Supporting Actress) and first Golden Globe Award win (Best Supporting Actress) Motion Picture for her performance.

===1990s===
Catapulting on her 1989 Academy Award nomination, Roberts gained further notice from worldwide audiences when she starred with Richard Gere in the Cinderella–Pygmalionesque story, &quot;Pretty Woman&quot;, in 1990, playing an assertive freelance hooker with a heart of gold. Roberts won the role after Michelle Pfeiffer, Molly Ringwald, Meg Ryan, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Karen Allen, and Daryl Hannah (her co-star in &quot;Steel Magnolias&quot;) turned it down. The role also earned her a second Oscar nomination, this time as Best Actress, and second Golden Globe Award win, as Best Actress – Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy). She was paid $300,000 for the part. &quot;Pretty Woman&quot; saw the highest number of ticket sales in the U.S. ever for a romantic comedy, and made $463.4million worldwide. The red dress Roberts wore in the film has been considered one of the most famous gowns in cinema.

Her next film release following &quot;Pretty Woman&quot; was Joel Schumacher&#x27;s supernatural thriller &quot;Flatliners&quot; (also 1990), in which Roberts starred as one of five students conducting clandestine experiments that produce near-death experiences. The production was met with a polarized critical reception, but made a profit at the box office and has since been considered a cult film. In 1991, Roberts played a battered wife attempting to begin a new life in Iowa in the thriller &quot;Sleeping with the Enemy&quot;, a winged, six-inch-tall tomboyish Tinkerbell in Steven Spielberg&#x27;s fantasy film &quot;Hook&quot; and an outgoing yet cautious nurse in her second collaboration with director Joel Schumacher, the romance drama &quot;Dying Young&quot;. Although negative reviews greeted her 1991 outings, &quot;Sleeping with the Enemy&quot; grossed $175 million, &quot;Hook&quot; $300.9 million and &quot;Dying Young&quot; $82.3 million globally.

Roberts took a two-year hiatus from the screen, during which she made appeared in no films other than a cameo appearance in Robert Altman&#x27;s &quot;The Player&quot; (1992). In early 1993, she was the subject of a &quot;People&quot; magazine cover story asking, &quot;What Happened to Julia Roberts?&quot;. Roberts starred with Denzel Washington in the thriller &quot;The Pelican Brief&quot; (1993), based on John Grisham&#x27;s 1992 novel of the same name. In it, she played a young law student who uncovers a conspiracy, putting herself and others in danger. The film was a commercial success, grossing $195.2 million worldwide. None of her next film releases —&quot;I Love Trouble&quot; (1994), &quot;Prêt-à-Porter&quot; (1994) and &quot;Something to Talk About&quot; (1995)— were particularly well received by critics nor big box office draws. In 1996, she guest-starred in the second season of &quot;Friends&quot; (episode 13, &quot;The One After the Superbowl&quot;), and appeared with Liam Neeson in the historical drama &quot;Michael Collins&quot;, portraying Kitty Kiernan, the fiancée of the assassinated Irish revolutionary leader. Stephen Frears&#x27; &quot;Mary Reilly&quot;, her other 1996 film, was a critical and commercial failure.

By the late 1990s, Roberts enjoyed renewed success in the romantic comedy genre. In P. J. Hogan&#x27;s &quot;My Best Friend&#x27;s Wedding&quot; (1997), she starred opposite Dermot Mulroney, Cameron Diaz and Rupert Everett, as a food critic who realizes she&#x27;s in love with her best friend and tries to win him back after he decides to marry someone else. Considered to be one of the best romantic comedies of all time, Rotten Tomatoes gave the film an approval rating of 73% based on 59 reviews, with the critical consensus reading, &quot;Thanks to a charming performance from Julia Roberts and a subversive spin on the genre, &quot;My Best Friend&#x27;s Wedding&quot; is a refreshingly entertaining romantic comedy.&quot; The film was a global box-office hit, earning $299.3 million. In her next film, Richard Donner&#x27;s political thriller &quot;Conspiracy Theory&quot; (1997), Roberts starred with Mel Gibson as a Justice Department attorney. Mick LaSalle of &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; stated: &quot;When all else fails, there are still the stars to look at—Roberts, who actually manages to do some fine acting, and Gibson, whose likability must be a sturdy thing indeed.&quot; The film, nevertheless, grossed a respectable $137 million. In 1998, Roberts appeared on the television series &quot;Sesame Street&quot; opposite the character Elmo, and starred in the drama &quot;Stepmom&quot;, alongside Susan Sarandon, revolving around the complicated relationship between a terminally-ill mother and the future stepmother of her children. While reviews were mixed-to-positive, the film made $159.7 million worldwide.

Roberts paired with Hugh Grant for &quot;Notting Hill&quot; (1999), portraying a famous actress who falls in love with a struggling book store owner. The film displaced &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; as the biggest British hit in the history of cinema, with earnings equalling $363million worldwide. An exemplar of modern romantic comedies in mainstream culture, the film was also received well by critics. CNN reviewer Paul Clinton called Roberts &quot;the queen of the romantic comedy [whose] reign continues&quot;, and remarked: &quot;&quot;Notting Hill&quot; stands alone as another funny and heartwarming story about love against all odds.&quot; In 1999, she also reunited with Richard Gere and Garry Marshall for &quot;Runaway Bride&quot;, in which she played a woman who has left a string of fiancés at the altar. Despite mixed reviews, &quot;Runaway Bride&quot; was another financial success, grossing $309.4million around the globe. Roberts was a guest star in &quot;Empire&quot;, a Season 9 episode of the television series &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot;, with regular cast member Benjamin Bratt, who at the time, was her boyfriend. Her performance earned her a nomination for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series.
===2000s===
Roberts became the first actress to be paid $20 million for a film, when she took on the role of real-life environmental activist Erin Brockovich in her fight against the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&amp;E) of California, in &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; (2000). Peter Travers of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; wrote, &quot;Roberts shows the emotional toll on Erin as she tries to stay responsible to her children and to a job that has provided her with a first taste of self-esteem&quot;, while &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; critic Owen Gleiberman felt that it was a &quot;delight to watch Roberts, with her flirtatious sparkle and undertow of melancholy&quot;. &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; made $256.3 million worldwide, and earned Roberts the Academy Award for Best Actress, among numerous other accolades. In 2000, she also became the first actress to make &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;″s list of the 50 most influential women in show business since the list had begun in 1992, and her Shoelace Productions company received a deal with Joe Roth.

Her first film following &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; was the road gangster comedy &quot;The Mexican&quot; (2001), giving her a chance to work with long-time friend Brad Pitt. The film&#x27;s script was originally intended to be filmed as an independent production without major motion picture stars, but Roberts and Pitt, who had for some time been looking for a project they could do together, learned about it and decided to sign on. Though advertised as a typical romantic comedy star vehicle, the film does not focus solely on the actors&#x27; relationship and the two shared relatively little screen time together. &quot;The Mexican&quot; earned $66.8 million in North America. In Joe Roth&#x27;s romantic comedy &quot;America&#x27;s Sweethearts&quot; (2001), Roberts starred as the once-overweight sister and assistant of a Hollywood actress, along with Billy Crystal, John Cusack, and Catherine Zeta-Jones. Critics felt that despite its famous cast, the production lacked &quot;sympathetic characters&quot; and was &quot;only funny in spurts.&quot; A commercial success, it grossed over $138 million worldwide, however. In her last film released in 2001, Roberts teamed with &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; director Steven Soderbergh for &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Eleven&quot;, a remake of the 1960 film of the same name, featuring an ensemble cast including George Clooney, Brad Pitt, and Matt Damon. Roberts played Tess Ocean, the ex-wife of leader Danny Ocean (Clooney), originally played by Angie Dickinson. A success with critics and at the box office alike, &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Eleven&quot; became the fifth highest-grossing film of the year with a total of $450 million worldwide.

Roberts received a record $25 million, the highest ever earned by an actress at that time, to portray a forward-thinking art history professor at Wellesley College in 1953, in Mike Newell&#x27;s drama &quot;Mona Lisa Smile&quot;. The film garnered largely lukewarm reviews by critics, who found it &quot;predictable and safe&quot;, but made over $141 million in theaters. In 2004, Roberts replaced Cate Blanchett in the role of an American photographer for Mike Nichols&#x27;s film &quot;Closer&quot;, a romantic drama written by Patrick Marber, based on his 1997 play of the same name, co-starring Jude Law, Natalie Portman and Clive Owen. She next reprised the role of Tess Ocean in &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Twelve&quot;, which was deliberately much more unconventional than the first film, epitomized by a sequence in which Roberts&#x27;s character impersonates the real-life Julia Roberts, due to what the film&#x27;s characters believe is their strong resemblance. Though less well reviewed than &quot;Eleven&quot;, the film became another major success at the box office, with a gross of $363 million worldwide. In 2005, she was featured in the music video for the single &quot;Dreamgirl&quot; by the Dave Matthews Band. It was her first music video appearance. Roberts appeared in &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;&#x27;s list of the 10 highest-paid actresses every year from 2002 (when the magazine began compiling its list) to 2005.

In 2006, Roberts voiced a nurse ant in &quot;The Ant Bully&quot; and a barn spider in &quot;Charlotte&#x27;s Web&quot;. She made her Broadway debut on April 19, 2006, as Nan in a revival of Richard Greenberg&#x27;s 1997 play &quot;Three Days of Rain&quot; opposite Bradley Cooper and Paul Rudd. Although the play grossed nearly $1million in ticket sales during its first week and was a commercial success throughout its limited run, her performance drew criticism. Ben Brantley of &quot;The New York Times&quot; described Roberts as being fraught with &quot;self-consciousness (especially in the first act) [and] only glancingly acquainted with the two characters she plays.&quot; Brantley also criticized the overall production, writing that &quot;it&#x27;s almost impossible to discern its artistic virtues from this wooden and splintered interpretation, directed by Joe Mantello.&quot; Writing in the &quot;New York Post&quot;, Clive Barnes declared, &quot;Hated the play. To be sadly honest, even hated her. At least I liked the rain—even if three days of it can seem an eternity.&quot; In Mike Nichols&#x27; biographical drama &quot;Charlie Wilson&#x27;s War&quot; (2007), Roberts starred as socialite Joanne Herring, the love interest of Democratic Texas Congressman Charles Wilson, opposite Tom Hanks and Philip Seymour Hoffman. The film received considerable acclaim, made $119.5 million worldwide, and earned Roberts her sixth Golden Globe nomination.

The independent drama &quot;Fireflies in the Garden&quot;, in which Roberts played a mother whose death sets the story in motion, was screened at the 2008 Berlin International Film Festival before being shown in European cinemas—it did not get a North American release until 2011. Roberts played a CIA agent collaborating with another spy to carry out a complicated con, opposite Clive Owen, in the comic thriller &quot;Duplicity&quot; (2009). Despite mixed reviews and moderate box office returns, critic A. O. Scott praised her performance: &quot;Ms. Roberts has almost entirely left behind the coltish, America&#x27;s-sweetheart mannerisms, except when she uses them strategically, to disarm or confuse. [...] She is, at 41, unmistakably in her prime&quot;. She received her seventh Golden Globe nomination for her role.

===2010s===
In 2010, Roberts played a U.S. Army captain on a one-day leave, as part of a large ensemble cast, in the romantic comedy &quot;Valentine&#x27;s Day&quot;, and starred as an author finding herself following a divorce in the film adaptation of &quot;Eat Pray Love&quot;. While she received $3 million up front against 3 percent of the gross for her six-minute role in &quot;Valentine&#x27;s Day&quot;, &quot;Eat Pray Love&quot; had the highest debut at the box office for Roberts in a top-billed role since &quot;America&#x27;s Sweethearts&quot;. She appeared as the teacher of a middle-aged man returning to education in the romantic comedy &quot;Larry Crowne&quot;, opposite Tom Hanks, who also served as the director. The film was poorly received by critics and audiences, although Roberts&#x27;s comedic performance was praised. In &quot;Mirror Mirror&quot; (2012), the Tarsem Singh adaptation of &quot;Snow White&quot;, Roberts portrayed Queen Clementianna, Snow White&#x27;s evil stepmother, opposite Lily Collins. Peter Travers of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; felt that she tried &quot;way too hard&quot; in her role, while Katey Rich of &quot;Cinema Blend&quot; observed that she &quot;takes relish in her wicked [portrayal] but could have gone even further with it&quot;. &quot;Mirror Mirror&quot; made $183 million globally.

In 2013, Roberts starred alongside Meryl Streep and Ewan McGregor in the black comedy drama &quot;&quot;, about a dysfunctional family that re-unites into the familial house when their patriarch suddenly disappears. Her performance earned her nominations for the Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, Critics&#x27; Choice Award, and Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, amongst other accolades. It was her fourth Academy Award nomination. In 2014, Roberts starred as Dr. Emma Brookner, a character based on Dr. Linda Laubenstein, in the television adaptation of Larry Kramer&#x27;s AIDS-era play, &quot;The Normal Heart&quot;, which aired on HBO; the film was critically acclaimed and &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, in its review, wrote: &quot;Roberts, meanwhile, hums with righteous, &quot;Erin Brokovich&quot;-ian anger. Between this and &quot;August: Osage County&quot;, she&#x27;s carving out a nice new niche for herself, playing brittle women who show their love and concern through explosive temper&quot;. Her role garnered her a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie.

Roberts narrated &quot;Women in Hollywood&quot;, an episode of the second season of &quot;&quot;, in 2014, and appeared in Givenchy&#x27;s spring–summer campaign in 2015. She starred as a grieving mother opposite Nicole Kidman and Chiwetel Ejiofor in &quot;Secret in Their Eyes&quot; (2015), a remake of the 2009 Argentine film of the same name, both based on the novel &quot;La pregunta de sus ojos&quot; by author Eduardo Sacheri. Unlike the original film, the American version received negative reviews and failed to find an audience. Donald Clarke of &quot;Irish Times&quot; concluded that a &quot;sound job&quot; by the cast &quot;can&#x27;t quite shake the whiff of compromise that hangs around the project&quot;. In 2016, Roberts reunited with Garry Marshall and reportedly received a $3 million fee for a four-day shoot, playing an accomplished author who gave her child for adoption, in the romantic comedy &quot;Mother&#x27;s Day&quot;, which had a lackluster critical and commercial response. Her next film release was Jodie Foster&#x27;s thriller &quot;Money Monster&quot;, in which she starred as a television director, alongside George Clooney and Jack O&#x27;Connell. Sandra Hall of &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; stated: &quot;It may be Hollywood melodrama but it&#x27;s top of the range, giving Clooney and Roberts every opportunity to demonstrate the value of star power.&quot; The film made a respectable $93.3 million worldwide.

In &quot;Wonder&quot; (2017), the film adaptation of the 2012 novel of the same name by R. J. Palacio, Roberts played the mother of a boy with Treacher Collins syndrome. &quot;The Times&quot; felt that she &quot;lifts every one of her scenes in &quot;Wonder&quot; to near-sublime places&quot;. With a worldwide gross of $305.9 million, &quot;Wonder&quot; emerged as one of Roberts&#x27;s most widely seen films. In 2017, she also voiced a motherly Smurf leader in the animated film &quot;&quot;.

Roberts portrayed the mother of a troubled young man in Peter Hedges&#x27;s drama &quot;Ben Is Back&quot; (2018). Shaun Kitchener of &quot;Daily Express&quot; remarked: &quot;Roberts is often the best, or one of the best, things about any film she&#x27;s in —and &quot;Ben Is Back&quot; is no different&quot;. The role of a caseworker at a secret government facility, in the first season of the psychological thriller series &quot;Homecoming&quot;, was Roberts&#x27;s first regular television project. The series, which premiered on Amazon Video in November 2018, garnered acclaim from critics, who concluded it was an &quot;impressive small-screen debut&quot; for Roberts that &quot;balances its haunting mystery with a frenetic sensibility that grips and doesn&#x27;t let go.&quot; She received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Television Series – Drama.

===2020s===
Roberts reunited with George Clooney for the romantic comedy &quot;Ticket to Paradise&quot;, which was released by Universal Pictures on October 21, 2022. She also played Martha Mitchell, a controversial figure throughout the Watergate scandal, in the political thriller television series &quot;Gaslit&quot;, based on the first season of the podcast &quot;Slow Burn&quot; by Leon Neyfakh.

Roberts also starred as Amanda Sandford in the 2023 film &quot;Leave the World Behind&quot;, appearing alongside Ethan Hawke and Mahershala Ali. The movie is an adaptation of the novel of the same name by Rumaan Alam. The film is produced by Barack and Michelle Obama&#x27;s company, Higher Ground Productions.

In 2024, Roberts and Riley Keough would narrate the audiobook version of Lisa Marie Presley&#x27;s memoir &quot;From Here to the Great Unknown&quot;.

== Other ventures ==
===Philanthropy===
Roberts has contributed to UNICEF as well as other charitable organizations. Her six-day visit to Port-au-Prince, Haiti in 1995, as she said, &quot;to educate myself&quot;, was expected to trigger an outburst of donations —$10 million in aid was sought at the time— by UNICEF officials. In 2006, she became a spokeswoman for Earth Biofuels as well as chair of the company&#x27;s newly formed advisory board promoting the use of renewable fuels. In 2013, she was part of a Gucci campaign, &quot;Chime for Change&quot;, that aims to spread female empowerment.

In 2000, Roberts narrated a documentary about Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder, designed to help raise public awareness about the disease, and in 2014, she was the voice of Mother Nature in a short film for the Conservation International campaign &quot;Nature Is Speaking&quot;, intended to raise awareness about climate change.

===Production company===
Roberts runs the production company Red Om Films (Red Om is &quot;Moder&quot; spelled backwards, after her husband&#x27;s last name) with her sister, Lisa Roberts Gillan, and Marisa Yeres Gill. Through Red Om, Roberts has served as an executive producer for various projects she has starred in such as &quot;Eat Pray Love&quot; and &quot;Homecoming&quot;, as well as for the first four films of the &quot;American Girl&quot; film series (based on the &quot;American Girl&quot; line of dolls), released between 2004 and 2008.

===Endorsements===
In 2006, Roberts signed an endorsement deal with fashion label Gianfranco Ferre, valued at $6 million. She was photographed by Mario Testino in Los Angeles for the brand&#x27;s advertising campaign, which was distributed in Europe, Asia and Australia. Since 2009, Roberts has acted as Lancôme&#x27;s global ambassador, a role in which she has been involved in the development and promotion of the brand&#x27;s range of cosmetics and beauty products. She initially signed a five-year extension with the company for $50 million in 2010. Roberts starred as the global face of Chopard&#x27;s Happy Sport and Happy Diamonds collections campaigns since 2021 and then Chopard had announced her as its Global Brand Ambassador in 2023.

Roberts endorsed President Joe Biden for re-election in 2024 and has been involved in related fundraising, even though Biden ended his re-election campaign on July 21, 2024.

==Personal life==
===Ancestry===
On a 2023 episode of &quot;Finding Your Roots&quot;, Roberts learned that the surname of her biological paternal great-great-grandfather was actually Mitchell, not Roberts.

Roberts also learned her ancestors owned slaves: &quot;You have to figure, if you are from the South, you&#x27;re on one side of it or the other. It just seems very typical of that time, unfortunately. ... You can&#x27;t turn your back on history, even when you become a part of it in a way that doesn&#x27;t align with your personal compass.&quot;

Roberts is a distant cousin of fellow actor Edward Norton.

===Relationships and family===
Roberts had romantic relationships with actors Jason Patric, Liam Neeson, Kiefer Sutherland, Dylan McDermott, and Matthew Perry. She was briefly engaged to Sutherland; they broke up shortly before their scheduled wedding on June 14, 1991. According to Roberts, it had been cancelled long before, not &quot;days before the wedding&quot; as the press claimed at the time, and that it was a mutual decision. On June 25, 1993, she married country singer Lyle Lovett; the wedding took place at St. James Lutheran Church in Marion, Indiana. They separated in March 1995 and subsequently divorced. From 1998 to 2001, Roberts dated actor Benjamin Bratt.

Roberts and her husband, cameraman Daniel Moder, met on the set of her film &quot;The Mexican&quot; in 2000 while she was still dating Bratt. At the time, Moder was married to Vera Steimberg. He filed for divorce a little over a year later, and after it was finalized, he and Roberts wed on July 4, 2002, at her ranch in Taos, New Mexico. Together, they have three children: twins, a daughter and a son, born in November 2004, and another son born in June 2007.

===Religious beliefs===
In 2010, Roberts said she was Hindu, having converted for &quot;spiritual satisfaction&quot;. Roberts is a devotee of the guru Neem Karoli Baba (Maharaj-ji), a picture of whom drew Roberts to Hinduism.

In September 2009, Swami Daram Dev of Ashram Hari Mandir in Pataudi, where Roberts was shooting &quot;Eat Pray Love&quot;, gave her children new names after Hindu gods: Lakshmi for Hazel, Ganesh for Phinnaeus and Krishna Balram for Henry.

===Political views===
Roberts supported Kamala Harris during the 2024 United States presidential election. She appeared with Harris in a campaign rally in the swing state of Georgia, and also voiced a political advertisement for Harris. Donald Trump, who ran against Harris in the election, criticized Roberts for her role in the advertisement.

===Personal habits===
Roberts has a preference for going barefoot, including at public events like film festivals, talk shows, and her wedding to Lyle Lovett. Her barefoot habit was incorporated into a number of her movie roles, including Tinker Bell in &quot;Hook&quot;.

== Filmography and accolades ==

Roberts&#x27;s films that have earned the most at the box office, , include:
Roberts has received four Academy Award nominations, winning for Best Actress at the 73rd Academy Awards, for her titular portrayal in &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot;, which additionally earned her a Golden Globe, a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award. She won Golden Globe Awards for her performances in &quot;Steel Magnolias&quot; and &quot;Pretty Woman&quot;, and as of 2019, has garnered eight nominations. Roberts received two Primetime Emmy Awards nominations, one for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series, for her guest-role on &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot;, and the other for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Television Movie, for her performance in &quot;The Normal Heart&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Mark Bego. &quot;Julia Roberts: America&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot; (New York: AMI Books, 2003). .
* Paul Donnelley. &quot;Julia Roberts Confidential: The Unauthorised Biography&quot; (London: Virgin, 2003). .
* James Spada. &quot;Julia: Her Life&quot; (New York: St Martin&#x27;s Press, 2004). 
* Frank Sanello. &quot;Julia Roberts: Pretty Superstar&quot; (Edinburgh: Mainstream 2010). .

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="0" end="19" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Fiona Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811794" start="156" end="174" title="List of awards and nominations received by Julia Roberts" label="multiple accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="189" end="202" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="206" end="232" title="British Academy Film Award" label="British Academy Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="244" end="263" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145457" start="269" end="299" title="Julia Roberts filmography" label="films in which she has starred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331243" start="464" end="476" title="Mystic Pizza" label="Mystic Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q762140" start="500" end="515" title="Steel Magnolias" label="Steel Magnolias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765879" start="563" end="578" title="leading lady" label="leading actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q207954" start="637" end="649" title="Pretty Woman" label="Pretty Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q918380" start="779" end="808" title="My Best Friend&amp;#x27;s Wedding" label="My Best Friend&amp;#x27;s Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q200672" start="829" end="841" title="Notting Hill (film)" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160813" start="865" end="878" title="Runaway Bride (film)" label="Runaway Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="905" end="935" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q232019" start="952" end="962" title="Erin Brockovich" label="title role"/>
<link wikidata="Q220955" start="995" end="1010" title="Erin Brockovich (film)" label="Erin Brockovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q205447" start="1099" end="1118" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Eleven" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q504053" start="1139" end="1158" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q273568" start="1179" end="1204" title="Charlie Wilson&amp;#x27;s War (film)" label="Charlie Wilson&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q244975" start="1225" end="1245" title="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day (2010 film)" label="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q304030" start="1266" end="1279" title="Eat Pray Love" label="Eat Pray Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958394" start="1321" end="1327" title="Wonder (film)" label="Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q109511080" start="1348" end="1366" title="Ticket to Paradise (2022 film)" label="Ticket to Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q111670916" start="1391" end="1413" title="Leave the World Behind (film)" label="Leave the World Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548737" start="1452" end="1472" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="1492" end="1495" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039861" start="1518" end="1534" title="The Normal Heart (film)" label="The Normal Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="1614" end="1632" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q48805434" start="1669" end="1679" title="Homecoming (TV series)" label="Homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774338" start="1708" end="1723" title="Martha Mitchell" label="Martha Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422698" start="1731" end="1736" title="Starz" label="Starz"/>
<link wikidata="Q106678966" start="1768" end="1774" title="Gaslit (TV series)" label="Gaslit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743893" start="2007" end="2020" title="American Girl (film series)" label="American Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541268" start="2093" end="2100" title="Lancôme" label="Lancôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q642546" start="2361" end="2376" title="Mona Lisa Smile" label="Mona Lisa Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="2472" end="2478" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q958676" start="2647" end="2662" title="Smyrna, Georgia" label="Smyrna, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971998" start="2676" end="2683" title="Atlanta Metropolitan Area" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q207969" start="2899" end="2911" title="Eric Roberts" label="Eric Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q228598" start="3035" end="3047" title="Emma Roberts" label="Emma Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="3233" end="3259" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="3326" end="3333" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q986200" start="3410" end="3426" title="Decatur, Georgia" label="Decatur, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230969" start="3477" end="3484" title="Coretta Scott King" label="Coretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="3489" end="3511" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q458994" start="3591" end="3598" title="Yolanda King" label="Yolanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q958676" start="3969" end="3984" title="Smyrna, Georgia" label="Smyrna, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028088" start="4064" end="4084" title="Campbell High School (Smyrna, Georgia)" label="Campbell High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="4561" end="4569" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028088" start="4626" end="4646" title="Campbell High School (Georgia)" label="Campbell High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140021" start="4924" end="4935" title="Crime Story (U.S. TV series)" label="Crime Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q352935" start="4948" end="4961" title="Dennis Farina" label="Dennis Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248487" start="5091" end="5103" title="Satisfaction (1988 film)" label="Satisfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="5128" end="5139" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q237817" start="5144" end="5159" title="Justine Bateman" label="Justine Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207969" start="5262" end="5266" title="Eric Roberts" label="Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q885136" start="5277" end="5286" title="Blood Red (film)" label="Blood Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="5439" end="5449" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331243" start="5551" end="5563" title="Mystic Pizza" label="Mystic Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="5667" end="5678" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q762140" start="5943" end="5958" title="Steel Magnolias" label="Steel Magnolias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257444" start="5975" end="5990" title="film adaptation" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496009" start="5994" end="6008" title="Robert Harling (writer)" label="Robert Harling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605689" start="6016" end="6042" title="Steel Magnolias (play)" label="1987 play of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="6082" end="6090" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187033" start="6102" end="6113" title="Sally Field" label="Sally Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="6115" end="6127" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q95026" start="6129" end="6145" title="Shirley MacLaine" label="Shirley MacLaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207596" start="6150" end="6162" title="Daryl Hannah" label="Daryl Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="6200" end="6210" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q101797" start="6215" end="6227" title="Winona Ryder" label="Winona Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q711415" start="6518" end="6530" title="Herbert Ross" label="Herbert Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="6845" end="6868" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q822907" start="6904" end="6927" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q822907" start="6929" end="6943" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture" label="Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48410" start="7105" end="7117" title="Richard Gere" label="Richard Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="7125" end="7135" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q637200" start="7136" end="7150" title="Pygmalion (play)" label="Pygmalionesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q207954" start="7164" end="7176" title="Pretty Woman" label="Pretty Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408769" start="7224" end="7251" title="hooker with a heart of gold" label="hooker with a heart of gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q159778" start="7280" end="7297" title="Michelle Pfeiffer" label="Michelle Pfeiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q231460" start="7299" end="7313" title="Molly Ringwald" label="Molly Ringwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="7315" end="7323" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232902" start="7325" end="7345" title="Jennifer Jason Leigh" label="Jennifer Jason Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q229137" start="7347" end="7358" title="Karen Allen" label="Karen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207596" start="7364" end="7376" title="Daryl Hannah" label="Daryl Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q762140" start="7399" end="7414" title="Steel Magnolias" label="Steel Magnolias"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="7503" end="7515" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="7555" end="7604" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical" label="Best Actress – Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297658" start="7784" end="7793" title="Red dress of Julia Roberts" label="red dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q295207" start="7941" end="7956" title="Joel Schumacher" label="Joel Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q514348" start="7992" end="8002" title="Flatliners" label="Flatliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q219566" start="8119" end="8140" title="near-death experience" label="near-death experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="8271" end="8280" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193347" start="8383" end="8406" title="Sleeping with the Enemy" label="Sleeping with the Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q853847" start="8448" end="8458" title="Tinker Bell" label="Tinkerbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="8462" end="8478" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q646389" start="8505" end="8509" title="Hook (film)" label="Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345359" start="8634" end="8645" title="Dying Young" label="Dying Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="8972" end="8985" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551573" start="8999" end="9009" title="The Player (1992 film)" label="The Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="9070" end="9076" title="People (American magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="9178" end="9195" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q728404" start="9218" end="9235" title="The Pelican Brief (film)" label="The Pelican Brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q106465" start="9259" end="9271" title="John Grisham" label="John Grisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210978" start="9279" end="9306" title="The Pelican Brief" label="1992 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481578" start="9519" end="9533" title="I Love Trouble (1994 film)" label="I Love Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q911775" start="9554" end="9567" title="Prêt-à-Porter (film)" label="Prêt-à-Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544085" start="9591" end="9614" title="Something to Talk About (film)" label="Something to Talk About"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532753" start="9732" end="9745" title="Friends (season 2)" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="9755" end="9762" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532209" start="9788" end="9815" title="The One After the Superbowl" label="The One After the Superbowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="9842" end="9853" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q430535" start="9884" end="9899" title="Michael Collins (film)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581421" start="9918" end="9931" title="Kitty Kiernan" label="Kitty Kiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="9952" end="9964" title="assassination" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q55258" start="9993" end="10007" title="Stephen Frears" label="Stephen Frears"/>
<link wikidata="Q953911" start="10020" end="10031" title="Mary Reilly (film)" label="Mary Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011694" start="10184" end="10195" title="P. J. Hogan" label="P. J. Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918380" start="10209" end="10238" title="My Best Friend&amp;#x27;s Wedding" label="My Best Friend&amp;#x27;s Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q363386" start="10274" end="10289" title="Dermot Mulroney" label="Dermot Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q44380" start="10291" end="10303" title="Cameron Diaz" label="Cameron Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q208685" start="10308" end="10322" title="Rupert Everett" label="Rupert Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="10524" end="10539" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q751940" start="10843" end="10864" title="1997 in film" label="global box-office hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="10908" end="10922" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q506661" start="10955" end="10972" title="Conspiracy Theory (film)" label="Conspiracy Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="11008" end="11018" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="11024" end="11042" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11882399" start="11053" end="11065" title="Mick LaSalle" label="Mick LaSalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="11075" end="11098" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="11414" end="11427" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q762250" start="11457" end="11461" title="Elmo" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q267018" start="11494" end="11501" title="Stepmom (1998 film)" label="Stepmom"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="11519" end="11533" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163286" start="11755" end="11765" title="Hugh Grant" label="Hugh Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q200672" start="11776" end="11788" title="Notting Hill (film)" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059160" start="12164" end="12176" title="Paul Clinton" label="Paul Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160813" start="12469" end="12482" title="Runaway Bride (film)" label="Runaway Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729027" start="12720" end="12726" title="Empire (Law &amp;amp; Order episode)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="12784" end="12799" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q73362" start="12832" end="12846" title="Benjamin Bratt" label="Benjamin Bratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062632" start="12928" end="12996" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q232019" start="13140" end="13155" title="Erin Brockovich" label="Erin Brockovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815011" start="13181" end="13213" title="Pacific Gas and Electric Company" label="Pacific Gas and Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="13228" end="13238" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q220955" start="13249" end="13264" title="Erin Brockovich (film)" label="Erin Brockovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="13279" end="13292" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="13302" end="13315" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="13513" end="13533" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114488" start="13547" end="13562" title="Owen Gleiberman" label="Owen Gleiberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="13880" end="13902" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901596" start="13911" end="13965" title="Power 100" label="list of the 50 most influential women in show business"/>
<link wikidata="Q469839" start="14157" end="14168" title="The Mexican" label="The Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="14233" end="14242" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="14310" end="14332" title="independent film" label="independent production"/>
<link wikidata="Q919992" start="14755" end="14763" title="Joe Roth" label="Joe Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q467631" start="14793" end="14819" title="America&amp;#x27;s Sweethearts" label="America&amp;#x27;s Sweethearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="14929" end="14942" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106175" start="14944" end="14955" title="John Cusack" label="John Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q47664" start="14961" end="14981" title="Catherine Zeta-Jones" label="Catherine Zeta-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="15288" end="15305" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q205447" start="15316" end="15335" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Eleven (2001 film)" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q464933" start="15369" end="15385" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s 11 (1960 film)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="15400" end="15413" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="15424" end="15438" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="15440" end="15449" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="15455" end="15465" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15482" end="15492" title="List of Ocean&amp;#x27;s Trilogy characters#Tess Ocean" label="Tess Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q235989" start="15560" end="15575" title="Angie Dickinson" label="Angie Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15672" end="15711" title="2001 in film#Top-grossing films" label="fifth highest-grossing film of the year"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="15899" end="15916" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q312088" start="15929" end="15940" title="Mike Newell (director)" label="Mike Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q642546" start="15960" end="15975" title="Mona Lisa Smile" label="Mona Lisa Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q80966" start="16151" end="16165" title="Cate Blanchett" label="Cate Blanchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="16210" end="16222" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q212098" start="16241" end="16247" title="Closer (2004 film)" label="Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054574" start="16257" end="16271" title="romantic drama" label="romantic drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q934640" start="16283" end="16297" title="Patrick Marber" label="Patrick Marber"/>
<link wikidata="Q379913" start="16312" end="16338" title="Closer (play)" label="1997 play of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="16352" end="16360" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q37876" start="16362" end="16377" title="Natalie Portman" label="Natalie Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q183178" start="16382" end="16392" title="Clive Owen" label="Clive Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q504053" start="16444" end="16463" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306571" start="16931" end="16940" title="Dreamgirl (Dave Matthews Band song)" label="Dreamgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="16954" end="16972" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="17041" end="17063" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q622758" start="17236" end="17249" title="The Ant Bully (film)" label="The Ant Bully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306991" start="17262" end="17273" title="barn spider" label="barn spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q213773" start="17283" end="17303" title="Charlotte&amp;#x27;s Web (2006 film)" label="Charlotte&amp;#x27;s Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149632" start="17381" end="17398" title="Richard Greenberg" label="Richard Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797440" start="17422" end="17440" title="Three Days of Rain" label="Three Days of Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q205707" start="17456" end="17470" title="Bradley Cooper" label="Bradley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q276525" start="17475" end="17484" title="Paul Rudd" label="Paul Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="17678" end="17696" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="18101" end="18114" title="New York Post" label="New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134493" start="18122" end="18134" title="Clive Barnes" label="Clive Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="18285" end="18297" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q273568" start="18329" end="18354" title="Charlie Wilson&amp;#x27;s War (film)" label="Charlie Wilson&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179672" start="18398" end="18412" title="Joanne Herring" label="Joanne Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q333430" start="18464" end="18478" title="Charlie Wilson (Texas politician)" label="Charles Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="18489" end="18498" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180560" start="18503" end="18525" title="Philip Seymour Hoffman" label="Philip Seymour Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q230496" start="18681" end="18704" title="Fireflies in the Garden" label="Fireflies in the Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="18808" end="18842" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q183178" start="19033" end="19043" title="Clive Owen" label="Clive Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165516" start="19073" end="19082" title="Duplicity (film)" label="Duplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q38351" start="19159" end="19170" title="A. O. Scott" label="A. O. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="19439" end="19451" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q244975" start="19617" end="19637" title="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day (2010 film)" label="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q304030" start="19738" end="19751" title="Eat Pray Love" label="Eat Pray Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q382864" start="20136" end="20148" title="Larry Crowne" label="Larry Crowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="20165" end="20174" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q628851" start="20330" end="20343" title="Mirror Mirror (film)" label="Mirror Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q383768" start="20362" end="20374" title="Tarsem Singh" label="Tarsem Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="20395" end="20405" title="Snow White" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q611295" start="20431" end="20449" title="Queen (Snow White)" label="Queen Clementianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q229184" start="20495" end="20507" title="Lily Collins" label="Lily Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="20856" end="20868" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="20873" end="20886" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="20894" end="20906" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q906343" start="20935" end="20955" title="dysfunctional family" label="dysfunctional family"/>
<link wikidata="Q822907" start="21084" end="21102" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320315" start="21104" end="21129" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q922273" start="21131" end="21157" title="Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="21163" end="21204" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551737" start="21347" end="21364" title="Linda Laubenstein" label="Linda Laubenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754314" start="21439" end="21455" title="The Normal Heart" label="The Normal Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="21478" end="21481" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548737" start="21886" end="21968" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q759210" start="22094" end="22102" title="Givenchy" label="Givenchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="22184" end="22197" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q317343" start="22202" end="22218" title="Chiwetel Ejiofor" label="Chiwetel Ejiofor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363812" start="22228" end="22248" title="Secret in Their Eyes" label="Secret in Their Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q748851" start="22279" end="22315" title="The Secret in Their Eyes" label="2009 Argentine film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291185" start="22387" end="22402" title="Eduardo Sacheri" label="Eduardo Sacheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="22532" end="22543" title="Irish Times" label="Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q315087" start="22722" end="22736" title="Garry Marshall" label="Garry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899741" start="22893" end="22910" title="Mother&amp;#x27;s Day (2016 film)" label="Mother&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="23001" end="23013" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363691" start="23036" end="23049" title="Money Monster" label="Money Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="23114" end="23128" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q348066" start="23133" end="23152" title="Jack O&amp;#x27;Connell (actor)" label="Jack O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24073901" start="23154" end="23165" title="Sandra Hall (writer)" label="Sandra Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="23175" end="23200" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958394" start="23437" end="23443" title="Wonder (film)" label="Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476115" start="23485" end="23512" title="Wonder (Palacio novel)" label="2012 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123852" start="23516" end="23529" title="R. J. Palacio" label="R. J. Palacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q744790" start="23571" end="23596" title="Treacher Collins syndrome" label="Treacher Collins syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221" start="23876" end="23881" title="The Smurfs" label="Smurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001087" start="23981" end="23993" title="Peter Hedges" label="Peter Hedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q47009294" start="24013" end="24024" title="Ben Is Back" label="Ben Is Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="24064" end="24077" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q48805434" start="24356" end="24366" title="Homecoming (TV series)" label="Homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="24458" end="24470" title="Amazon Video" label="Amazon Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257501" start="24752" end="24795" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama" label="Best Actress in a Television Series – Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q109511080" start="24877" end="24895" title="Ticket to Paradise (2022 film)" label="Ticket to Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="24925" end="24943" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774338" start="24981" end="24996" title="Martha Mitchell" label="Martha Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="25036" end="25053" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106678966" start="25105" end="25111" title="Gaslit (TV series)" label="Gaslit"/>
<link wikidata="Q50718684" start="25166" end="25175" title="Slow Burn (podcast)" label="Slow Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q56600012" start="25185" end="25197" title="Leon Neyfakh" label="Leon Neyfakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q111670916" start="25263" end="25285" title="Leave the World Behind (film)" label="Leave the World Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q484615" start="25313" end="25324" title="Ethan Hawke" label="Ethan Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q360531" start="25329" end="25343" title="Mahershala Ali" label="Mahershala Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880303" start="25375" end="25401" title="Leave the World Behind (novel)" label="the novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q104385201" start="25405" end="25416" title="Rumaan Alam" label="Rumaan Alam"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="25442" end="25448" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="25453" end="25467" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q81950264" start="25484" end="25509" title="Higher Ground Productions" label="Higher Ground Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q254947" start="25533" end="25545" title="Riley Keough" label="Riley Keough"/>
<link wikidata="Q237324" start="25585" end="25603" title="Lisa Marie Presley" label="Lisa Marie Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q129978663" start="25624" end="25654" title="From Here to the Great Unknown" label="From Here to the Great Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="25730" end="25736" title="United Nations Children&amp;#x27;s Fund" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q34261" start="25801" end="25815" title="Port-au-Prince" label="Port-au-Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="25817" end="25822" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q178516" start="26175" end="26180" title="Gucci" label="Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q917357" start="26308" end="26321" title="Rett syndrome" label="Rett syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402540" start="26447" end="26460" title="Mother Nature" label="Mother Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127365" start="26485" end="26511" title="Conservation International" label="Conservation International"/>
<link wikidata="Q121592263" start="26527" end="26545" title="Nature Is Speaking" label="Nature Is Speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q30606503" start="26571" end="26601" title="Climate change education" label="awareness about climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743893" start="27034" end="27047" title="American Girl (film series)" label="American Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310434" start="27086" end="27099" title="American Girl" label="American Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q470436" start="27237" end="27253" title="Gianfranco Ferre" label="Gianfranco Ferre"/>
<link wikidata="Q958151" start="27301" end="27314" title="Mario Testino" label="Mario Testino"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="27398" end="27404" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="27406" end="27410" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="27415" end="27424" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541268" start="27459" end="27466" title="Lancôme" label="Lancôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q670112" start="27747" end="27754" title="Chopard" label="Chopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q117842677" start="27943" end="27954" title="Joe Biden 2024 presidential campaign" label="re-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q127688165" start="28027" end="28057" title="Withdrawal of Joe Biden from the 2024 United States presidential election" label="ended his re-election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449973" start="28137" end="28155" title="Finding Your Roots" label="Finding Your Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q125904" start="28678" end="28691" title="Edward Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q361412" start="28772" end="28784" title="Jason Patric" label="Jason Patric"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="28786" end="28797" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103946" start="28799" end="28816" title="Kiefer Sutherland" label="Kiefer Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q53120" start="28818" end="28833" title="Dylan McDermott" label="Dylan McDermott"/>
<link wikidata="Q171758" start="28839" end="28852" title="Matthew Perry" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q543637" start="29175" end="29186" title="Lyle Lovett" label="Lyle Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q286068" start="29243" end="29258" title="Marion, Indiana" label="Marion, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q73362" start="29355" end="29369" title="Benjamin Bratt" label="Benjamin Bratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402343" start="29407" end="29419" title="Daniel Moder" label="Daniel Moder"/>
<link wikidata="Q469839" start="29454" end="29465" title="The Mexican" label="The Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="29693" end="29709" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="29889" end="29894" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q484260" start="29981" end="29985" title="guru" label="guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q708116" start="29986" end="30002" title="Neem Karoli Baba" label="Neem Karoli Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025646" start="30122" end="30129" title="Pataudi" label="Pataudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q304030" start="30164" end="30177" title="Eat Pray Love" label="Eat Pray Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q131443" start="30231" end="30238" title="Lakshmi" label="Lakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579" start="30250" end="30256" title="Ganesh" label="Ganesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="30275" end="30282" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061606" start="30283" end="30289" title="Balram" label="Balram"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="30342" end="30355" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="30367" end="30407" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="30461" end="30472" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="30476" end="30483" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815888" start="30503" end="30526" title="Campaign advertising" label="political advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="30539" end="30551" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q808132" start="30705" end="30713" title="barefoot" label="barefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q543637" start="30794" end="30805" title="Lyle Lovett" label="Lyle Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q853847" start="30887" end="30898" title="Tinker Bell" label="Tinker Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q646389" start="30908" end="30912" title="Hook (film)" label="Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="31057" end="31070" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="31096" end="31108" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q751924" start="31116" end="31135" title="73rd Academy Awards" label="73rd Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="31227" end="31239" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="31243" end="31254" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q268200" start="31261" end="31286" title="Screen Actors Guild Award" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="31467" end="31488" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062632" start="31510" end="31553" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="31583" end="31598" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548737" start="31624" end="31694" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Television Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039861" start="31725" end="31741" title="The Normal Heart (film)" label="The Normal Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766694" start="31787" end="31796" title="Mark Bego" label="Mark Bego"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489399" start="32081" end="32094" title="Frank Sanello" label="Frank Sanello"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16554" wikidata="Q6257186" url="?curid=16554" title="John Sealy Hospital">
<text>John Sealy Hospital is a hospital that is a part of the University of Texas Medical Branch complex in Galveston, Texas, United States.

== History ==
Sealy opened on January 10, 1890. It was founded by the widow and brother of one of the richest citizens of Texas, John Sealy after his death. Accompanied by the John Sealy Hospital Training School for Nurses, which was opened two months after the hospital, the foundation became the primary teaching facility of University of Texas Medical Branch opened in October 1891. In 1922, John Sealy&#x27;s children, John Sealy, II and Jennie Sealy Smith established the Sealy &amp; Smith Foundation for the hospital. This enabled construction of several new facilities, including the Rebecca Sealy Nurses&#x27; home.

A second John Sealy Hospital was built in 1954 to replace the 1890 building. Today it is known as the John Sealy Annex and houses administrative and support services.

The current John Sealy Hospital was completed in 1978 at a cost of $32.5 million and was funded in full by the Sealy &amp; Smith Foundation. The 12-story hospital includes single-patient rooms and specialized intensive care units. Other features include the Acute Care for Elders Unit, or ACE Unit and a Level I Trauma Center, one of only three in the entire Greater Houston area.

The Sealy &amp; Smith Foundation has contributed over $600 million to UTMB since its inception.

==Hurricane Ike==
Hurricane Ike forced the closing of UTMB temporarily. John Sealy Hospital and its trauma center have reopened, with renovations being undertaken in damaged areas.

==See also==
* List of Texas Medical Center institutions
* List of hospitals in Texas
* Rebecca Sealy Hospital

==References==
==External links==
* John Sealy Hospital History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6257186" start="0" end="19" title="John Sealy Hospital" label="John Sealy Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="25" end="33" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q921264" start="56" end="90" title="University of Texas Medical Branch" label="University of Texas Medical Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="102" end="111" title="Galveston" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="113" end="118" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="120" end="133" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="258" end="263" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q921264" start="463" end="497" title="University of Texas Medical Branch" label="University of Texas Medical Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440668" start="613" end="641" title="Sealy &amp;amp; Smith Foundation" label="Sealy &amp;amp; Smith Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q437458" start="1218" end="1226" title="ACE unit" label="ACE Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473971" start="1233" end="1254" title="Level I Trauma Center" label="Level I Trauma Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="1288" end="1303" title="Greater Houston" label="Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q392603" start="1426" end="1439" title="Hurricane Ike" label="Hurricane Ike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599335" start="1605" end="1646" title="List of Texas Medical Center institutions" label="List of Texas Medical Center institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623700" start="1649" end="1675" title="List of hospitals in Texas" label="List of hospitals in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301908" start="1678" end="1700" title="Rebecca Sealy Hospital" label="Rebecca Sealy Hospital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16555" wikidata="Q328804" url="?curid=16555" title="John the Evangelist">
<text>John the Evangelist ( – ) is the name traditionally given to the author of the Gospel of John. Christians have traditionally identified him with John the Apostle, John of Patmos, and John the Presbyter, although there is no consensus on how many of these may actually be the same individual.

== Identity ==

The exact identity of John – and the extent to which his identification with John the Apostle, John of Patmos and John the Presbyter is historical – is disputed between Christian tradition and scholars.

The Gospel of John refers to an otherwise unnamed &quot;disciple whom Jesus loved&quot;, who &quot;bore witness to and wrote&quot; the Gospel&#x27;s message. The author of the Gospel of John seemed interested in maintaining the internal anonymity of the author&#x27;s identity, although interpreting the Gospel in the light of the Synoptic Gospels and considering that the author names (and therefore is not claiming to be) Peter, and that James was martyred as early as AD 44, Christian tradition has widely believed that the author was the Apostle John, though modern scholars believe the work to be pseudepigrapha.

Christian tradition says that John the Evangelist was John the Apostle. John, Peter and James the Just were the &quot;three pillars&quot; of the Jerusalem church after Jesus&#x27; death. He was one of the original twelve apostles and is thought to be the only one to escape martyrdom. It had been believed that he was exiled (around AD 95) to the Aegean island of Patmos, where he wrote the Book of Revelation. However, some attribute the authorship of Revelation to another man, called John the Presbyter, or to other writers of the late first century AD. Bauckham argues that the early Christians identified John the Evangelist with John the Presbyter.

==Authorship of the Johannine works==

Since at least the 2nd century AD, scholars have debated the authorship of the Johannine works—whether they were written by one author or many, and if any of the authors can be identified with John the Apostle.

The gospel and epistles traditionally and plausibly came from Ephesus, , although some scholars argue for an origin in Syria. Eastern Orthodox tradition attributes all of the Johannine books to John the Apostle. Some today agree that the gospel and epistles may have been written by a single author, whether or not this was the apostle.

Other scholars conclude that the author of the epistles was different from that of the gospel, although all four works originated from the same community. In the 6th century, the argued that the Second and Third Epistle of John have a separate author known as &quot;John the priest.&quot;

Historical critics like H.P.V. Nunn, Reza Aslan and Bart Ehrman, believe with most modern scholars that the apostle John wrote none of these works. Some scholars, though, such as John Robinson, F. F. Bruce, Leon Morris, and Martin Hengel, still hold the apostle to be behind at least some of the works in question, particularly the gospel.

The Book of Revelation is today generally agreed to have a separate author, John of Patmos, with some parts possibly dating to Nero&#x27;s reign in the early 60s.

==Feast day==
The feast day of Saint John in the Catholic Church, Anglican Communion, and the Lutheran Calendar, is on 27 December, the third day of Christmastide. In the Tridentine calendar he was commemorated also on each of the following days up to and including 3 January, the Octave of the 27 December feast. This Octave was abolished by Pope Pius XII in 1955. The traditional liturgical color is white.

Freemasons celebrate this feast day, dating back to the 18th century when the Feast Day was used for the installation of Grand Masters.

==In art==

John is traditionally depicted in one of two distinct ways: either as an aged man with a white or gray beard, or alternatively as a beardless youth. The first way of depicting him was more common in Byzantine art, where it was possibly influenced by antique depictions of Socrates; the second was more common in the art of Medieval Western Europe and can be dated back as far as 4th-century Rome.

In medieval works of painting, sculpture and literature, Saint John is often presented in an androgynous or feminized manner. Historians have related such portrayals to the circumstances of the believers for whom they were intended. For instance, John&#x27;s feminine features are argued to have helped to make him more relatable to women. Likewise, Sarah McNamer argues that because of John&#x27;s androgynous status, he could function as an &#x27;image of a third or mixed gender&#x27; and &#x27;a crucial figure with whom to identify&#x27; for male believers who sought to cultivate an attitude of affective piety, a highly emotional style of devotion that, in late-medieval culture, was thought to be poorly compatible with masculinity.

Legends from the &quot;Acts of John&quot; contributed much to medieval iconography; it is the source of the idea that John became an apostle at a young age. One of John&#x27;s familiar attributes is the chalice, often with a snake emerging from it. According to one legend from the Acts of John, John was challenged to drink a cup of poison to demonstrate the power of his faith, and thanks to God&#x27;s aid the poison was rendered harmless. The chalice can also be interpreted with reference to the Last Supper, or to the words of Christ to John and James: &quot;My chalice indeed you shall drink.&quot; According to the 1910 &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;, some authorities believe that this symbol was not adopted until the 13th century. There was also a legend that John was at some stage boiled in oil and miraculously preserved. Another common attribute is a book or a scroll, in reference to his writings. John the Evangelist is symbolically represented by an eagle, one of the creatures envisioned by Ezekiel (1:10) and in the Book of Revelation (4:7).

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* Eagle of Saint John
* Luke the Evangelist
* Mark the Evangelist
* Matthew the Evangelist
* St. John the Evangelist Church

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==

* &quot;Saint John the Apostle.&quot; &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; Online.
* St. John the Evangelist at the Christian Iconography web site
* Caxton&#x27;s translations of the &quot;Golden Legend&quot;″s two chapters on St. John: Of St. John the Evangelist and The History of St. John Port Latin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="0" end="19" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="79" end="93" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="145" end="161" title="John the Apostle" label="John the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733634" start="163" end="177" title="John of Patmos" label="John of Patmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698707" start="183" end="201" title="John the Presbyter" label="John the Presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="386" end="402" title="John the Apostle" label="John the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733634" start="404" end="418" title="John of Patmos" label="John of Patmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698707" start="423" end="441" title="John the Presbyter" label="John the Presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110396" start="478" end="497" title="Christian tradition" label="Christian tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="517" end="531" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564479" start="569" end="594" title="disciple whom Jesus loved" label="disciple whom Jesus loved"/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="844" end="859" title="Synoptic Gospel" label="Synoptic Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107013" start="963" end="971" title="Christian martyr" label="martyred"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="1115" end="1129" title="pseudepigrapha" label="pseudepigrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="1210" end="1215" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="1220" end="1234" title="James the Just" label="James the Just"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1250" end="1263" title="Triumvirate#Biblical" label="three pillars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1277" end="1293" title="Early Christianity#Jerusalem church" label="Jerusalem church"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="1346" end="1361" title="twelve apostles" label="twelve apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q190053" start="1496" end="1502" title="Patmos" label="Patmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="1523" end="1541" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698707" start="1619" end="1637" title="John the Presbyter" label="John the Presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698707" start="1767" end="1785" title="John the Presbyter" label="John the Presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="1862" end="1870" title="Biblical criticism" label="scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329596" start="1906" end="1921" title="Johannine works" label="Johannine works"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2101" end="2108" title="Early centers of Christianity#Asia Minor" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2158" end="2163" title="Early centers of Christianity#Damascus" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131453" start="2572" end="2578" title="Second Epistle of John" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q131462" start="2583" end="2604" title="Third Epistle of John" label="Third Epistle of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698707" start="2643" end="2658" title="John the Presbyter" label="John the priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q508091" start="2667" end="2685" title="Historical criticism" label="Historical critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298313" start="2704" end="2714" title="Reza Aslan" label="Reza Aslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="2719" end="2730" title="Bart Ehrman" label="Bart Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372485" start="2846" end="2859" title="John Robinson (bishop of Woolwich)" label="John Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q181778" start="2861" end="2872" title="F. F. Bruce" label="F. F. Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443150" start="2874" end="2885" title="Leon Morris" label="Leon Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q64875" start="2891" end="2904" title="Martin Hengel" label="Martin Hengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733634" start="3084" end="3098" title="John of Patmos" label="John of Patmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="3135" end="3139" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="3190" end="3199" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3221" end="3236" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="3238" end="3256" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262992" start="3308" end="3317" title="Twelve Days of Christmas" label="third day"/>
<link wikidata="Q867780" start="3321" end="3334" title="Christmastide" label="Christmastide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883976" start="3343" end="3362" title="Tridentine calendar" label="Tridentine calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896500" start="3453" end="3459" title="Octave (liturgy)" label="Octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="3515" end="3528" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="3582" end="3592" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238397" start="3593" end="3617" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Day, Masonic feast" label="celebrate this feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940122" start="3703" end="3716" title="Grand Master (Freemasonry)" label="Grand Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q211884" start="3930" end="3943" title="Byzantine art" label="Byzantine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="4003" end="4011" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624153" start="4054" end="4077" title="Medieval art" label="Medieval Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891947" start="4730" end="4745" title="affective piety" label="affective piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q776123" start="4894" end="4906" title="Acts of John" label="Acts of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q210723" start="5074" end="5081" title="chalice" label="chalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="5372" end="5383" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="5842" end="5847" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9098119" start="5966" end="5985" title="Eagle of Saint John" label="Eagle of Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q128538" start="5988" end="6007" title="Luke the Evangelist" label="Luke the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="6010" end="6029" title="Mark the Evangelist" label="Mark the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43600" start="6032" end="6054" title="Matthew the Evangelist" label="Matthew the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697134" start="6057" end="6087" title="St. John the Evangelist Church (disambiguation)" label="St. John the Evangelist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q129493" start="6324" end="6337" title="Golden Legend" label="Golden Legend"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16556" wikidata="Q311607" url="?curid=16556" title="Jack Kirby">
<text>Jack Kirby (; born Jacob Kurtzberg; August 28, 1917 – February 6, 1994) was an American comic book artist, widely regarded as one of the medium&#x27;s major innovators and one of its most prolific and influential creators. He grew up in New York City and learned to draw cartoon figures by tracing characters from comic strips and editorial cartoons. He entered the nascent comics industry in the 1930s, drawing various comics features under different pen names, including Jack Curtiss, before settling on Jack Kirby. In 1940, he and writer-editor Joe Simon created the highly successful superhero character Captain America for Timely Comics, predecessor of Marvel Comics. During the 1940s, Kirby regularly teamed with Simon, creating numerous characters for that company and for National Comics Publications, later to become DC Comics.

After serving in the European Theater in World War II, Kirby produced work for DC Comics, Harvey Comics, Hillman Periodicals and other publishers. At Crestwood Publications, he and Simon created the genre of romance comics and later founded their own short-lived comic company, Mainline Publications. Kirby was involved in Timely&#x27;s 1950s iteration, Atlas Comics, which in the next decade became Marvel. There, in the 1960s, Kirby cocreated many of the company&#x27;s major characters, including Ant-Man, the Avengers, the Black Panther, the Fantastic Four, the Hulk, Iron Man, the Silver Surfer, Thor, and the X-Men, among many others. Kirby&#x27;s titles garnered high sales and critical acclaim, but in 1970, feeling he had been treated unfairly, largely in the realm of authorship credit and creators&#x27; rights, Kirby left the company for rival DC.

At DC, Kirby created his Fourth World saga which spanned several comics titles. While these series proved commercially unsuccessful and were canceled, the Fourth World&#x27;s New Gods have continued as a significant part of the DC Universe. Kirby returned to Marvel briefly in the mid-to-late 1970s, then ventured into television animation and independent comics. In his later years, Kirby, who has been called &quot;the William Blake of comics&quot;, began receiving great recognition in the mainstream press for his career accomplishments, and in 1987 he was one of the three inaugural inductees of the Will Eisner Comic Book Hall of Fame. In 2017, Kirby was posthumously named a Disney Legend for his creations not only in the field of publishing, but also because those creations formed the basis for The Walt Disney Company&#x27;s financially and critically successful media franchise, the Marvel Cinematic Universe.

Kirby was married to Rosalind Goldstein in 1942. They had four children and remained married until his death from heart failure in 1994, at the age of 76. The Jack Kirby Awards and Jack Kirby Hall of Fame were named in his honor, and he is known as &quot;The King&quot; among comics fans for his many influential contributions to the medium.

==Early life (1917–1935)==
Jack Kirby was born Jacob Kurtzberg on August 28, 1917, at 147 Essex Street on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in New York City; he grew up there. His parents, Rose (Bernstein) and Benjamin Kurtzberg, were Austrian-Jewish immigrants, and his father earned a living as a garment factory worker. Kirby grew up on the Lower East Side. Among his close friends was Leon Klinghoffer, who grew up in the same neighborhood, and who in 1985 was shot, killed and thrown overboard from the cruise ship &quot;Achille Lauro&quot; by Palestinian Liberation Front hijackers. In his youth, Kirby desired to escape his neighborhood. He liked to draw, and sought out places he could learn more about art. Essentially self-taught, Kirby cited among his influences the comic strip artists Milton Caniff, Hal Foster, and Alex Raymond, as well as such editorial cartoonists as C. H. Sykes, &quot;Ding&quot; Darling, and Rollin Kirby. He was rejected by the Educational Alliance because he drew &quot;too fast with charcoal&quot;, according to Kirby. He later found an outlet for his skills by drawing cartoons for the newspaper of the Boys Brotherhood Republic, a &quot;miniature city&quot; on East 3rd Street where street kids ran their own government.

At age 14, Kirby enrolled at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, leaving after a week. &quot;I wasn&#x27;t the kind of student that Pratt was looking for. They wanted people who would work on something forever. I didn&#x27;t want to work on any project forever. I intended to get things done&quot;.

==Career==
===Entry into comics (1936–1940)===
Kirby joined the Lincoln Newspaper Syndicate in 1936, working there on newspaper comic strips and on single-panel advice cartoons such as &quot;Your Health Comes First!!!&quot; (under the pseudonym Jack Curtiss). He remained until late 1939, when he began working for the theatrical animation company Fleischer Studios as an inbetweener (an artist who fills in the action between major-movement frames) on &quot;Popeye&quot; cartoons at the same time in 1935. He left the studio before the Fleischer strike in 1937. &quot;I went from Lincoln to Fleischer,&quot; he recalled. &quot;From Fleischer I had to get out in a hurry because I couldn&#x27;t take that kind of thing,&quot; describing it as &quot;a factory in a sense, like my father&#x27;s factory. They were manufacturing pictures.&quot;

Around that time, the American comic book industry was booming. Kirby began writing and drawing for the comic book packager Eisner &amp; Iger, one of a handful of firms creating comics on demand for publishers. Through that company, Kirby did what he remembered as his first comic book work, for &quot;Wild Boy Magazine&quot;. This included such strips as the science fiction adventure &quot;The Diary of Dr. Hayward&quot; (under the pseudonym Curt Davis), the Western crimefighter feature &quot;Wilton of the West&quot; (as Fred Sande), the swashbuckler adventure &quot;The Count of Monte Cristo&quot; (again as Jack Curtiss), and the humor features &quot;Abdul Jones&quot; (as Ted Grey) and &quot;Socko the Seadog&quot; (as Teddy), all variously for &quot;Jumbo Comics&quot; and other Eisner-Iger clients. He first used the surname Kirby as the pseudonymous Lance Kirby in two &quot;Lone Rider&quot; Western stories in Eastern Color Printing&#x27;s &quot;Famous Funnies&quot; #63–64 (Oct.–Nov. 1939). He ultimately settled on the pen name Jack Kirby because it reminded him of actor James Cagney. However, he took offense to those who suggested he changed his name in order to hide his Jewish heritage.

===Partnership with Joe Simon===
Kirby moved on to comic-book publisher and newspaper syndicator Fox Feature Syndicate, earning a then-reasonable $15-a-week salary. During this time, Kirby met and began collaborating with cartoonist and Fox editor Joe Simon, who in addition to his staff work continued to freelance. Simon recalled in 1988, &quot;I loved Jack&#x27;s work and the first time I saw it I couldn&#x27;t believe what I was seeing. He asked if we could do some freelance work together. I was delighted and I took him over to my little office. We worked from the second issue of Blue Bolt through... about 25 years.&quot;

After leaving Fox and collaborating on the premiere issue of Fawcett Comics&#x27; &quot;Captain Marvel Adventures&quot; ([March] 1941), the first solo title for the previously introduced superhero, and for which Kirby was told to mimic creator C.C. Beck&#x27;s drawing style, the duo were hired on staff at pulp magazine publisher Martin Goodman&#x27;s Timely Comics (later to become Marvel Comics). There Simon and Kirby created the patriotic superhero Captain America in late 1940. Simon, who became the company&#x27;s editor, with Kirby as art director, said he negotiated with Goodman to give the duo 25 percent of the profits from the feature. The first issue of &quot;Captain America Comics&quot;, released in early 1941, sold out in days, and the second issue&#x27;s print run was set at over a million copies. The title&#x27;s success established the team as a notable creative force in the industry. After the first issue was published, Simon asked Kirby to join the Timely staff as the company&#x27;s art director.

With the success of the Captain America character, Simon said he felt that Goodman was not paying the pair the promised percentage of profits, and so sought work for the two of them at National Comics Publications (later renamed DC Comics). Kirby and Simon negotiated a deal that would pay them a combined $500 a week, as opposed to the $75 and $85 they respectively earned at Timely. The pair feared Goodman would not pay them if he found they were moving to National, but many people knew of their plan, including Timely editorial assistant Stan Lee. When Goodman eventually discovered it, he told Simon and Kirby to leave after finishing work on &quot;Captain America Comics&quot; #10. Kirby was bitterly convinced it was specifically Lee who betrayed them, ignoring Simon&#x27;s willingness to give him the benefit of the doubt.

Kirby and Simon spent their first weeks at National trying to devise new characters while the company sought how best to utilize the pair. After a few failed editor-assigned ghosting assignments, National&#x27;s Jack Liebowitz told them to &quot;just do what you want&quot;. The pair then revamped the Sandman feature in &quot;Adventure Comics&quot; and created the superhero Manhunter. In July 1942 they began the &quot;Boy Commandos&quot; feature. The ongoing &quot;kid gang&quot; series of the same name, launched later that same year, was the creative team&#x27;s first National feature to graduate into its own title. It sold over a million copies a month, becoming National&#x27;s third best-selling title. They scored a hit with the homefront kid-gang team, the Newsboy Legion, featuring in &quot;Star-Spangled Comics&quot;. In 2010, DC Comics writer and executive Paul Levitz observed that &quot;Like Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster, the creative team of Joe Simon and Jack Kirby was a mark of quality and a proven track record.&quot;

====World War II (1943–1945)====
With World War II underway, Liebowitz expected that Simon and Kirby would be drafted, so he asked the artists to create an inventory of material to be published in their absence. The pair hired writers, inkers, letterers, and colorists in order to create a year&#x27;s worth of material. Kirby was drafted into the U.S. Army on June 7, 1943. After basic training at Camp Stewart, near Savannah, Georgia, he was assigned to Company F of the 11th Infantry Regiment. He landed on Omaha Beach in Normandy on August 23, 1944, months after D-Day, although Kirby&#x27;s reminiscences would place his arrival just 10 days after. Kirby recalled that a lieutenant, learning that comics artist Kirby was in his command, made him a scout who would advance into towns and draw reconnaissance maps and pictures, an extremely dangerous duty.

====Postwar career (1946–1955)====
After the war, Simon arranged work for Kirby and himself at Harvey Comics, where, through the early 1950s, the duo created such titles as the kid-gang adventure &quot;Boy Explorers Comics&quot;, the kid-gang Western &quot;Boys&#x27; Ranch&quot;, the superhero comic &quot;Stuntman&quot;, and, in vogue with the fad for 3-D movies, &quot;Captain 3-D&quot;. Simon and Kirby additionally freelanced for Hillman Periodicals (the crime-fiction comic &quot;Real Clue Crime&quot;) and for Crestwood Publications (&quot;Justice Traps the Guilty&quot;).

The team had its greatest success in the postwar period by creating romance comics. Simon, inspired by Macfadden Publications&#x27; romantic-confession magazine &quot;True Story&quot;, transplanted the idea to comic books and with Kirby created a first-issue mock-up of &quot;Young Romance&quot;. Showing it to Crestwood general manager Maurice Rosenfeld, Simon asked for 50% of the comic&#x27;s profits. Crestwood publishers Teddy Epstein and Mike Bleier agreed, stipulating that the creators would take no money up front. &quot;Young Romance&quot; #1 (cover-date Oct. 1947) &quot;became Jack and Joe&#x27;s biggest hit in years&quot;. The first title sold a staggering 92% of its print run, inspiring Crestwood to increase the print run by the third issue to triple the initial number of copies. Initially published bimonthly, &quot;Young Romance&quot; quickly became a monthly title and produced the spin-off &quot;Young Love&quot;—together the two titles sold two million copies per month, according to Simon—later joined by &quot;Young Brides&quot; and &quot;In Love&quot;, the latter &quot;featuring full-length romance stories&quot;. &quot;Young Romance&quot; spawned dozens of imitators from publishers such as Timely, Fawcett, Quality, and Fox Feature Syndicate. Despite the glut, the Simon and Kirby romance titles continued to sell millions of copies a month.

Bitter that Timely Comics&#x27; 1950s iteration, Atlas Comics, had relaunched Captain America in a new series in 1954, Kirby and Simon created &quot;Fighting American&quot;. Simon recalled, &quot;We thought we&#x27;d show them how to do Captain America&quot;. While the comic book initially portrayed the protagonist as an anti-Communist dramatic hero, Simon and Kirby turned the series into a superhero satire with the second issue, in the aftermath of the Army-McCarthy hearings and the public backlash against the Red-baiting U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy.

===After Simon (1956–1957)===
At the urging of a Crestwood salesman, Kirby and Simon launched their own comics company, Mainline Publications, securing a distribution deal with Leader News in late 1953 or early 1954, subletting space from their friend Al Harvey&#x27;s Harvey Publications at 1860 Broadway. Mainline, which existed from 1954 to 1955, published four titles: the Western &quot;Bullseye: Western Scout&quot;; the war comic &quot;Foxhole&quot; because EC Comics and Atlas Comics were having success with war comics, but promoting theirs as being written and drawn by actual veterans; &quot;In Love&quot; because their earlier romance comic &quot;Young Love&quot; was still being widely imitated; and the crime comic &quot;Police Trap&quot;, which claimed to be based on genuine accounts by law-enforcement officials. After the duo rearranged and republished artwork from an old Crestwood story in &quot;In Love&quot;, Crestwood refused to pay the team, who sought an audit of Crestwood&#x27;s finances. Upon review, the pair&#x27;s attorneys stated the company owed them $130,000 for work done over the past seven years. Crestwood paid them $10,000 in addition to their recent delayed payments. The partnership between Kirby and Simon had become strained. Simon left the industry for a career in advertising, while Kirby continued to freelance. &quot;He wanted to do other things and I stuck with comics,&quot; Kirby recalled in 1971. &quot;It was fine. There was no reason to continue the partnership and we parted friends.&quot;

At this point in the mid-1950s, Kirby made a temporary return to the former Timely Comics, now known as Atlas Comics, the direct predecessor of Marvel Comics. Inker Frank Giacoia had approached editor-in-chief Stan Lee for work and suggested he could &quot;get Kirby back here to pencil some stuff. While freelancing for National Comics Publications, the future DC Comics, Kirby drew 20 stories for Atlas from 1956 to 1957: Beginning with the five-page &quot;Mine Field&quot; in &quot;Battleground&quot; #14 (Nov. 1956), Kirby penciled and in some cases inked (with his wife, Roz) and wrote stories of the Western hero Black Rider, the Fu Manchu-like Yellow Claw, and more. But in 1957, distribution troubles caused the &quot;Atlas implosion&quot; that resulted in several series being dropped and no new material being assigned for many months. The next year Kirby returned to the nascent Marvel.

For DC around that time, Kirby co-created with writers Dick and Dave Wood the non-superpowered adventuring quartet the Challengers of the Unknown in &quot;Showcase&quot; #6 (Feb. 1957), while contributing to such anthologies as &quot;House of Mystery&quot;. During 30 months freelancing for DC, Kirby drew slightly more than 600 pages, which included 11 six-page Green Arrow stories in &quot;World&#x27;s Finest Comics&quot; and &quot;Adventure Comics&quot; that in a rarity, Kirby inked himself. Kirby recast the archer as a science-fiction hero, moving him away from his Batman-formula roots, but, in the process, alienating Green Arrow co-creator Mort Weisinger.

He began drawing &quot;Sky Masters of the Space Force,&quot; a newspaper comic strip, written by the Wood brothers and initially inked by the unrelated Wally Wood. Kirby left National Comics Publications due largely to a contractual dispute in which editor Jack Schiff, who had been involved in getting Kirby and the Wood brothers the &quot;Sky Masters&quot; contract, claimed he was due royalties from Kirby&#x27;s share of the strip&#x27;s profits. Schiff successfully sued Kirby. Some DC editors had criticized him over art details, such as not drawing &quot;the shoelaces on a cavalryman&#x27;s boots&quot; and showing a Native American &quot;mounting his horse from the wrong side.&quot;

===Marvel Comics in the Silver Age (1958–1970)===
Several months later, after his split with DC, Kirby began freelancing regularly for Atlas despite harboring negative sentiments about Stan Lee (the cousin of Timely publisher Martin Goodman&#x27;s wife), who Kirby had always found annoying on top of his aforementioned betrayal he suspected in the 1940s. Because of the poor page rates, Kirby would spend 12 to 14 hours daily at his drawing table at home, producing four to five pages of artwork a day. His first published work at Atlas was the cover of and the seven-page story &quot;I Discovered the Secret of the Flying Saucers&quot; in &quot;Strange Worlds&quot; #1 (Dec. 1958). Initially with Christopher Rule as his regular inker, and later Dick Ayers, Kirby drew across all genres, from romance comics to war comics to crime comics to Western comics, but made his mark primarily with a series of supernatural-fantasy and science fiction stories featuring giant, drive-in movie-style monsters with names like Groot, the Thing from Planet X; Grottu, King of the Insects; and Fin Fang Foom for the company&#x27;s many anthology series, such as &quot;Amazing Adventures,&quot; &quot;Strange Tales,&quot; &quot;Tales to Astonish,&quot; &quot;Tales of Suspense,&quot; and &quot;World of Fantasy.&quot; His bizarre designs of powerful, unearthly creatures proved a hit with readers. Additionally, he freelanced for Archie Comics around this time, reuniting briefly with Joe Simon to help develop the series &quot;The Fly&quot; and &quot;The Double Life of Private Strong&quot;. Additionally, Kirby drew some issues of &quot;Classics Illustrated&quot;.

At Marvel Kirby hit his stride once again in superhero comics, beginning with &quot;The Fantastic Four&quot; #1 (Nov. 1961), which some have observed, shares many elements of Kirby&#x27;s &quot;Challengers of the Unknown&quot;. The landmark series became a hit that revolutionized the industry with its comparative naturalism and, eventually, a cosmic purview informed by Kirby&#x27;s seemingly boundless imaginationone well-matched with the consciousness-expanding youth culture of the 1960s. For almost a decade, Kirby provided Marvel&#x27;s house style, creating many of the Marvel characters and designing their visual motifs. At the editor-in-chief&#x27;s request, he often provided new-to-Marvel artists &quot;breakdown&quot; layouts, over which they would pencil in order to become acquainted with the Marvel look. As artist Gil Kane described:

Highlights of Kirby&#x27;s tenure also include the Hulk, Thor, the X-Men and Magneto, Doctor Doom, Uatu the Watcher, Ego the Living Planet, the Inhumans and their hidden city of Attilan, and the Black Panther (comics&#x27; first black superhero) and his Afrofuturist nation, Wakanda. Kirby initially was assigned to pencil the first Spider-Man story, but when he showed Lee the first six pages, Lee recalled, &quot;I &quot;hated&quot; the way he was doing it! Not that he did it badly—it just wasn&#x27;t the character I wanted; it was too heroic&quot;. Lee then turned to Steve Ditko to draw the story that would appear in &quot;Amazing Fantasy&quot; #15, for which Kirby nonetheless penciled the cover. Lee and Kirby gathered several of their newly created characters together into the team title &quot;The Avengers&quot; and brought back old characters from the 1940s such as the Sub-Mariner and Captain America. In later years, Lee and Kirby disputed over who deserved credit for such creations as &quot;The Fantastic Four&quot;.

The story frequently cited as Lee and Kirby&#x27;s finest achievement is &quot;The Galactus Trilogy&quot; in &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; #48–50 (March–May 1966), chronicling the arrival of Galactus, a cosmic giant who wanted to devour the planet, and his herald, the Silver Surfer. &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; #48 was chosen as #24 in the 100 Greatest Marvels of All Time poll of Marvel&#x27;s readers in 2001. Editor Robert Greenberger wrote in his introduction to the story that &quot;As the fourth year of the &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; came to a close, Stan Lee and Jack Kirby seemed to be only warming up. In retrospect, it was perhaps the most fertile period of any monthly title during the Marvel Age.&quot; Comics historian Les Daniels noted that &quot;[t]he mystical and metaphysical elements that took over the saga were perfectly suited to the tastes of young readers in the 1960s&quot;, and Lee soon discovered that the story was a favorite on college campuses. Kirby continued to expand the medium&#x27;s boundaries, devising photo-collage covers and interiors, developing new drawing techniques such as the method for depicting energy fields now known as &quot;Kirby Krackle&quot;, and other experiments.

In 1968 and 1969, Joe Simon was involved in litigation with Marvel Comics over the ownership of Captain America, initiated by Marvel after Simon registered the copyright renewal for Captain America in his own name. According to Simon, Kirby agreed to support the company in the litigation and, as part of a deal Kirby made with publisher Martin Goodman, signed over to Marvel any rights he might have had to the character.

At the same time, Kirby grew increasingly dissatisfied with working at Marvel, for reasons Kirby biographer Mark Evanier has suggested include resentment over Lee&#x27;s media prominence, a lack of full creative control, anger over breaches of perceived promises by publisher Martin Goodman, and frustration over Marvel&#x27;s failure to credit him specifically for his story plotting and for his character creations and co-creations. He began to both write and draw some secondary features for Marvel, such as &quot;The Inhumans&quot; in &quot;Amazing Adventures&quot; volume two, as well as horror stories for the anthology title &quot;Chamber of Darkness,&quot; and received full credit for doing so; but in 1970, Kirby was presented with a contract that included unfavorable terms such as a prohibition against legal retaliation. When Kirby objected, the management refused to negotiate any contract changes, bluntly dismissing his contribution to Marvel&#x27;s success since they considered Lee solely responsible. Kirby, although he was earning $35,000 a year freelancing for the company (adjusted for inflation it was the equivalent of over $271,000 in 2024), then left Marvel in 1970 for rival DC Comics, under editorial director Carmine Infantino.

===DC Comics and the Fourth World saga (1971–1975)===
Kirby spent nearly two years negotiating a deal to move to DC Comics, where in late 1970 he signed a three-year contract with an option for two additional years. He produced a series of interlinked titles under the blanket sobriquet &quot;The Fourth World&quot;, which included a trilogy of new titles—&quot;New Gods,&quot; &quot;Mister Miracle,&quot; and &quot;The Forever People&quot;—as well as the extant &quot;Superman&#x27;s Pal Jimmy Olsen.&quot; Kirby picked the latter book because the series was without a stable creative team and he did not want to cost anyone a job.

The three books Kirby originated dealt with aspects of mythology he had previously touched upon in &quot;Thor&quot;. &quot;The New Gods&quot; would establish this new mythos, while in &quot;The Forever People&quot; Kirby would attempt to mythologize the lives of the young people he observed around him. The third book, &quot;Mister Miracle&quot; was more of a personal myth. The title character was an escape artist, which Mark Evanier suggests Kirby channeled his feelings of constraint into. Mister Miracle&#x27;s wife was based in character on Kirby&#x27;s wife Roz, and he even caricatured Stan Lee within the pages of the book as Funky Flashman, a depiction Lee found hurtful while Kirby tried to downplay the insult when confronted about it by Lee&#x27;s protege, Roy Thomas, who was similarly insulted with Flashman&#x27;s sidekick, Houseroy.

The central villain of the Fourth World series, Darkseid, and some of the Fourth World concepts, appeared in &quot;Jimmy Olsen&quot; before the launch of the other Fourth World books, giving the new titles greater exposure to potential buyers. The Superman figures and Jimmy Olsen faces drawn by Kirby were redrawn by Al Plastino, and later by Murphy Anderson. Les Daniels observed in 1995 that &quot;Kirby&#x27;s mix of slang and myth, science fiction and the Bible, made for a heady brew, but the scope of his vision has endured.&quot; In 2007, comics writer Grant Morrison commented that &quot;Kirby&#x27;s dramas were staged across Jungian vistas of raw symbol and storm ... The Fourth World saga crackles with the voltage of Jack Kirby&#x27;s boundless imagination let loose onto paper.&quot;

In addition to his artistic efforts, Kirby proposed a variety of new formats for comics such as planning to collect his published Fourth World stories into square-bound books, a format that would later be called the trade paperback, which would eventually become standard practice in the industry. However, Infantino and company were not receptive and Kirby&#x27;s proposals only went as far as producing the one-shot black-and-white magazines &quot;Spirit World&quot; and &quot;In the Days of the Mob&quot; in 1971.

Kirby later produced other DC series including &quot;OMAC&quot;, &quot;Kamandi&quot;, &quot;The Demon&quot;, and &quot;Kobra&quot; as well as working on such extant features as &quot;The Losers&quot; in &quot;Our Fighting Forces&quot;. Together with former partner Joe Simon for one last time, he worked on a new incarnation of the Sandman. Kirby produced three issues of the &quot;1st Issue Special&quot; anthology series and created Atlas the Great, a new Manhunter, and the Dingbats of Danger Street.

Kirby&#x27;s production assistant of the time, Mark Evanier, recounted that DC&#x27;s policies of the era were not in sync with Kirby&#x27;s creative impulses. Also Evanier said that he was often forced to work on characters and projects which he did not like. Meanwhile, some artists at DC did not want Kirby there, as he threatened their positions in the company; they also had bad blood from previous competition with Marvel and legal problems with him. Since he was working from California, they were able to undermine his work through redesigns in the New York office.

===Return to Marvel (1976–1978)===
At the comic book convention Marvelcon &#x27;75, in 1975, Stan Lee used a Fantastic Four panel discussion to announce that Kirby was returning to Marvel after having left in 1970 to work for DC Comics. Lee wrote in his monthly column, &quot;Stan Lee&#x27;s Soapbox&quot;, &quot;I mentioned that I had a special announcement to make. As I started telling about Jack&#x27;s return, to a totally incredulous audience, everyone&#x27;s head started to snap around as Kirby himself came waltzin&#x27; down the aisle to join us on the rostrum! You can imagine how it felt clownin&#x27; around with the co-creator of most of Marvel&#x27;s greatest strips once more.&quot;

Back at Marvel, Kirby both wrote and drew the monthly &quot;Captain America&quot; series as well as the &quot;Captain America&#x27;s Bicentennial Battles&quot; one-shot in the oversized treasury format. He created the series &quot;The Eternals&quot;, which featured a race of inscrutable alien giants, the Celestials, whose behind-the-scenes intervention in primordial humanity would eventually become a core element of Marvel Universe continuity. He produced an adaptation and expansion of the film &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;, as well as an abortive attempt to do the same for the classic television series &quot;The Prisoner&quot;. He wrote and drew &quot;Black Panther&quot; and drew numerous covers across the line.

Kirby&#x27;s other Marvel creations in this period include Machine Man and Devil Dinosaur. Kirby&#x27;s final comics collaboration with Stan Lee, &quot;The Silver Surfer: The Ultimate Cosmic Experience&quot;, was published in 1978 as part of the Marvel Fireside Books series and is considered Marvel&#x27;s first graphic novel.

===Film and animation (1979–1980)===
Still dissatisfied with Marvel&#x27;s treatment of him, and with an offer of employment from Hanna-Barbera, a job located in nearby Hollywood, Kirby left Marvel to work in animation. In that field for Ruby-Spears Productions he did designs for &quot;Turbo Teen&quot;, &quot;Thundarr the Barbarian&quot; and other animated series for television. In addition to a superior pay to his comics work, Kirby enjoyed excellent relations with the staff, especially with the younger artists who typically credited him as their inspiration. He worked on &quot;The New Fantastic Four&quot; animated series, reuniting him with scriptwriter Stan Lee and they kept their relations sufficiently cordial on a professional level. He illustrated an adaptation of the Walt Disney movie &quot;The Black Hole&quot; for &quot;Walt Disney&#x27;s Treasury of Classic Tales&quot; syndicated comic strip in 1979–80.

In 1979, Kirby drew concept art for film producer Barry Geller&#x27;s script treatment adapting Roger Zelazny&#x27;s science fiction novel, &quot;Lord of Light&quot;, for which Geller had purchased the rights. In collaboration, Geller commissioned Kirby to draw set designs that would be used as architectural renderings for a Colorado theme park to be called Science Fiction Land; Geller announced his plans at a November press conference attended by Kirby, former American football star Rosey Grier, writer Ray Bradbury, and others. While the film did not come to fruition, Kirby&#x27;s drawings were used for the CIA&#x27;s &quot;Canadian Caper&quot;, in which some members of the U.S. embassy in Tehran, Iran, who had avoided capture in the Iran hostage crisis, were able to escape the country posing as members of a movie location-scouting crew.

===Final years (1981–1994)===
In the early 1980s, Kirby and Pacific Comics, a new, non-newsstand comic-book publisher, made one of the industry&#x27;s earliest deals for creator-owned series, resulting in &quot;Captain Victory and the Galactic Rangers&quot;, and the six-issue miniseries &quot;Silver Star&quot; (later collected in hardcover format in 2007). This, together with similar actions by other independent comics publishers as Eclipse Comics (where Kirby co-created the character Destroyer Duck in a benefit comic-book series published to help Steve Gerber fight a legal case against Marvel), helped establish a precedent to end the monopoly of the work-for-hire system, wherein comics creators, even freelancers, had owned no rights to characters they created.

In 1983 Richard Kyle commissioned Kirby to create a 10-page autobiographical strip, &quot;Street Code&quot;, which became one of the last works published in Kirby&#x27;s lifetime. It was published in 1990, in the second issue of Kyle&#x27;s revival of &quot;Argosy&quot;. Kirby continued to do periodic work for DC Comics during the 1980s, including a brief revival of his &quot;Fourth World&quot; saga in the 1984 and 1985 &quot;Super Powers&quot; miniseries and the 1985 graphic novel &quot;The Hunger Dogs&quot;. DC executives Jenette Kahn and Paul Levitz had Kirby re-design the Fourth World characters for the &quot;Super Powers&quot; toyline as a way of entitling him to royalties for several of his DC creations. In 1985, Kirby and Gil Kane helped to create the concept and designs for the Ruby-Spears animated television series &quot;The Centurions&quot;. A comic-book series based on the show was published by DC and a toy line produced by Kenner.

In the twilight of his life, Kirby spent a great deal of time sparring with Marvel executives over the ownership rights of his original page boards. At Marvel, many of these pages owned by the company (due to outdated and legally dubious copyright claims) were given away as promotional gifts to Marvel clients or simply stolen from company warehouses. After the passage of the Copyright Act of 1976, which greatly expanded artist copyright capabilities, comics publishers began to return original art to creators, but in Marvel&#x27;s case only if they signed a release reaffirming Marvel&#x27;s ownership of the copyright. In 1985, Marvel issued a release that demanded Kirby affirm that his art was created for hire, allowing Marvel to retain copyright in perpetuity, in addition to demanding that Kirby forego all future royalties. Marvel offered him 88 pages of his art (less than 1% of his total output) if he signed the agreement, but reserved the right to reclaim the art if Kirby violated the deal. After Kirby publicly slammed Marvel, calling the company thugs and claiming they were arbitrarily holding his creations, Marvel finally returned (after two years of deliberations) approximately 1,900 or 2,100 pages of the estimated 10,000 to 13,000 Kirby drew for the company.

For the producer Charles Band, Jack Kirby made concept art for the films &quot;Doctor Mortalis&quot; and &quot;Mindmaster&quot;, which were later released as &quot;Doctor Mordrid&quot; (1992) and &quot;Mandroid&quot; (1993), respectively. &quot;Doctor Mordrid&quot; began as a planned adaptation of the Marvel Comics character Dr. Strange, but Band&#x27;s option expired.

For Topps Comics, founded in 1993, Kirby retained ownership of characters used in multiple series of what the company dubbed &quot;The Kirbyverse&quot;. These titles were derived mainly from designs and concepts Kirby had kept in his files, some intended initially for the by-then-defunct Pacific Comics, and then licensed to Topps for what became the &quot;Jack Kirby&#x27;s Secret City Saga&quot; mythos. &quot;Phantom Force&quot; was the last comic book Kirby worked on before his death. The story was co-written by Kirby with Michael Thibodeaux and Richard French, based on an eight-page pitch for an unused Bruce Lee comic in 1978. Issues #1 and 2 were published by Image Comics with various Image artists inking over Kirby&#x27;s pencils. Issue #0 and issues #3–8 were published by Genesis West, with Kirby providing pencils for issues #0 and 4. Thibodeaux provided the art for the remaining issues of the series after Kirby died.

==Personal life and death==
In the early 1940s, Kirby and his family moved to Brooklyn. Kirby met Rosalind &quot;Roz&quot; Goldstein, who lived in the same Brooklyn apartment building. The pair began dating soon afterward. Kirby proposed to Goldstein on her 18th birthday, and the two became engaged. They married on May 23, 1942. The couple had four children: Susan (b. December 6, 1945), Neal (b. May 1948), Barbara (b. November 1952), and Lisa (b. September 1960).

After being drafted into the U.S. Army and serving in the European Theater in World War II, Kirby corresponded with his wife regularly by v-mail, with Roz sending daily letters while she worked in a lingerie shop and lived with her mother at 2820 Brighton 7th Street in Brooklyn. During the winter of 1944, Kirby suffered severe frostbite and was taken to a hospital in London for recovery. Doctors considered amputating Kirby&#x27;s legs, which had turned black, but he eventually recovered and was able to walk again. He returned to the United States in January 1945, assigned to Camp Butner in North Carolina, where he spent the last six months of his service as part of the motor pool. Kirby was honorably discharged as a private first class on July 20, 1945, having received a Combat Infantryman Badge, a European/African/Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with a bronze Battle Star.

In 1949, Kirby bought a house for his family in East Williston, NY on Long Island. It was the family&#x27;s home for the next 20 years; Kirby worked out of a basement studio just wide, which the family referred to jocularly as &quot;The Dungeon&quot;. He moved the family to Southern California in early 1969, both to live in a drier climate for the sake of daughter Lisa&#x27;s health and to be closer to the Hollywood studios Jack Kirby believed might provide work.

In an interview, Kirby&#x27;s granddaughter Jillian Kirby said Jack Kirby was a &quot;liberal Democrat&quot;. Jack Kirby held anti-communist views, once saying that &quot;I was against the reds. I became a witch hunter. My enemies were the commies—I called them commies. In fact, Granny Goodness was a commie, Doubleheader was a commie.&quot;

On February 6, 1994, aged 76, Kirby died of heart failure in his Thousand Oaks, California home. He was buried at Valley Oaks Memorial Park in Westlake Village, California.

==Artistic style and achievements==
Brent Staples wrote in the &quot;New York Times&quot;:
Jack Kirby has been referred to as the &quot;superhero of style&quot;, his artwork described by John Carlin in &quot;Masters of American Comics&quot; as &quot;deliberately primitive and bombastic&quot;, and elsewhere has been compared to Cubist, Futurist, Primitivist and outsider art. His contributions to the comic book form, including the many characters he created or co-created and the many genres he worked on have led to him being referred to as the definitive comic book artist. Given the number of places Kirby&#x27;s artwork can now be found, the toys based on his designs, and the success of the movies based upon his work, Charles Hatfield and Ben Saunders said he was &quot;one of the chief architects of the American imagination.&quot; He was regarded as a hard working artist, and it has been calculated that he drew at least 20,318 pages of published art and a further 1,385 covers in his career. He published 1,158 pages in 1962 alone. Kirby defined comics in two periods. His work in the early 1940s with Joe Simon on the Captain America strip, and then his superhero comics of the 1960s with Stan Lee at Marvel Comics and on his own at DC Comics. Kirby also created stories in almost every genre of comics, from the autobiographical &quot;Street Code&quot; to the apocalyptic science fiction fantasy of Kamandi.

===Narrative approach to comics===
Like many of his contemporaries, Kirby was hugely indebted to Milton Caniff, Hal Foster, and Alex Raymond who codified many of the tropes of narrative art in adventure comic strips. It has also been suggested that Kirby drew from Burne Hogarth, whose dynamic figure work may have informed the way Kirby drew figures; &quot;his ferocious bounding, and grotesquely articulated figures seem directly descended from Hogarth&#x27;s dynamically contorted forms.&quot; His style drew on these influences, all major artists at the time Kirby was learning his craft, with Caniff, Foster and Raymond between them imparting to the sequential adventure comic strip a highly illustrative approach based on realizing the setting to a very high degree. Where Kirby diverged from these influences, and where his style impacted on the formation of comic book art, was in his move away from an illustrated approach to one that was more dynamic. Kirby&#x27;s artistic style was one that captured energy and motion within the image, synergizing with the text and helping to serve the narrative. In contrast, successors to the illustrative approach, such as Gil Kane, found their work eventually reach an impasse. The art would illustrate, but in lacking movement caused the reader to contemplate the art as much as the written word. Later artists such as Bryan Hitch and Alex Ross combined the Kirby and Kane approaches, using highly realistic backgrounds contrasted with dynamic characters to create what became known as a widescreen approach to comics.

Kirby&#x27;s dynamism and energy served to push the reader through the story where an illustrative, detailed approach would cause the eye to linger. His reduction of the presentation of a given scene down to one that represents the semblance of movement has led Kirby to be described as cinematic in his style. Kirby had worked at Fleischer Studios before coming to comics and had a grounding in animation techniques for producing motion. He also realized that comic books were not subject to the same constraints as the newspaper strip. While other comic book artists recreated the layouts that format used, Kirby swiftly utilized the space a whole comic book page created. As Ron Goulart describes, &quot;(h)e broke up the pages in new ways and introduced splash panels that stretched across two pages.&quot; Kirby himself described the creation of his dynamic style as a reaction both to the cinema and to the urge to create and compete: &quot;I found myself competing with the movie camera. I had to compete with the camera. I felt like John Henry... I tore my characters out of the panels. I made them jump all over the page. I tried to make that cohesive so that it would be easier to read... I had to get my characters in extreme positions, and in doing so I created an extreme style which was recognizable by everybody.&quot;

===Style===
In the early 1940s Kirby at times disregarded panel borders. A character was drawn in one panel, but their shoulder and arm would extend outside the border, into the gutter and sometimes on top of a nearby panel. A character may be punched out of one panel, feet being in the original panel and body in the next. Panels themselves would overlap, and Kirby found new ways to arrange panels on a comic book page. His figures were depicted as lithe and graceful, although Kirby would place them thrusting from the page towards the reader. In the late 1940s and 1950s Kirby moved away from superhero comics and working with Joe Simon worked in a number of genres. Kirby and Simon created the romance comics genre, and working in this as well as the war, Western and crime genres saw Kirby&#x27;s style change. He left behind the diverse panel framing and layouts. The nature of the genres enabled him to channel the energy into the posing and blocking of characters, forcing the drama into the constraints of the panel.

When Kirby and Stan Lee came together at Marvel Comics, his art developed again. His characters and representations became more abstract, less anatomically correct. He placed figures across three planes of a panel&#x27;s depth to suggest three dimensions. His backgrounds were less detailed where he did not want the eye to be drawn. His figures moved actively along diagonals and he utilized foreshortening to make a character appear to recede more deeply into the panel, so that they appeared to move towards the reader off the page. During the 1960s Kirby also developed a talent for creating collages, initially utilizing them within the pages of &quot;The Fantastic Four&quot;. He introduced the Negative Zone as a place within the Marvel Universe that would only be illustrated via collage. However, the reproduction within the published comics of the collages, coupled with the low page rate he was being paid and the time they took to develop saw their use discarded. Kirby would later return to the use of collage in his Fourth World work at DC Comics. Here he used them most often in the pages of &quot;Superman&#x27;s Pal, Jimmy Olsen&quot;.

Kirby&#x27;s style in the late 1960s was regarded so highly by Stan Lee that he instituted it as Marvel&#x27;s house style. Lee would instruct other artists to draw more like Jack, and would also assign them books to work on using Kirby&#x27;s breakdowns of the story so that they could more closely hew to Kirby&#x27;s style. Over time, Kirby&#x27;s style has become so well known that imitations, homages and pastiche are referred to as Kirbyesque.

Kirby Krackle, also referred to as Kirby Dots, is Kirby&#x27;s artistic convention of depicting the effect of energy. Within the drawing, a field of black, pseudo-fractal images is used to represent negative space around unspecified kinds of energy. Kirby Krackles are typically used in illustrations of explosions, smoke, the blasts from ray guns, &quot;cosmic&quot; energy, and outer space phenomena. The advanced technology Kirby drew, from the Afrofuturistic state of Wakanda through the Mother Boxes of the New Gods to the spaceships and design of the Celestials is gathered together under the collective term &quot;Kirby Tech&quot;. John Paul Leon has described it as &quot;It&#x27;s tech; it&#x27;s mechanical even if it&#x27;s alien, but it&#x27;s drawn in such an organic way that you don&#x27;t question it. It&#x27;s just an extension of his world. I&#x27;m not sure who else you could say did that.&quot; Kirby&#x27;s depiction of technology is linked by Charles Hatfield to Leo Marx&#x27;s idea of the technological sublime, specifically utilizing Edmund Burke&#x27;s definition of the Sublime. Using this definition, Kirby&#x27;s view and depiction of technology is that of it as something to be feared.

===Working method===
Unlike many of his contemporaries, Kirby did not use preliminary sketches, rough work or layouts. He would instead start with the blank board and draw the story onto the page from top to bottom, start to finish. Many artists, including Carmine Infantino, Gil Kane and Jim Steranko have remarked on the unusual nature of his method. Kirby would rarely erase while working; the art, and therefore the story, would flow from him almost fully formed. Kirby&#x27;s pencils had a reputation for being detailed, to the point that they were difficult to ink. Will Eisner remembers even in the early years that Kirby&#x27;s pencils were &quot;tight&quot;. Working for Eisner, Kirby initially inked with a pen, not confident enough in his ability to use the Japanese brushes Lou Fine and Eisner preferred. By the time Kirby worked with Joe Simon, Kirby had taught himself to use a brush, and would on occasion ink over inked work where he felt it was needed.

Due to the amount of work Kirby produced, it was rare for him to ink his own work. Instead the pencilled pages were sent on to an inker; different inkers left their own stylistic stamp on the published version. As Kirby noted, individual inkers were suited to different genres. Harry Mendryk has suggested that for a period in the 1950s, Kirby inked himself due to other work drying up. By the late 1960s, Kirby preferred to pencil, feeling that &quot;inking in itself is a separate kind of art.&quot; Stan Lee recalls Kirby not really being too interested in who inked him: &quot;I cared much more about who inked Kirby than Kirby did... Kirby never seemed to care who inked him... I think Kirby felt his style was so strong that it just didn&#x27;t matter who inked him&quot;. Chic Stone, an inker of Kirby&#x27;s during the 1960s at Marvel, recalled &quot;(T)he two best [inkers] for Jack were Mike Royer and Steve Rude. Both truly maintained the integrity of Jack&#x27;s pencils.&quot;

The size of the art board made a difference to Kirby&#x27;s style. During the late 1960s the industry shrunk the size of the art board artists used. Prior to 1967, art boards were around 14 x 21 inches, being reproduced at 7 x 10 inches. After 1967 the size of the board shrunk to 10 x 15. This affected the way Kirby drew. Gil Kane noted that &quot;the amount of space around the figures became less and less... The figures became bigger and bigger, and they couldn&#x27;t be contained by a single panel or even a single page&quot;. Professor Craig Fischer asserts Kirby at first &quot;hated&quot; the new size. Fischer argues that it took Kirby around 18 months to negotiate a way of working at the smaller size. Initially he retreated to a less detailed, close up style, as seen in &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; #68. In adjusting to the new size, Kirby began utilizing depth to bring the pages to life, increasing his use of foreshortening. By the time Kirby had moved to DC, he started to incorporate the use of two-page spreads into his art more. These spreads helped define the mood of the story, and came to define Kirby&#x27;s late era work.

===Exhibitions and original art===
Kirby&#x27;s art has been exhibited as part of the Masters of American Comics joint exhibition by the Hammer Museum and Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles from November 2005 to March 2006. In 2015 Charles Hatfield curated the &quot;Comic Book Apocalypse&quot; exhibition at the California State University, Northridge Art Galleries. The exhibition focused on Kirby&#x27;s work from 1965 onward. In 2018 &quot;A Jack Kirby Odyssey&quot; was organized by Tom Kraft. The exhibition displayed photocopies of unpublished Kirby pencils for stories intended for publication in the &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; comic book adaptation series as well as reproductions of the published work. In 1994 The Cartoon Art Trust organized an exhibition in
London of Kirby art, &quot;Jack Kirby: The King of Comic Books&quot;, in the wake of Kirby&#x27;s death. In 2010 Dan Nadel and Paul Gravett curated &quot;Jack Kirby: The House That Jack Built&quot;, a retrospective of Kirby&#x27;s career from 1942 to 1985. The exhibition was part of the Fumetto International Comics Festival held in Lucerne, Switzerland.

Kirby&#x27;s original art regularly sells at auction, with Heritage Auctions listing the cover of &quot;Tales of Suspense&quot; #84, inked by Frank Giacoia as realizing a price of $167,300 in a February 2014 auction. A large portion of Kirby&#x27;s art remains unaccounted for. Work created around World War II would have been reused or pulped due to paper shortages. DC Comics had a policy of destroying original art in the 1950s. Marvel Comics also destroyed art until 1960, when it stored artwork prior to a policy which had art returned to the artist. In Kirby&#x27;s case, it is reported that about 2,100 pieces of the estimated 10,000 pages drawn were returned to him. The whereabouts of the missing pages are unknown, although some do turn up for sale, provenance unknown.

==Kirby&#x27;s estate==
===Subsequent releases===
Lisa Kirby announced in early 2006 that she and co-writer Steve Robertson, with artist Mike Thibodeaux, planned to publish via the Marvel Comics Icon imprint a six-issue limited series, &quot;Jack Kirby&#x27;s Galactic Bounty Hunters&quot;, featuring characters and concepts created by her father for &quot;Captain Victory&quot;. The series, scripted by Lisa Kirby, Robertson, Thibodeaux, and Richard French, with pencil art by Jack Kirby and Thibodeaux, and inking by Scott Hanna and Karl Kesel primarily, ran an initial five issues (Sept. 2006–Jan. 2007) and then a later final issue (Sept. 2007).

Marvel posthumously published a &quot;lost&quot; Kirby/Lee &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; story, &quot;Fantastic Four: The Lost Adventure&quot; (April 2008), with unused pages Kirby had originally drawn for a story that was partially published in &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; #108 (March 1971).

In 2011, Dynamite Entertainment published &quot;Kirby: Genesis&quot;, an eight-issue miniseries by writer Kurt Busiek and artists Jack Herbert and Alex Ross, featuring Kirby-owned characters previously published by Pacific Comics and Topps Comics.

===Copyright dispute===
On September 16, 2009, Kirby&#x27;s four children served notices of termination to The Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, Universal Pictures, Paramount Pictures, and Sony Pictures to attempt to gain control of various Silver Age Marvel characters. Marvel sought to invalidate those claims. In mid-March 2010 Kirby&#x27;s children &quot;sued Marvel to terminate copyrights and gain profits from [Kirby&#x27;s] comic creations.&quot; In July 2011, the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York issued a summary judgment in favor of Marvel, which was affirmed in August 2013 by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. The Kirby children filed a petition on March 21, 2014, for a review of the case by the Supreme Court of the United States, but a settlement was reached on September 26, 2014, and the family requested that the petition be dismissed. While the settlement has left uncertain the legal right to works governed by the Copyright Act of 1909 created before the Copyright Act of 1976 came into force, the Kirby children&#x27;s attorney, Marc Toberoff, said (in 2014) that the issue of creators&#x27; rights to reclaim the work done as independent contractors remains, and other potential claims have yet to become ripe.

==Legacy==

* Glen David Gold wrote in &quot;Masters of American Comics&quot; that, &quot;Kirby elevates all of us into a realm where we fly among the beating wings of the immortal and the omnipotent, the gods and the monsters, so that we, dreamers all, can play host to the demons of creation, can become our own myths.
* Michael Chabon, in his afterword to his Pulitzer Prize-winning novel &quot;The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp; Clay&quot;, a fictional account of two early comics pioneers, wrote, &quot;I want to acknowledge the deep debt I owe in this and everything else I&#x27;ve ever written to the work of the late Jack Kirby, the King of Comics.&quot;
* Director James Cameron said Kirby inspired the look of his film &quot;Aliens&quot;, calling it &quot;not intentional in the sense I sat down and looked at all my favorite comics and studied them for this film, but, yeah, Kirby&#x27;s work was definitely in my subconscious programming. The guy was a visionary. Absolutely. And he could draw machines like nobody&#x27;s business. He was sort of like A. E. van Vogt and some of these other science-fiction writers who are able to create worlds that — even though we live in a science-fictionary world today — are still so far beyond what we&#x27;re experiencing.&quot;
* Writer Marv Wolfman: &quot;The imagination of Jack Kirby has no boundaries, no limits. ...When man eventually reaches the far end of the universe, he will undoubtedly find the name Jack Kirby signed on the lower right hand corner.&quot;
* Several Kirby images are among those on the &quot;Marvel Super Heroes&quot; set of commemorative stamps issued by the U.S. Postal Service on July 27, 2007. Ten of the stamps are portraits of individual Marvel characters and the other 10 stamps depict individual Marvel comic book covers. According to the credits printed on the back of the pane, Kirby&#x27;s artwork is featured on: Captain America, The Thing, Silver Surfer, &quot;The Amazing Spider-Man&quot; #1, &quot;The Incredible Hulk&quot; #1, &quot;Captain America&quot; #100, &quot;The X-Men&quot; #1, and &quot;The Fantastic Four&quot; #3.
* In the 1990s &quot;&quot; television show, police detective Dan Turpin was modeled on Kirby.
* In the 1998 episode &quot;The Demon Within&quot; of &quot;The New Batman Adventures&quot;, Klarion has Etrigan break into the Kirby Cake Company. Both characters were created by Kirby.
* In 2002, jazz percussionist Gregg Bendian released a seven-track CD titled &quot;Requiem for Jack Kirby&quot;, inspired by Kirby&#x27;s art and storytelling. Titles of the instrumental cuts include &quot;Kirby&#x27;s Fourth World&quot;, &quot;New Gods&quot;, &quot;The Mother Box&quot;, &quot;Teaneck in the Marvel Age&quot; and &quot;Air Above Zenn-La&quot;.
* The Cartoon Network/Adult Swim series &quot;Minoriteam&quot; uses artwork as a homage to Jack Kirby (credited under Jack &quot;The King&quot; Kirby, who is credited under special thanks in the show&#x27;s end credits).
* Various comic-book and cartoon creators have done homages to Kirby. Examples include the &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot; Mirage Comics series (&quot;Kirby and the Warp Crystal&quot; in &quot;Donatello&quot; #1, and its animated counterpart, &quot;The King&quot;, from the 2003 cartoon series). The episode of &quot;Superman: The Animated Series&quot; entitled &quot;Apokolips ... Now!, Part 2&quot; was dedicated to his memory.
* As of June 2018, Hollywood films based on characters Kirby co-created have collectively earned nearly US$7.4 billion. Kirby himself is a character portrayed by Luis Yagüe in the 2009 Spanish short film &quot;The King &amp; the Worst,&quot; which is inspired by Kirby&#x27;s service in World War II. He is portrayed by Michael Parks in a brief appearance in the fact-based drama &quot;Argo&quot; (2012), about the Canadian Caper.
* A play based on Kirby&#x27;s life, &quot;King Kirby&quot;, by Crystal Skillman and &quot;New York Times&quot; bestselling comics writer Fred Van Lente, was staged at Brooklyn&#x27;s Brick Theater as part of its annual Comic Book Theater Festival. The play was a &quot;New York Times&quot; Critics&#x27; Pick selection and was funded by a widely publicized Kickstarter campaign.
* The 2016 novel &quot;I Hate the Internet&quot; frequently mentions Kirby as a &quot;central personage&quot; of the novel.
* To mark Jack Kirby&#x27;s 100th birthday in 2017, DC Comics announced a series of one-shots involving characters that Kirby had created, including The Newsboy Legion and the Boy Commandos, Manhunter, Sandman, the New Gods, Darkseid, and ending with The Black Racer and Shilo Norman.
* In May 2004, in &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; issue #511 (written by Mark Waid and penciled by Mike Weiringo), Reed, Sue, and Johnny travel to Heaven to recover the soul of the deceased Ben Grimm. After passing a trial, they are allowed to meet God himself, who is depicted as Jack Kirby. God explains that he is seen by them as what he is to them, and that he considers the fact that they see him as Kirby to be an honor.
* Alan Moore delivers his tribute to Jack Kirby in his next-to-last issue of the &quot;Supreme&quot; series, &quot;Supreme&quot; #62 (The Return #6) &quot;New Jack City&quot; (March 2000), illustrated by Rob Liefeld and, for the Kirbyesque part, Rick Veitch. In this story Supreme enters a realm of pure ideas where he meets a gigantic floating Jack Kirby head, smoking a cigar. &quot;This gigantic entity explains to him that he used to be a flesh and blood artist but now he is entirely in the realm of ideas, which is much better because flesh and blood has its limitations because he can only do four or five pages a day tops, where now he exists purely in the world of ideas&quot;.
* The Disney California Adventure attraction &quot;Guardians of the Galaxy&quot; – Mission: Breakout! is surrounded by markings on the ground that serve as a tribute to the Kirby Krackle.
* The 1995 video game &quot;Marvel Super Heroes&quot; was dedicated to Kirby.

==Filmography==
* Kirby guest starred in the episode &quot;Bounty Hunter&quot; of &quot;Starsky &amp; Hutch&quot; as a police officer.
* Kirby made an un-credited cameo appearance in the episode &quot;No Escape&quot; of &quot;The Incredible Hulk&quot;. He can be spotted in the hospital scene as a police sketch artist who is recreating, from the witness&#x27;s description, a picture of the man he claimed to have saved his life. Instead of resembling the live-action Hulk, this illustration is instantly recognizable as the Hulk as he appeared in the original comics.
* Kirby appeared as himself in the episode &quot;You Can&#x27;t Win&quot; of &quot;Bob&quot;.

==Awards and honors==
Jack Kirby received a great deal of recognition over the course of his career, including the 1967 Alley Award for Best Pencil Artist. The following year he was runner-up behind Jim Steranko. His other Alley Awards were:
* 1963: Favorite Short Story – &quot;The Human Torch Meets Captain America&quot;, by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, &quot;Strange Tales&quot; #114
* 1964:
** Best Novel – &quot;Captain America Joins the Avengers&quot;, by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, from &quot;The Avengers&quot; #4
** Best New Strip or Book – &quot;Captain America&quot;, by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, in &quot;Tales of Suspense&quot;
* 1965: Best Short Story – &quot;The Origin of the Red Skull&quot;, by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, &quot;Tales of Suspense&quot; #66
* 1966: Best Professional Work, Regular Short Feature – &quot;Tales of Asgard&quot; by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, in &quot;Thor&quot;
* 1967: Best Professional Work, Regular Short Feature – (tie) &quot;Tales of Asgard&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Inhumans&quot;, both by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, in &quot;Thor&quot;
* 1968:
** Best Professional Work, Best Regular Short Feature – &quot;Tales of the Inhumans&quot;, by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, in &quot;Thor&quot;
** Best Professional Work, Hall of Fame – &quot;Fantastic Four&quot;, by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby; &quot;Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.&quot;, by Jim Steranko

Kirby won a Shazam Award for Special Achievement by an Individual in 1971 for his &quot;Fourth World&quot; series in &quot;Forever People&quot;, &quot;New Gods&quot;, &quot;Mister Miracle&quot;, and &quot;Superman&#x27;s Pal Jimmy Olsen&quot;. He received an Inkpot Award in 1974 and was inducted into the Shazam Awards Hall of Fame in 1975. In 1987 he was an inaugural inductee into the Will Eisner Comic Book Hall of Fame. He received the 1993 Bob Clampett Humanitarian Award at that year&#x27;s Eisner Awards.

His work was honored posthumously in 1998: The collection of his New Gods material, &quot;Jack Kirby&#x27;s New Gods&quot;, edited by Bob Kahan, won both the Harvey Award for Best Domestic Reprint Project, and the Eisner Award for Best Archival Collection/Project. On July 14, 2017, Jack Kirby was named a Disney Legend for his part in the creation of numerous characters that would comprise Disney&#x27;s Marvel Cinematic Universe.

The Jack Kirby Awards and Jack Kirby Hall of Fame were named in his honor. He was the posthumous recipient of the Bill Finger Award in 2017.
With Will Eisner, Robert Crumb, Harvey Kurtzman, Gary Panter and Chris Ware, Kirby was among the artists honored in the exhibition &quot;Masters of American Comics&quot; at the Jewish Museum in New York City from September 16, 2006, to January 28, 2007.

Asteroid 51985 Kirby, discovered September 22, 2001, was named in his honor. A crater on Mercury, located near the north pole, was named in his honor in 2019.

==Bibliography==
This is an abridged listing of Kirby&#x27;s comics work (interior pencil art) for major comics publishers DC Comics and Marvel Comics. For his work at DC it lists any title Kirby worked on for eight or more issues between 1970 and 1976. Of his Marvel Comics work, it lists any title Kirby worked on for eight or more issues between 1959 and 1978.

===DC Comics===
* &quot;Demon&quot; #1–16 (1972–1974)
* &quot;Forever People&quot; #1–11 (1971–1972)
* &quot;Kamandi: The Last Boy on Earth&quot; #1–40 (1972–1976)
* &quot;Mister Miracle&quot; #1–18 (1971–1974)
* &quot;New Gods&quot; #1–11 (1971–1972)
* &quot;O.M.A.C.&quot; #1–8 (1974–1975)
* &quot;Our Fighting Forces&quot; (The Losers) #151–162 (1974–1975)
* &quot;Superman&#x27;s Pal Jimmy Olsen&quot; #133–139, 141–148 (1970–1972)

===Marvel Comics===
* &quot;Amazing Adventures&quot; #1–4 (Inhumans) (1970)
* &quot;Avengers&quot; #1–8 (full pencils), #14–17 (layouts only, pencils by Don Heck) (1963–1965)
* &quot;Black Panther&quot; #1–12 (1977–1978)
* &quot;Captain America&quot; #100–109, 112 (1968–1969); #193–214, &quot;Annual&quot; #3–4 (1976–1977)
* &quot;Devil Dinosaur&quot; #1–9 (1978)
* &quot;Eternals&quot; #1–19, &quot;Annual&quot; #1 (1976–1978)
* &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; #1–102, 108, &quot;Annual&quot; #1–6 (1961–1971)
* &quot;Incredible Hulk&quot; #1–5 (1962–1963)
* &quot;Journey into Mystery&quot; #51–52, 54–82 (1959–1962); (Thor): #83–89, 93, 97–125, &quot;Annual&quot; #1 (1962–1966)
* &quot;Machine Man&quot; #1–9 (1978)
* &quot;Silver Surfer&quot; #18 (1970)
* &quot;Strange Tales&quot; #67–70, 72–100 (1959–1962); (Human Torch): #101–105, 108–109, 114, 120, &quot;Annual&quot; #2 (1962–1964); (Nick Fury): #135, 141–142 (full pencils), 136–140, 143–153 (layouts only, pencils by John Severin, Jim Steranko and others) (1965–1967)
* &quot;Tales of Suspense&quot; #2–4, 7–35 (1959–1962); (Iron Man): #41, 43 (1963); (Captain America): #59–68, 78–86, 92–99 (full pencils), #69–75, 77 (layouts only) (1964–1968)
* &quot;Tales to Astonish&quot; #1, 5–34; (Ant-Man): #35–40, 44, 49–51 (1962–1964); (The Incredible Hulk): #68–72 (full pencils), #73–84 (layouts only, pencils by Bill Everett and others) (1965–1966); (Sub-Mariner): #82 (1966)
* &quot;Thor&quot; #126–177, 179, &quot;Annual&quot; #2 (1966–1970)
* &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; #1–10 (1976–1977)
* &quot;X-Men&quot; #1–11 (full pencils) (1963–1965), #12–17 (layouts only, pencils by Alex Toth and Werner Roth) (1965–1966)

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* The Jack Kirby Museum &amp; Research Center
* 
* Jack Kirby at Mike&#x27;s Amazing World of Comics
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="0" end="10" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="19" end="34" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jacob Kurtzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="88" end="105" title="comics artist" label="comic book artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="237" end="250" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="473" end="485" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Curtiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q725384" start="548" end="557" title="Joe Simon" label="Joe Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="588" end="597" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q190679" start="608" end="623" title="Captain America" label="Captain America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358070" start="628" end="641" title="Timely Comics" label="Timely Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="658" end="671" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975135" start="780" end="808" title="National Comics Publications" label="National Comics Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="826" end="835" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060817" start="859" end="875" title="European Theater of Operations, United States Army" label="European Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="879" end="891" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973435" start="928" end="941" title="Harvey Comics" label="Harvey Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q544945" start="943" end="962" title="Hillman Periodicals" label="Hillman Periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406094" start="988" end="1010" title="Crestwood Publications" label="Crestwood Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742640" start="1046" end="1060" title="romance comics" label="romance comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736683" start="1116" end="1137" title="Mainline Publications" label="Mainline Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869434" start="1192" end="1204" title="Atlas Comics (1950s)" label="Atlas Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420783" start="1338" end="1345" title="Ant-Man" label="Ant-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q322646" start="1351" end="1359" title="Avengers (comics)" label="Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q998220" start="1365" end="1378" title="Black Panther (comic book)" label="Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q152098" start="1384" end="1398" title="Fantastic Four" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="1404" end="1408" title="Hulk" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q180704" start="1410" end="1418" title="Iron Man" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q95153" start="1424" end="1437" title="Silver Surfer" label="Silver Surfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="1439" end="1443" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="1453" end="1458" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927290" start="1724" end="1736" title="Fourth World (comics)" label="Fourth World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784409" start="1874" end="1882" title="New Gods" label="New Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152150" start="1927" end="1938" title="DC Universe" label="DC Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="2018" end="2038" title="television animation" label="television animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q438464" start="2043" end="2061" title="independent comics" label="independent comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="2120" end="2133" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11041074" start="2304" end="2339" title="The Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame" label="Will Eisner Comic Book Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150306" start="2381" end="2394" title="Disney Legend" label="Disney Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="2504" end="2527" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="2594" end="2619" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324867" start="2781" end="2798" title="Jack Kirby Awards" label="Jack Kirby Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377097" start="2803" end="2826" title="Jack Kirby Hall of Fame" label="Jack Kirby Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="2877" end="2885" title="Jack Kirby" label="The King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532801" start="3055" end="3067" title="Essex Street" label="Essex Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="3075" end="3090" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3094" end="3103" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3107" end="3120" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q527934" start="3199" end="3214" title="History of the Jews in Austria" label="Austrian-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="3263" end="3270" title="Clothing" label="garment"/>
<link wikidata="Q603096" start="3353" end="3369" title="Leon Klinghoffer" label="Leon Klinghoffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q340233" start="3490" end="3503" title="MS Achille Lauro" label="Achille Lauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422785" start="3513" end="3541" title="Palestinian Liberation Front" label="Palestinian Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067545" start="3542" end="3551" title="Achille Lauro hijacking" label="hijackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="3742" end="3753" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935903" start="3762" end="3775" title="Milton Caniff" label="Milton Caniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q719676" start="3777" end="3787" title="Hal Foster" label="Hal Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q919115" start="3793" end="3805" title="Alex Raymond" label="Alex Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017296" start="3848" end="3859" title="Charles Henry Sykes" label="C. H. Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166984" start="3861" end="3885" title="Jay Norwood Darling" label="&amp;quot;Ding&amp;quot; Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440493" start="3891" end="3903" title="Rollin Kirby" label="Rollin Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731605" start="3924" end="3948" title="the Educational Alliance" label="the Educational Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204714" start="4259" end="4274" title="Pratt Institute" label="Pratt Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="4278" end="4286" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q110500957" start="4587" end="4614" title="Lincoln Newspaper Syndicate" label="Lincoln Newspaper Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="4758" end="4767" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427842" start="4871" end="4888" title="Fleischer Studios" label="Fleischer Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002674" start="4895" end="4906" title="Inbetweening" label="inbetweener"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229295" start="4982" end="4988" title="Popeye the Sailor (animated cartoons)" label="Popeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q117422287" start="5470" end="5489" title="comic book packager" label="comic book packager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349976" start="5490" end="5507" title="Eisner &amp;amp; Iger" label="Eisner &amp;amp; Iger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057354" start="5827" end="5834" title="Western comics" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194437" start="5908" end="5920" title="swashbuckler" label="swashbuckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594022" start="6124" end="6136" title="Jumbo Comics" label="Jumbo Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046564" start="6287" end="6309" title="Eastern Color Printing" label="Eastern Color Printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066283" start="6323" end="6337" title="Famous Funnies" label="Famous Funnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q94041" start="6451" end="6463" title="James Cagney" label="James Cagney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6554" end="6560" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080183" start="6669" end="6690" title="Fox Feature Syndicate" label="Fox Feature Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q725384" start="6820" end="6829" title="Joe Simon" label="Joe Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928908" start="7161" end="7170" title="Blue Bolt" label="Blue Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q933317" start="7266" end="7280" title="Fawcett Comics" label="Fawcett Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q534153" start="7293" end="7307" title="Captain Marvel (DC Comics)" label="Captain Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q734161" start="7449" end="7458" title="C.C. Beck" label="C.C. Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="7512" end="7525" title="pulp magazine" label="pulp magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169061" start="7536" end="7550" title="Martin Goodman (publisher)" label="Martin Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358070" start="7558" end="7571" title="Timely Comics" label="Timely Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190679" start="7659" end="7674" title="Captain America" label="Captain America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975135" start="8416" end="8444" title="National Comics Publications" label="National Comics Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="8460" end="8469" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="8774" end="8782" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113684" start="9277" end="9291" title="Jack Liebowitz" label="Jack Liebowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q338182" start="9367" end="9374" title="Sandman (Wesley Dodds)" label="Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q379927" start="9392" end="9408" title="Adventure Comics" label="Adventure Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315837" start="9441" end="9450" title="Manhunter (comics)" label="Manhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952066" start="9486" end="9499" title="Boy Commandos" label="Boy Commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983699" start="9834" end="9848" title="Newsboy Legion" label="Newsboy Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q520930" start="9869" end="9889" title="Star-Spangled Comics" label="Star-Spangled Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q380113" start="9974" end="9986" title="Jerry Siegel" label="Jerry Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q471619" start="9991" end="10002" title="Joe Shuster" label="Joe Shuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="10216" end="10223" title="Conscription in the United States" label="drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="10454" end="10463" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438754" start="10505" end="10517" title="Camp Stewart" label="Camp Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547888" start="10579" end="10601" title="11th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="11th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q464257" start="10616" end="10627" title="Omaha Beach" label="Omaha Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="10631" end="10639" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="10673" end="10678" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="10903" end="10917" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973435" start="11062" end="11075" title="Harvey Comics" label="Harvey Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057354" start="11210" end="11217" title="Western comics" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952616" start="11224" end="11240" title="Boys&amp;#x27; Ranch" label="Boys&amp;#x27; Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="11321" end="11331" title="3D film" label="3-D movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036525" start="11339" end="11350" title="Captain 3-D" label="Captain 3-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q544945" start="11402" end="11421" title="Hillman Periodicals" label="Hillman Periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="11427" end="11440" title="crime-fiction" label="crime-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406094" start="11484" end="11506" title="Crestwood Publications" label="Crestwood Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317106" start="11514" end="11538" title="Justice Traps the Guilty" label="Justice Traps the Guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742640" start="11616" end="11630" title="romance comics" label="romance comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723272" start="11651" end="11673" title="Macfadden Publications" label="Macfadden Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572861" start="11824" end="11837" title="Young Romance" label="Young Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058254" start="12466" end="12476" title="Young Love (comics)" label="Young Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q933317" start="12775" end="12782" title="Fawcett Comics" label="Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648355" start="12784" end="12791" title="Quality Comics" label="Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080183" start="12797" end="12818" title="Fox Feature Syndicate" label="Fox Feature Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358070" start="12932" end="12945" title="Timely Comics" label="Timely Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869434" start="12969" end="12981" title="Atlas Comics (1950s)" label="Atlas Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447864" start="13069" end="13086" title="Fighting American" label="Fighting American"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="13243" end="13257" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794369" start="13378" end="13400" title="Army-McCarthy hearings" label="Army-McCarthy hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="13462" end="13477" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736683" start="13600" end="13621" title="Mainline Publications" label="Mainline Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722799" start="13732" end="13741" title="Al Harvey" label="Al Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973435" start="13749" end="13768" title="Harvey Publications" label="Harvey Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069300" start="13906" end="13915" title="war comics" label="war comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274252" start="13944" end="13953" title="EC Comics" label="EC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869434" start="13958" end="13970" title="Atlas Comics (1950s)" label="Atlas Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742640" start="14118" end="14131" title="romance comic" label="romance comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058254" start="14138" end="14148" title="Young Love (comic)" label="Young Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q134426" start="14196" end="14207" title="crime comic" label="crime comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358070" start="15100" end="15113" title="Timely Comics" label="Timely Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="15168" end="15181" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082626" start="15189" end="15202" title="Frank Giacoia" label="Frank Giacoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="15386" end="15395" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15600" end="15603" title="Jack Kirby#Personal life" label="Roz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057354" start="15630" end="15637" title="Western comics" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921594" start="15643" end="15654" title="Black Rider (comics)" label="Black Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357701" start="15660" end="15669" title="Fu Manchu" label="Fu Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051696" start="15675" end="15686" title="Yellow Claw (comics)" label="Yellow Claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060146" start="16042" end="16068" title="Challengers of the Unknown" label="Challengers of the Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184847" start="16078" end="16086" title="Showcase (comics)" label="Showcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q25575" start="16157" end="16173" title="House of Mystery" label="House of Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q611993" start="16286" end="16297" title="Green Arrow" label="Green Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q178477" start="16315" end="16341" title="World&amp;#x27;s Finest Comics" label="World&amp;#x27;s Finest Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q379927" start="16358" end="16374" title="Adventure Comics" label="Adventure Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235693" start="16573" end="16587" title="Mort Weisinger" label="Mort Weisinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5799444" start="16613" end="16643" title="Sky Masters of the Space Force" label="Sky Masters of the Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304824" start="16742" end="16752" title="Wally Wood" label="Wally Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151821" start="16847" end="16858" title="Jack Schiff" label="Jack Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869434" start="17931" end="17945" title="Strange Worlds (Atlas Comics)" label="Strange Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113177" start="17983" end="17999" title="Christopher Rule" label="Christopher Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026563" start="18032" end="18042" title="Dick Ayers" label="Dick Ayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q786922" start="18254" end="18268" title="drive-in movie" label="drive-in movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116935" start="18300" end="18305" title="Groot" label="Groot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604737" start="18365" end="18378" title="Fin Fang Foom" label="Fin Fang Foom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740779" start="18439" end="18457" title="Amazing Adventures" label="Amazing Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115055" start="18471" end="18484" title="Strange Tales" label="Strange Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q835698" start="18498" end="18515" title="Tales to Astonish" label="Tales to Astonish"/>
<link wikidata="Q782363" start="18529" end="18546" title="Tales of Suspense" label="Tales of Suspense"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036597" start="18564" end="18580" title="World of Fantasy" label="World of Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q633812" start="18700" end="18713" title="Archie Comics" label="Archie Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463097" start="18798" end="18805" title="The Fly (Archie Comics)" label="The Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989247" start="18822" end="18855" title="The Shield (Archie Comics)" label="The Double Life of Private Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744604" start="18909" end="18929" title="Classics Illustrated" label="Classics Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597419" start="19022" end="19040" title="Fantastic Four (comic book)" label="The Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="19253" end="19263" title="Naturalism (arts)" label="naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059289" start="19404" end="19417" title="youth culture" label="youth culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365108" start="19770" end="19778" title="Gil Kane" label="Gil Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="19842" end="19846" title="Hulk" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="19848" end="19852" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="19858" end="19863" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="19868" end="19875" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q430178" start="19877" end="19888" title="Doctor Doom" label="Doctor Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q615226" start="19890" end="19906" title="Uatu" label="Uatu the Watcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642342" start="19908" end="19929" title="Ego the Living Planet" label="Ego the Living Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858350" start="19935" end="19943" title="Inhumans" label="Inhumans"/>
<link wikidata="Q998220" start="19986" end="19999" title="Black Panther (comics)" label="Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362516" start="20045" end="20057" title="Afrofuturism" label="Afrofuturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q766099" start="20066" end="20073" title="Wakanda" label="Wakanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="20124" end="20134" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q355652" start="20364" end="20375" title="Steve Ditko" label="Steve Ditko"/>
<link wikidata="Q688263" start="20421" end="20436" title="Amazing Fantasy" label="Amazing Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207095" start="20596" end="20608" title="The Avengers (comic book)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q613067" start="20674" end="20685" title="Namor" label="Sub-Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051092" start="20905" end="20925" title="The Galactus Trilogy" label="The Galactus Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429836" start="21014" end="21022" title="Galactus" label="Galactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q95153" start="21092" end="21105" title="Silver Surfer" label="Silver Surfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344933" start="21242" end="21260" title="Robert Greenberger" label="Robert Greenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231912" start="21556" end="21567" title="Les Daniels" label="Les Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414968" start="21999" end="22012" title="Kirby Krackle" label="Kirby Krackle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23007" end="23048" title="Amazing Adventures#1970 series" label="&amp;quot;Amazing Adventures&amp;quot; volume two"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069538" start="23106" end="23125" title="Chamber of Darkness" label="Chamber of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043824" start="23706" end="23723" title="Carmine Infantino" label="Carmine Infantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="24003" end="24012" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927290" start="24019" end="24035" title="Fourth World (comics)" label="The Fourth World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784409" start="24088" end="24096" title="New Gods" label="New Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365204" start="24110" end="24124" title="Mister Miracle" label="Mister Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748058" start="24142" end="24160" title="The Forever People" label="The Forever People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977952" start="24195" end="24226" title="Superman&amp;#x27;s Pal Jimmy Olsen" label="Superman&amp;#x27;s Pal Jimmy Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509296" start="24996" end="25010" title="Funky Flashman" label="Funky Flashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q981976" start="25131" end="25141" title="Roy Thomas" label="Roy Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q430698" start="25260" end="25268" title="Darkseid" label="Darkseid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376972" start="25530" end="25541" title="Al Plastino" label="Al Plastino"/>
<link wikidata="Q351099" start="25556" end="25571" title="Murphy Anderson" label="Murphy Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="25773" end="25787" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="26227" end="26242" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552104" start="26582" end="26586" title="OMAC (Buddy Blank)" label="OMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q592305" start="26600" end="26607" title="Kamandi" label="Kamandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q690541" start="26621" end="26630" title="Etrigan the Demon" label="The Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424486" start="26648" end="26653" title="Kobra (DC comics)" label="Kobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988088" start="26712" end="26722" title="Losers (comics)" label="The Losers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110630" start="26738" end="26757" title="Our Fighting Forces" label="Our Fighting Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q72512" start="26861" end="26868" title="Sandman (DC Comics)" label="Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596410" start="26911" end="26928" title="1st Issue Special" label="1st Issue Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628247" start="26964" end="26979" title="Atlas (DC Comics)" label="Atlas the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315837" start="26987" end="26996" title="Manhunter (comics)" label="Manhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385492" start="27006" end="27031" title="Dingbats of Danger Street" label="Dingbats of Danger Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q354575" start="27081" end="27093" title="Mark Evanier" label="Mark Evanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070220" start="27651" end="27672" title="comic book convention" label="comic book convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="28469" end="28477" title="One-shot (comics)" label="one-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778204" start="28495" end="28510" title="Marvel Treasury Edition" label="treasury format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618814" start="28540" end="28552" title="Eternals (comics)" label="The Eternals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712364" start="28615" end="28625" title="Celestial (comics)" label="Celestials"/>
<link wikidata="Q931597" start="28729" end="28744" title="Marvel Universe" label="Marvel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28815" end="28836" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (comics)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28930" end="28942" title="The Prisoner in other media#Marvel Comics" label="The Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601925" start="29096" end="29107" title="Machine Man" label="Machine Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267281" start="29112" end="29126" title="Devil Dinosaur" label="Devil Dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778161" start="29283" end="29304" title="Marvel Fireside Books" label="Marvel Fireside Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="29350" end="29363" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="29496" end="29509" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614803" start="29604" end="29627" title="Ruby-Spears Productions" label="Ruby-Spears Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282500" start="29653" end="29663" title="Turbo Teen" label="Turbo Teen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863441" start="29677" end="29699" title="Thundarr the Barbarian" label="Thundarr the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722904" start="29952" end="29974" title="The New Fantastic Four" label="The New Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="30151" end="30162" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q304029" start="30175" end="30189" title="The Black Hole" label="The Black Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963926" start="30206" end="30250" title="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Treasury of Classic Tales" label="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Treasury of Classic Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="30389" end="30402" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q734976" start="30439" end="30452" title="Lord of Light" label="Lord of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="30629" end="30639" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368791" start="30782" end="30793" title="Rosey Grier" label="Rosey Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="30802" end="30814" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="30909" end="30912" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032059" start="30926" end="30940" title="Canadian Caper" label="Canadian Caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369972" start="30977" end="30999" title="Embassy of the United States, Tehran" label="U.S. embassy in Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="31038" end="31057" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045521" start="31205" end="31219" title="Pacific Comics" label="Pacific Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183614" start="31315" end="31328" title="creator-owned" label="creator-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036847" start="31356" end="31396" title="Captain Victory and the Galactic Rangers" label="Captain Victory and the Galactic Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516377" start="31439" end="31450" title="Silver Star (comics)" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q438464" start="31549" end="31567" title="independent comics" label="independent comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281957" start="31582" end="31596" title="Eclipse Comics" label="Eclipse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265367" start="31635" end="31649" title="Destroyer Duck" label="Destroyer Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569995" start="31699" end="31711" title="Steve Gerber" label="Steve Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634097" start="32008" end="32019" title="Street Code" label="Street Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q649812" start="32176" end="32182" title="Argosy (magazine)" label="Argosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642660" start="32348" end="32360" title="Super Powers Collection" label="Super Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q535728" start="32448" end="32460" title="Jenette Kahn" label="Jenette Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q351188" start="32465" end="32476" title="Paul Levitz" label="Paul Levitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365108" start="32657" end="32665" title="Gil Kane" label="Gil Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614803" start="32715" end="32726" title="Ruby-Spears" label="Ruby-Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346045" start="32760" end="32774" title="The Centurions (TV series)" label="The Centurions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738830" start="32867" end="32873" title="Kenner Products" label="Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196755" start="33254" end="33275" title="Copyright Act of 1976" label="Copyright Act of 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q738410" start="34179" end="34191" title="Charles Band" label="Charles Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287360" start="34326" end="34340" title="Doctor Mordrid" label="Doctor Mordrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508519" start="34358" end="34378" title="Mandroid (film)" label="&amp;quot;Mandroid&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q907767" start="34489" end="34500" title="Doctor Strange" label="Dr. Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825125" start="34539" end="34551" title="Topps Comics" label="Topps Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825125" start="34666" end="34680" title="Kirbyverse" label="The Kirbyverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443980" start="34893" end="34927" title="Secret City Saga" label="Jack Kirby&amp;#x27;s Secret City Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="35147" end="35156" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q913301" start="35206" end="35218" title="Image Comics" label="Image Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="35551" end="35559" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="35954" end="35961" title="conscription" label="drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="35971" end="35980" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060817" start="36000" end="36016" title="European Theater of Operations, United States Army" label="European Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36020" end="36032" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q918109" start="36080" end="36086" title="v-mail" label="v-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350326" start="36271" end="36280" title="frostbite" label="frostbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027033" start="36524" end="36535" title="Camp Butner" label="Camp Butner"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="36642" end="36662" title="Honorable discharge" label="honorably discharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352637" start="36668" end="36687" title="private first class" label="private first class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192947" start="36724" end="36748" title="Combat Infantryman Badge" label="Combat Infantryman Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376304" start="36752" end="36798" title="European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal" label="European/African/Middle Eastern Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035234" start="36813" end="36824" title="Service Star" label="Battle Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="36897" end="36908" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="37422" end="37436" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q690895" start="37576" end="37591" title="Granny Goodness" label="Granny Goodness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447864" start="37606" end="37618" title="Fighting American" label="Doubleheader"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="37705" end="37730" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958361" start="37754" end="37779" title="Valley Oaks Memorial Park" label="Valley Oaks Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q474655" start="37783" end="37811" title="Westlake Village, California" label="Westlake Village, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="38143" end="38149" title="Cubism" label="Cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="38151" end="38159" title="Futurism" label="Futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q848365" start="38161" end="38172" title="Primitivism" label="Primitivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q594150" start="38177" end="38189" title="outsider art" label="outsider art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="38216" end="38226" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="38301" end="38306" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148930" start="38512" end="38518" title="List of Marvel Cinematic Universe films" label="movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q431112" start="38540" end="38556" title="Charles Hatfield" label="Charles Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q725384" start="38928" end="38937" title="Joe Simon" label="Joe Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190679" start="38945" end="38960" title="Captain America" label="Captain America"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="39016" end="39024" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="39028" end="39041" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="39060" end="39069" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634097" start="39163" end="39174" title="Street Code" label="Street Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q592305" start="39227" end="39234" title="Kamandi" label="Kamandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935903" start="39334" end="39347" title="Milton Caniff" label="Milton Caniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q719676" start="39349" end="39359" title="Hal Foster" label="Hal Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q919115" start="39365" end="39377" title="Alex Raymond" label="Alex Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="39440" end="39451" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q981472" start="39502" end="39515" title="Burne Hogarth" label="Burne Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365108" start="40409" end="40417" title="Gil Kane" label="Gil Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927162" start="40607" end="40618" title="Bryan Hitch" label="Bryan Hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507300" start="40623" end="40632" title="Alex Ross" label="Alex Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427842" start="41139" end="41156" title="Fleischer Studios" label="Fleischer Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596171" start="41849" end="41859" title="John Henry (folklore)" label="John Henry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42201" end="42206" title="Glossary of comics terminology#Panel" label="panel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42321" end="42327" title="Glossary of comics terminology#Gutter" label="gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742640" start="42843" end="42857" title="romance comics" label="romance comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="43187" end="43195" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="43213" end="43226" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="43565" end="43579" title="foreshortening" label="foreshortening"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="43768" end="43775" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q152098" start="43829" end="43847" title="The Fantastic Four" label="The Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q897800" start="43873" end="43886" title="Negative Zone" label="Negative Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="44223" end="44232" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977952" start="44285" end="44317" title="Superman&amp;#x27;s Pal, Jimmy Olsen" label="Superman&amp;#x27;s Pal, Jimmy Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414968" start="44778" end="44791" title="Kirby Krackle" label="Kirby Krackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="44941" end="44948" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092316" start="44977" end="44991" title="negative space" label="negative space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="45020" end="45026" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="45082" end="45091" title="explosion" label="explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048664" start="45117" end="45125" title="Raygun" label="ray guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362516" start="45226" end="45240" title="Afrofuturistic" label="Afrofuturistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q766099" start="45250" end="45257" title="Wakanda" label="Wakanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951734" start="45270" end="45280" title="Mother Box" label="Mother Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784409" start="45290" end="45298" title="New Gods" label="New Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712364" start="45331" end="45345" title="Celestial (comics)" label="the Celestials"/>
<link wikidata="Q10307874" start="45417" end="45431" title="John Paul Leon" label="John Paul Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524037" start="45765" end="45773" title="Leo Marx" label="Leo Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="45839" end="45851" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45877" end="45884" title="Sublime (philosophy)#Edmund Burke" label="Sublime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043824" start="46254" end="46271" title="Carmine Infantino" label="Carmine Infantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706303" start="46286" end="46298" title="Jim Steranko" label="Jim Steranko"/>
<link wikidata="Q309850" start="46569" end="46580" title="Will Eisner" label="Will Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q725384" start="46844" end="46853" title="Joe Simon" label="Joe Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="47470" end="47478" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121407" start="47747" end="47757" title="Chic Stone" label="Chic Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655075" start="47865" end="47875" title="Mike Royer" label="Mike Royer"/>
<link wikidata="Q257354" start="47880" end="47890" title="Steve Rude" label="Steve Rude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916879" start="47975" end="47984" title="Bristol board" label="art board"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597419" start="48750" end="48764" title="Fantastic Four (comic book)" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q677561" start="49244" end="49257" title="Hammer Museum" label="Hammer Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134646" start="49262" end="49301" title="Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles" label="Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026939" start="49425" end="49464" title="California State University, Northridge" label="California State University, Northridge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49727" end="49748" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (comics)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721464" start="49840" end="49861" title="The Cartoon Museum" label="The Cartoon Art Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="49889" end="49895" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069221" start="50016" end="50028" title="Paul Gravett" label="Paul Gravett"/>
<link wikidata="Q677819" start="50177" end="50214" title="Fumetto International Comics Festival" label="Fumetto International Comics Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="50223" end="50243" title="Lucerne, Switzerland" label="Lucerne, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995257" start="50305" end="50322" title="Heritage Auctions" label="Heritage Auctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q782363" start="50350" end="50367" title="Tales of Suspense" label="Tales of Suspense"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082626" start="50388" end="50401" title="Frank Giacoia" label="Frank Giacoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="50544" end="50556" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="50614" end="50623" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="50678" end="50691" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482589" start="51222" end="51226" title="Icon Comics" label="Icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608849" start="51227" end="51234" title="imprint (trade name)" label="imprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297186" start="51247" end="51261" title="Limited series (comics)" label="limited series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113485" start="51269" end="51310" title="Jack Kirby&amp;#x27;s Galactic Bounty Hunters" label="Jack Kirby&amp;#x27;s Galactic Bounty Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q351436" start="51562" end="51572" title="Karl Kesel" label="Karl Kesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q965905" start="51977" end="51999" title="Dynamite Entertainment" label="Dynamite Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q971041" start="52074" end="52085" title="Kurt Busiek" label="Kurt Busiek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507300" start="52115" end="52124" title="Alex Ross" label="Alex Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825125" start="52202" end="52214" title="Topps Comics" label="Topps Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49669" start="52695" end="52761" title="United States District Court for the Southern District of New York" label="United States District Court for the Southern District of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q281126" start="52771" end="52787" title="summary judgment" label="summary judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="52849" end="52902" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="52991" end="53025" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169220" start="53217" end="53238" title="Copyright Act of 1909" label="Copyright Act of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196755" start="53258" end="53279" title="Copyright Act of 1976" label="Copyright Act of 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755922" start="53333" end="53346" title="Marc Toberoff" label="Marc Toberoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183614" start="53381" end="53402" title="creators&amp;#x27; rights" label="creators&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q313466" start="53840" end="53854" title="Michael Chabon" label="Michael Chabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="53880" end="53894" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705230" start="53915" end="53960" title="The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp;amp; Clay" label="The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp;amp; Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="54197" end="54210" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q104814" start="54258" end="54264" title="Aliens (film)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="54587" end="54601" title="A. E. van Vogt" label="A. E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333734" start="54814" end="54826" title="Marv Wolfman" label="Marv Wolfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="55129" end="55148" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214517" start="55708" end="55718" title="Dan Turpin" label="Dan Turpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362994" start="55801" end="55826" title="The New Batman Adventures" label="The New Batman Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545915" start="55834" end="55841" title="Klarion the Witch Boy" label="Klarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q690541" start="55846" end="55853" title="Etrigan the Demon" label="Etrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545018" start="55958" end="55971" title="Gregg Bendian" label="Gregg Bendian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439694" start="56275" end="56282" title="Zenn-La" label="Zenn-La"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="56296" end="56311" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="56312" end="56322" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869228" start="56336" end="56346" title="Minoriteam" label="Minoriteam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594023" start="56608" end="56636" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (Mirage Studios)" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q158869" start="56794" end="56813" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2003 TV series)" label="2003 cartoon series"/>
<link wikidata="Q525318" start="57270" end="57283" title="Michael Parks" label="Michael Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q59653" start="57336" end="57340" title="Argo (2012 film)" label="Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032059" start="57365" end="57379" title="Canadian Caper" label="Canadian Caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086966" start="57519" end="57533" title="Fred Van Lente" label="Fred Van Lente"/>
<link wikidata="Q39054236" start="57784" end="57803" title="I Hate the Internet" label="I Hate the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="57937" end="57946" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="57969" end="57978" title="One-shot (comics)" label="one-shots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640749" start="58136" end="58151" title="Black Racer (DC Comics)" label="The Black Racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859326" start="58156" end="58168" title="Mister Miracle (Shilo Norman)" label="Shilo Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="58594" end="58604" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994272" start="58673" end="58692" title="Supreme (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Supreme&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061990" start="58796" end="58807" title="Rob Liefeld" label="Rob Liefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431609" start="58838" end="58849" title="Rick Veitch" label="Rick Veitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229098" start="59285" end="59312" title="Disney California Adventure" label="Disney California Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59324" end="59380" title="Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout!" label="&amp;quot;Guardians of the Galaxy&amp;quot; – Mission: Breakout!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414968" start="59452" end="59465" title="Kirby Krackle" label="Kirby Krackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559819" start="59489" end="59520" title="Marvel Super Heroes (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Marvel Super Heroes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q196226" start="59634" end="59653" title="Starsky &amp;amp; Hutch" label="Starsky &amp;amp; Hutch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59772" end="59791" title="The Incredible Hulk (1978 TV series)" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641264" start="60199" end="60202" title="Bob (TV series)" label="Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732183" start="60331" end="60342" title="Alley Award" label="Alley Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706303" start="60410" end="60422" title="Jim Steranko" label="Jim Steranko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115055" start="60569" end="60582" title="Strange Tales" label="Strange Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207095" start="60705" end="60717" title="The Avengers (comic book)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q782363" start="60821" end="60838" title="Tales of Suspense" label="Tales of Suspense"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="61096" end="61100" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858350" start="61220" end="61228" title="Inhumans" label="Inhumans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28433217" start="61540" end="61572" title="Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. (comic book)" label="Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q4671439" start="61609" end="61621" title="Shazam Award" label="Shazam Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687578" start="61856" end="61868" title="Inkpot Award" label="Inkpot Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11041074" start="61985" end="62020" title="The Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame" label="Will Eisner Comic Book Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="62095" end="62107" title="Eisner Award" label="Eisner Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q512814" start="62269" end="62281" title="Harvey Award" label="Harvey Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150306" start="62417" end="62430" title="Disney Legends" label="Disney Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="62517" end="62542" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324867" start="62549" end="62566" title="Jack Kirby Awards" label="Jack Kirby Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377097" start="62571" end="62594" title="Jack Kirby Hall of Fame" label="Jack Kirby Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908985" start="62659" end="62676" title="Bill Finger Award" label="Bill Finger Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q309850" start="62691" end="62702" title="Will Eisner" label="Will Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q435278" start="62704" end="62716" title="Robert Crumb" label="Robert Crumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q732474" start="62718" end="62733" title="Harvey Kurtzman" label="Harvey Kurtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351201" start="62735" end="62746" title="Gary Panter" label="Gary Panter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077842" start="62751" end="62761" title="Chris Ware" label="Chris Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q592116" start="62863" end="62876" title="Jewish Museum (New York)" label="Jewish Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246165" start="62950" end="62961" title="51985 Kirby" label="51985 Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q70496500" start="63020" end="63026" title="Kirby (crater)" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="63030" end="63037" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q690541" start="63490" end="63495" title="Etrigan the Demon" label="Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748058" start="63528" end="63542" title="Forever People" label="Forever People"/>
<link wikidata="Q592305" start="63575" end="63605" title="Kamandi" label="Kamandi: The Last Boy on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365204" start="63638" end="63652" title="Mister Miracle" label="Mister Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784409" start="63685" end="63693" title="New Gods" label="New Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552104" start="63726" end="63734" title="OMAC (Buddy Blank)" label="O.M.A.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7110630" start="63766" end="63785" title="Our Fighting Forces" label="Our Fighting Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988088" start="63793" end="63803" title="The Losers (comics)" label="The Losers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977952" start="63834" end="63865" title="Superman&amp;#x27;s Pal Jimmy Olsen" label="Superman&amp;#x27;s Pal Jimmy Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740779" start="63931" end="63949" title="Amazing Adventures" label="Amazing Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207095" start="63987" end="63995" title="The Avengers (comic book)" label="Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548090" start="64056" end="64064" title="Don Heck" label="Don Heck"/>
<link wikidata="Q998220" start="64086" end="64099" title="Black Panther (comics)" label="Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q25221879" start="64132" end="64147" title="Captain America (comic book)" label="Captain America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267281" start="64235" end="64249" title="Devil Dinosaur" label="Devil Dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618814" start="64276" end="64284" title="Eternals (comics)" label="Eternals"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597419" start="64340" end="64354" title="Fantastic Four (comic book)" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386325" start="64418" end="64433" title="The Incredible Hulk (comic book)" label="Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270826" start="64465" end="64485" title="Journey into Mystery" label="Journey into Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="64520" end="64524" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601925" start="64589" end="64600" title="Machine Man" label="Machine Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516437" start="64627" end="64640" title="Silver Surfer (comic book)" label="Silver Surfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115055" start="64666" end="64679" title="Strange Tales" label="Strange Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q584585" start="64715" end="64726" title="Human Torch" label="Human Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q975100" start="64794" end="64803" title="Nick Fury" label="Nick Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q543947" start="64879" end="64891" title="John Severin" label="John Severin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706303" start="64893" end="64905" title="Jim Steranko" label="Jim Steranko"/>
<link wikidata="Q782363" start="64938" end="64955" title="Tales of Suspense" label="Tales of Suspense"/>
<link wikidata="Q180704" start="64987" end="64995" title="Iron Man" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q835698" start="65116" end="65133" title="Tales to Astonish" label="Tales to Astonish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057532" start="65151" end="65158" title="Hank Pym" label="Ant-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="65193" end="65212" title="Hulk" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837116" start="65271" end="65283" title="Bill Everett" label="Bill Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q613067" start="65310" end="65321" title="Sub-Mariner" label="Sub-Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="65343" end="65347" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="65411" end="65432" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (comics)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399747" start="65465" end="65470" title="Uncanny X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364628" start="65544" end="65553" title="Alex Toth" label="Alex Toth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983490" start="65558" end="65569" title="Werner Roth (comics)" label="Werner Roth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16558" wikidata="Q151284" url="?curid=16558" title="Johnny Weissmuller">
<text>Johnny Weissmuller ( ; born Johann Peter Weißmüller, ; June 2, 1904 – January 20, 1984) was a Hungarian-born ethnic German American Olympic swimmer, water polo player and actor. He was known for having one of the best competitive-swimming records of the 20th century. He set world records alongside winning five gold medals in the Olympics. He won the 100m freestyle and the relay team event in the 1924 Summer Olympics in Paris and the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam. Weissmuller also won gold in the 400m freestyle, as well as a bronze medal in the water polo competition in Paris.

Following his retirement from swimming, Weissmuller played Edgar Rice Burroughs&#x27; Tarzan in twelve feature films from 1932 to 1948; six were produced by MGM, and six additional films by RKO. Weissmuller went on to star in sixteen &quot;Jungle Jim&quot; movies over an eight-year period, then filmed 26 additional half-hour episodes of the &quot;Jungle Jim&quot; TV series.

==Early life==
Johann Peter Weißmüller was born on June 2, 1904, in Szabadfalva, in the Kingdom of Hungary, Austria-Hungary (now part of Romania, and called Freidorf) into an ethnically Banat Swabian family. He was the sixth generation Weißmüller born in Hungary. An ancestor had immigrated from Baden, Holy Roman Empire . Three days later he was baptized into the Catholic faith by the Hungarian version of his German name, as János. Early the next year, January 26, 1905, his father, Peter Weißmüller, and mother, Elisabeth Weißmüller (née Kersch), took him on a twelve-day trip on the &quot;S.S. Rotterdam&quot; to Ellis Island. Soon they arrived in Windber, Pennsylvania, to live with family. Johnny&#x27;s brother Peter was born the following September.
Three years later they relocated to Chicago to be with his mother&#x27;s parents. His parents rented a single level in a shared house where he lived during his childhood. At age nine, Weissmüller contracted polio. His doctor recommended swimming to help his recovery from the disease. Fullerton Beach on Lake Michigan is where Johnny&#x27;s love for swimming took off, having his first swimming lessons there. He excelled immediately and began entering and winning every race he could. Johnny&#x27;s father deserted the family when Johnny was in the eighth grade. He left school to begin working in order to support his mother and younger brother.

When Weissmuller was 11 he lied to join the YMCA, which had a 12 year old minimum rule to join. He won every swimming race he entered and also excelled at running and high jumping. Before long he was on one of the best swim teams in the country, the Illinois Athletic Club.

==Career==
===Swimming===

Weissmuller tried out for swimming coach Bill Bachrach. Impressed with what he saw, he took Weissmuller under his wing. He also was a strong father figure and mentor for Johnny. On August 6, 1921, Weissmuller began his competitive swimming career. He entered four Amateur Athletic Union races and won them all. He set his first two world records at the A.A.U. Nationals on September 27, 1921, in the 100m and 150yd events.

On July 9, 1922, Weissmuller broke Duke Kahanamoku&#x27;s world record in the 100-meter freestyle, swimming it in 58.6 seconds. He won the title for that distance at the 1924 Summer Olympics, beating Kahanamoku for the gold medal. He also won the 400-meter freestyle and was a member of the winning U.S. team in the 4×200-meter relay.

Four years later, at the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam, he won another two gold medals. It was during this period that Weissmuller became an enthusiast for John Harvey Kellogg&#x27;s holistic lifestyle views on nutrition, enemas and exercise. He went to Kellogg&#x27;s Battle Creek, Michigan sanatorium to dedicate its new 120-foot swimming pool, and break one of his own previous swimming records after adopting the vegetarian diet prescribed by Kellogg.

In 1927, Weissmuller set a new world record of 51.0 seconds in the 100-yard freestyle, which stood for 17 years. He improved it to 48.5 seconds at Billy Rose World&#x27;s Fair Aquacade in 1940, aged 36, but this result was discounted, as he was competing as a professional.
As a member of the U.S. men&#x27;s national water polo team, he won a bronze medal at the 1924 Summer Olympics. He also competed in the 1928 Olympics, where the U.S. team finished in seventh place.

In all, Weissmuller won five Olympic gold medals and one bronze medal, 52 United States national championships, and set 67 world records. He was the first man to swim the 100-meter freestyle under one minute and the 440-yard freestyle under five minutes. He never lost a race and retired with an unbeaten amateur record. In 1950, he was selected by the Associated Press as the greatest swimmer of the first half of the 20th century.

===Films===
Weissmuller&#x27;s first film was the non-speaking role of Adonis in the movie &quot;Glorifying the American Girl&quot;. He appeared wearing only a fig leaf while hoisting actress Mary Eaton on his shoulders. He was noticed by the writer Cyril Hume, which led to his big break playing Tarzan in &quot;Tarzan the Ape Man&quot; in 1932.
When asked to play Tarzan, Weissmuller was already under contract to model BVD underwear. MGM agreed to have actresses such as Greta Garbo and Marie Dressler featured in BVD ads so that he could be released from his BVD contract. The author of Tarzan, Edgar Rice Burroughs, was pleased with Weissmuller, although he so hated the studio&#x27;s depiction of Tarzan as an individual who barely spoke English that he created his own concurrent Tarzan series starring Herman Brix as a suitably articulate version of the character (as is true to the original books).

Weissmuller is considered the definitive Tarzan. He originated the famous Tarzan yell, which was created by sound recordist Douglas Shearer. Shearer recorded Weissmuller&#x27;s normal yell, but manipulated it and played it in reverse.

Weissmuller went on to play the lead in the film &quot;Jungle Jim&quot;. He appeared in sixteen Jungle Jim movies over eight years, going on to film 26 episodes of the Jungle Jim TV series.

Weissmuller retired from acting in 1957.

==Personal life==
Weissmuller was married five times: to band and club singer Bobbe Arnst (married 1931, divorced 1933); to actress Lupe Vélez (married 1933, divorced 1939); to Beryl Scott (married 1939, divorced 1948); to Allene Gates (married 1948, divorced 1962); and to Maria Gertrude Baumann (born 1921, died 2004; they were married from 1963 until his death in 1984).

With his third wife, Beryl, Weissmuller had three children: Johnny Weissmuller, Jr. (1940–2006), Wendy Anne Weissmuller (born 1942), and Heidi Elizabeth Weissmuller (1944–1962), who was killed in a car crash. He also had a stepdaughter with Baumann, Lisa Weissmuller-Gallagher.

Weissmuller saved many people&#x27;s lives throughout his own life. One very notable instance was in 1927 during training for the Chicago Marathon, when Weissmuller saved 11 people from drowning after a boat accident. On July 28, 1927, 16 children, 10 women, and 1 man drowned when the &quot;Favorite&quot;, a small excursion boat cruising from Lincoln Park to Municipal Pier (Navy Pier), capsized half a mile off North Avenue in a sudden, heavy squall. When the boat tipped over, 75 women and children and 6 men sank with the boat, but rescuers saved over 50 of them. Weissmuller was one of the Chicago lifeguards who saved many.

==Later life==
In 1974, Weissmuller broke both his hip and leg, marking the beginning of years of declining health. While hospitalized he learned that in spite of his strength and lifelong daily regimen of swimming and exercise, he had a serious heart condition. In 1977, Weissmuller suffered a series of strokes. In 1979, he entered the Motion Picture &amp; Television Country House and Hospital in Woodland Hills, California, for several weeks before moving with his last wife, Maria, to Acapulco, Mexico, the location of his last Tarzan movie.

On January 20, 1984, Weissmuller died from pulmonary edema at the age of 79. He was buried just outside Acapulco, Valle de La Luz at the Valley of the Light Cemetery. As his coffin was lowered into the ground, a recording of the Tarzan yell he invented was played three times, at his request. He was honored with a 21-gun salute, befitting a head of state, which was arranged by Senator Ted Kennedy and President Ronald Reagan.

== Legacy ==
For his contribution to the motion picture industry, Johnny Weissmuller has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

He is on the album cover of The Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; (1967).

His former co-star and movie son Johnny Sheffield wrote of him, &quot;I can only say that working with Big John was one of the highlights of my life. He was a Star (with a capital &quot;S&quot;) and he gave off a special light and some of that light got into me. Knowing and being with Johnny Weissmuller during my formative years had a lasting influence on my life.&quot;

In 1973, Weissmuller was awarded the George Eastman Award, given by George Eastman House for distinguished contribution to the art of film.

The Piscine Molitor in Paris was built as a tribute to Weissmuller and his swimming prowess.

Edgar Rice Burroughs himself paid tribute to Weissmuller&#x27;s powerful screen persona in the last Tarzan novel that he completed

Weissmuller was inducted into the International Swimming Hall of Fame in 1965 after becoming its founding chairman.

==Filmography==

== Published works ==
* Autobiography, excerpts of which were published in &quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot;.

==See also==

* List of athletes with Olympic medals in different disciplines
* List of multiple Olympic gold medalists
* List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games
* List of Olympic medalists in swimming (men)
* List of Olympic medalists in water polo (men)
* List of multi-sport athletes
* World record progression 4 × 200 metres freestyle relay
* World record progression 100 metres freestyle
* World record progression 200 metres freestyle
* World record progression 400 metres freestyle
* World record progression 800 metres freestyle
* List of members of the International Swimming Hall of Fame

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
==External links==
* 
* Louis S. Nixdorff, 1928 Olympic games collection, 1926–1978, Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution. 
* The passenger list of the ship that brought the Weissmullers to Ellis Island 
* &quot;Serbia: Monument to Tarzan&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, February 17, 2007. The article states that Johnny Weissmuller was born in Serbia.
* Johnny Weissmuller Official Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151284" start="0" end="18" title="Johnny Weissmuller" label="Johnny Weissmuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q151284" start="28" end="51" title="Johnny Weissmuller" label="Johann Peter Weißmüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8132" start="399" end="428" title="1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924 Summer Olympics in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8138" start="437" end="470" title="1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q148234" start="647" end="667" title="Edgar Rice Burroughs" label="Edgar Rice Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170241" start="674" end="680" title="Tarzan" label="Tarzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19710414" start="684" end="704" title="Tarzan in film, television and other non-print media" label="twelve feature films"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="745" end="748" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="778" end="781" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="828" end="838" title="Jungle Jim#Feature films" label="Jungle Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811277" start="927" end="963" title="Jungle Jim (TV series)" label="the &amp;quot;Jungle Jim&amp;quot; TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q747872" start="1034" end="1045" title="Freidorf" label="Szabadfalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="1054" end="1072" title="Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1074" end="1089" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="1103" end="1110" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q445618" start="1152" end="1165" title="Banat Swabians" label="Banat Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877935" start="1262" end="1267" title="Baden" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1269" end="1286" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1331" end="1339" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393515" start="1560" end="1574" title="SS Dwinsk" label="S.S. Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q202175" start="1584" end="1596" title="Ellis Island" label="Ellis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182776" start="1619" end="1640" title="Windber, Pennsylvania" label="Windber, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634107" start="1932" end="1937" title="List of polio survivors" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="2029" end="2042" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="2418" end="2422" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907981" start="2717" end="2730" title="Bill Bachrach" label="Bill Bachrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q123688" start="3135" end="3157" title="Duke Kahanamoku" label="Duke Kahanamoku&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8132" start="3270" end="3290" title="1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8138" start="3461" end="3481" title="1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q380036" start="3596" end="3622" title="John Harvey Kellogg" label="John Harvey Kellogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="3623" end="3631" title="holistic medicine" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="3709" end="3731" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="3857" end="3867" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q693231" start="4190" end="4230" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national water polo team" label="U.S. men&amp;#x27;s national water polo team"/>
<link wikidata="Q838635" start="4261" end="4281" title="Water polo at the 1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q832986" start="4307" end="4320" title="Water polo at the 1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="4875" end="4881" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772447" start="4901" end="4929" title="Glorifying the American Girl" label="Glorifying the American Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401595" start="4964" end="4972" title="fig leaf" label="fig leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q463042" start="4996" end="5006" title="Mary Eaton" label="Mary Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009018" start="5054" end="5064" title="Cyril Hume" label="Cyril Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q262793" start="5117" end="5135" title="Tarzan the Ape Man (1932 film)" label="Tarzan the Ape Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836822" start="5226" end="5239" title="BVD" label="BVD underwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443" start="5278" end="5289" title="Greta Garbo" label="Greta Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q253282" start="5294" end="5308" title="Marie Dressler" label="Marie Dressler"/>
<link wikidata="Q955708" start="5614" end="5625" title="Herman Brix" label="Herman Brix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566361" start="5787" end="5798" title="Tarzan yell" label="Tarzan yell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8651" start="5837" end="5852" title="Douglas Shearer" label="Douglas Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q997405" start="6004" end="6014" title="Jungle Jim (film)" label="Jungle Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811277" start="6117" end="6137" title="Jungle Jim (TV series)" label="Jungle Jim TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q267247" start="6314" end="6324" title="Lupe Vélez" label="Lupe Vélez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267884" start="6617" end="6640" title="Johnny Weissmuller, Jr." label="Johnny Weissmuller, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6917748" start="7806" end="7864" title="Motion Picture &amp;amp; Television Country House and Hospital" label="Motion Picture &amp;amp; Television Country House and Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337818" start="7868" end="7894" title="Woodland Hills, Los Angeles" label="Woodland Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="7958" end="7974" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q857667" start="8059" end="8074" title="pulmonary edema" label="pulmonary edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q49095233" start="8331" end="8344" title="21-gun salute" label="21-gun salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="8358" end="8371" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="8403" end="8414" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="8429" end="8442" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="8548" end="8570" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="8601" end="8612" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="8625" end="8667" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q962024" start="8716" end="8732" title="Johnny Sheffield" label="Johnny Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538823" start="9094" end="9114" title="George Eastman Award" label="George Eastman Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507284" start="9125" end="9145" title="George Eastman House" label="George Eastman House"/>
<link wikidata="Q645095" start="9202" end="9217" title="Piscine Molitor" label="Piscine Molitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q744713" start="9458" end="9493" title="International Swimming Hall of Fame" label="International Swimming Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="9639" end="9664" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813902" start="9689" end="9750" title="List of athletes with Olympic medals in different disciplines" label="List of athletes with Olympic medals in different disciplines"/>
<link wikidata="Q915373" start="9753" end="9792" title="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists" label="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238387" start="9795" end="9852" title="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games" label="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078515" start="9855" end="9898" title="List of Olympic medalists in swimming (men)" label="List of Olympic medalists in swimming (men)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106678247" start="9901" end="9946" title="List of Olympic medalists in water polo (men)" label="List of Olympic medalists in water polo (men)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629530" start="9949" end="9977" title="List of multi-sport athletes" label="List of multi-sport athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135718" start="9980" end="10035" title="World record progression 4 × 200 metres freestyle relay" label="World record progression 4 × 200 metres freestyle relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202761" start="10038" end="10083" title="World record progression 100 metres freestyle" label="World record progression 100 metres freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362958" start="10086" end="10131" title="World record progression 200 metres freestyle" label="World record progression 200 metres freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q668373" start="10134" end="10179" title="World record progression 400 metres freestyle" label="World record progression 400 metres freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q613865" start="10182" end="10227" title="World record progression 800 metres freestyle" label="World record progression 800 metres freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251703" start="10230" end="10288" title="List of members of the International Swimming Hall of Fame" label="List of members of the International Swimming Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="10435" end="10470" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="10472" end="10495" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="10726" end="10732" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16559" wikidata="Q5350072" url="?curid=16559" title="Jean Grey">
<text>Jean Elaine Grey-Summers is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-plotter Jack Kirby, the character first appeared in &quot;The X-Men&quot; #1 (September 1963). Jean Grey is a member of a subspecies of humans known as mutants, born with superhuman abilities. She was born with psionic powers. The character has also been known as Marvel Girl, Phoenix and Dark Phoenix at various points in her history.

Her powers first manifested when she saw her childhood friend being hit by a car. She is a caring, nurturing figure, but she also has to deal with being an Omega-level mutant and the physical manifestation of the cosmic Phoenix Force. Jean first experienced a transformation into Phoenix in the &quot;X-Men&quot; storyline &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot;. Due to Mastermind&#x27;s manipulations, Jean became Dark Phoenix during &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; and sacrificed herself.

Jean is an important figure in the lives of other Marvel Universe characters, mainly the X-Men, including her husband Cyclops, her mentor and father figure Charles Xavier, her best friend and sister figure Storm, and her genetic children Rachel Summers, Cable, Stryfe and X-Man. Jean&#x27;s connection to the Phoenix Force has often resulted in clashes with the Shi&#x27;ar Empire, responsible for the massacre of most of her family members.

Jean&#x27;s exact relationship to the Phoenix Force has often been changed throughout the character&#x27;s history, as has her involvement in the events of &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot;. Usually depicted as the Phoenix Force&#x27;s favorite and most compatible host, storylines in 2024 revealed that Jean is actually the human manifestation of the Phoenix Force and its mother.

Often listed as one of the most notable and powerful female characters in Marvel Comics, the character has been featured in various Marvel-licensed products, including video games, animated television series, and merchandise. Famke Janssen portrayed the character as an adult in the 20th Century Fox &quot;X-Men&quot; films, while Sophie Turner portrayed her as a teenager and young adult.

==Publication history==
Jean Grey debuted under the codename Marvel Girl in &quot;The X-Men&quot; #1 (September 1963), created by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-writer Jack Kirby. The original team&#x27;s sole female member, Marvel Girl was a regular part of the team through the series&#x27; publication. Initially possessing the ability of telekinesis, the character was later granted the power of telepathy, which would be retconned years later as a suppressed mutant ability.

Under the authorship of Chris Claremont and the artwork of first Dave Cockrum and then John Byrne in the late 1970s, Jean Grey underwent a significant transformation from the X-Men&#x27;s weakest member, to its most powerful.

The first comic Claremont saw at Marvel after coming there in 1969 was the first X-Men issue penciled by Neal Adams (issue 56), after which he became enamored of Jean Grey. But when he started to write X-Men in issue 94, the first issue after the creation of the new team in Giant-Size X-Men 1, Len Wein had already established that she was leaving the team. The artwork was already done, and it was too late to change. But he promised himself he would bring her back as soon as possible, which he did in issue 97 when he became the sole writer of the title. Claremont also decided to upgrade her powers significantly.

The storyline in which Jean Grey died as Marvel Girl and was reborn as Phoenix (&quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot; #101–108, 1976–1977) has been retroactively dubbed by fans &quot;The Phoenix Saga&quot;, and the storyline of her eventual corruption and death as Dark Phoenix (&quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot; #129–138, 1980) has been termed &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot;. This storyline is one of the most well-known and heavily referenced in mainstream American superhero comics, and is widely considered a classic, including Jean Grey&#x27;s suicidal sacrifice.

When the first trade paperback of &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; was published in 1984, Marvel also published a 48-page special issue titled &quot;Phoenix: The Untold Story&quot;. It contained the original version of &quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot; #137, the original splash page for &quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot; #138 and transcripts of a roundtable discussion between Shooter, Claremont, Byrne, editors Jim Salicrup and Louise Jones, and inker Terry Austin. The discussion was about the creation of the new Phoenix persona, the development of the story, and what led to its eventual change, and Claremont and Byrne&#x27;s plans for Jean Grey, had she survived.

Chris Claremont, the longest-running writer of the &quot;X-Men&quot; comics, revealed that his and Cockrum&#x27;s motivation for Jean Grey&#x27;s transformation into Phoenix was to create &quot;the first female cosmic hero&quot;. The two hoped that, like Thor had been integrated into &quot;The Avengers&quot; lineup, Phoenix would also become an effective and immensely powerful member of the X-Men. However, both Salicrup and Byrne had strong feelings against how powerful Phoenix had become, feeling that she drew too much focus in the book. Byrne worked with Claremont to effectively remove Phoenix from the storyline, initially by removing her powers. However, Byrne&#x27;s decision to have Dark Phoenix destroy an inhabited planetary system in &quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot; #135, coupled with the planned ending to the story arc, worried then-Editor-in-Chief Jim Shooter, who felt that allowing Jean to live at the conclusion of the story was both morally unacceptable (given that she was now a &quot;mass murderer&quot;) and also an unsatisfying ending from a storytelling point of view. Shooter publicly laid out his reasoning in the 1984 roundtable:

I personally think, and I&#x27;ve said this many times, that having a character destroy an inhabited world with billions of people, wipe out a starship and then—well, you know, having the powers removed and being let go on Earth. It seems to me that that&#x27;s the same as capturing Hitler alive and letting him go live on Long Island. Now, I don&#x27;t think the story would &quot;end&quot; there. I think a lot of people would come to his door with machine guns...
One of the creative team&#x27;s questions that affected the story&#x27;s conclusion was whether the Phoenix&#x27;s personality and later descent into madness and evil were inherent to Jean Grey or if the Phoenix was itself an entity merely possessing her. The relationship between Jean Grey and the Phoenix would continue to be subject to different interpretations and explanations by writers and editors at Marvel Comics following the story&#x27;s retcon in 1986. At the time of the Dark Phoenix&#x27;s creation, Byrne felt that, &quot;If someone could be seen to corrupt Jean, rather than her just turning bad, this could make for an interesting story.&quot; Salicrup and Byrne stated later that they viewed Phoenix as an entity that entirely possessed Jean Grey, therefore absolving her of its crimes once it was driven out. However, the creative and editorial team ultimately agreed that Phoenix had been depicted as an inherent and inseparable aspect of Jean Grey, meaning that the character was fully responsible for her actions as Phoenix. As a result, Shooter ordered that Claremont and Byrne rewrite issue #137 to explicitly place in the story both a consequence and an ending commensurate with the enormity of Phoenix&#x27;s actions. In a 2012 public signing, Claremont spoke about the context of the late 1970s and the end of the Vietnam War during the story&#x27;s writing, stating that the history of these events also made Jean Grey&#x27;s genocidal actions difficult to redeem.

In the original ending, Jean does not revert to Dark Phoenix, and the Shi&#x27;ar subject her to a &quot;psychic lobotomy&quot;, permanently removing all her telepathic or telekinetic powers. Claremont and Byrne planned to later have Magneto offer Jean the chance to restore her abilities, but Jean choosing to remain depowered and eliminate the threat of Dark Phoenix returning to power.
After several years, Marvel decided to revive the character, but only after an editorial decree that the character be absolved of her actions during The Dark Phoenix Saga. Writer Kurt Busiek is credited with devising the plot to revive Jean Grey. Busiek, a fan of the original five X-Men, was displeased with the character&#x27;s death and formulated various storylines that would have met Shooter&#x27;s rule and allowed the character to return to the X-Men franchise. He eventually shared his storyline idea with fellow writer Roger Stern who mentioned it to Byrne, who was both writing and illustrating the &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; at the time. Both series writer Bob Layton and artist Jackson Guice, who were developing the series &quot;X-Factor&quot;—a team of former X-Men—had yet to settle on their fifth team member, initially considering Dazzler. Layton opted to fill the open spot with Jean instead, and both he and Byrne submitted the idea to Shooter, who approved it. Jean Grey&#x27;s revival became a crossover plotline between the &quot;Avengers&quot; under Stern, &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; under Byrne, and &quot;X-Factor&quot; under Layton.

Busiek later found out that his idea had been used thanks to Layton, and he was credited in &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; #286 and paid for his contributions. The decision to revive Jean Grey was controversial among fans, with some appreciating the return of the character and others feeling it weakened the impact of the Dark Phoenix Saga&#x27;s ending. Busiek maintained that the idea that led to Jean Grey&#x27;s official return to Marvel Comics was merely a case of sharing his ideas with friends as a fan, and that he neither formally pitched the idea to anyone nor gave it the final go ahead. Claremont expressed dissatisfaction with the retcon, stating in 2012: &quot;We&#x27;d just gone to all the effort of saying, &#x27;Jean is dead, get over it,&#x27; and they said, &#x27;Haha, we fibbed.&#x27; So why should anyone trust us again? But that&#x27;s the difference between being the writer and being the boss.&quot; In a 2008 interview Byrne said he still felt Busiek&#x27;s method of reviving Jean Grey was &quot;brilliant&quot;, but agreed that in retrospect the character should have remained dead.

In the comics, having been fully established as separate from the &quot;Jean Grey&quot; copy created and taken over by the Phoenix Force, Jean is &quot;absolved&quot; of involvement in the atrocities of &quot;The Dark Phoenix&quot; storyline, and she returned in the first issue of &quot;X-Factor&quot; (1st Series).

Claremont later commented on how Jean&#x27;s revival affected his original plans for Madelyne Pryor, stating that the relationship between the two women was intended to be entirely coincidental. He intended Madelyne only to look like Jean by complete coincidence and exist as a means for Cyclops to move on with his life and be written out of the &quot;X-Men&quot; franchise, part of what he believed to be a natural progression for any member of the team. Claremont expressed dismay that Jean&#x27;s resurrection ultimately resulted in Cyclops abandoning his wife and child, tarnishing his written persona as a hero and &quot;decent human being&quot;, and the &quot;untenable situation&quot; with Madelyne was dealt with by transforming her into a prolicidal demonic villain and killing her off.

Soon after the beginning publication of &quot;X-Factor&quot;, Marvel also reprinted and released the original &quot;X-Men&quot; series under the title &quot;Classic X-Men&quot;. These reissues paired the original stories with new vignettes, elaborating on plot points. One such issue, &quot;Classic X-Men&quot; #8 (April 1987), paired the original &quot;The X-Men&quot; #100 (Aug. 1976) story of Jean Grey&#x27;s disastrous return flight from space immediately preceding her transformation into Phoenix (&quot;Greater Love Hath No X-Man...&quot;) with the new story &quot;Phoenix&quot;. The story further supported the retcon establishing Jean Grey and the Phoenix Force as two separate entities.

Following the conclusion of &quot;Inferno&quot;, Jean continued to be a mainstay character throughout the rest of &quot;X-Factor&quot;
&quot;X-Factor&quot; (1st Series) ended its run featuring the original X-Men with &quot;X-Factor&quot; #70 (Sept. 1991), with the characters transitioning over to &quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot;, explained in continuity as the two teams deciding to merge. The fourteen X-Men divide into two teams—&quot;Blue&quot; and &quot;Gold&quot;—led by Cyclops and Storm, respectively. Jean was added to the Gold Team beginning in &quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot; #281 (Oct. 1991).
Following Cyclops&#x27;s possession by the mutant villain Apocalypse and disappearance in the conclusion of the crossover storyline &quot;Apocalypse: The Twelve&quot;, Jean lost her telekinetic abilities and was left with increased psychic powers, the result of the &quot;six-month gap&quot; in plot across the &quot;X-Men&quot; franchise created by the &quot;Revolution&quot; revamp. During the &quot;Revolution&quot; event, all &quot;X-Men&quot; titles began six months after the events of &quot;Apocalypse: The Twelve&quot;, allowing writers to create fresh situations and stories and gradually fill in the missing events of the previous six months of continuity. Due to editing decisions following the success of the 2000 &quot;X-Men&quot; film, which depicted the character of Jean Grey with both telepathy and telekinesis, an explanation for Jean&#x27;s altered powers in the comics was never explicitly made, though writer Chris Claremont revealed in interviews that it was intended to be an accidental power switch between fellow X-Man Psylocke, explaining Psylocke&#x27;s new telekinetic powers as well.

Jean was next featured in the six-issue miniseries &quot;X-Men Forever&quot; written by Fabian Nicieza, which was designed to tie up the remaining plot lines. During the series, Jean revisited many of the events involving the Phoenix Force and the series introduced the concept of &quot;Omega level mutants&quot;, a category for mutants with unlimited potential, which included Jean herself.
In June 2001, &quot;X-Men&quot; was retitled as &quot;New X-Men&quot; under writer Grant Morrison. The title consisted of a smaller team featuring Jean, Cyclops, Beast, Wolverine, Emma Frost, and Charles Xavier. The overarching plot focused on the team assuming the roles of teachers to a new generation of mutants at the Xavier Institute while navigating their personal relationships and dealing with newly emerging pro- and anti-mutant political sentiments. Jean also made minor appearances in other titles during the &quot;New X-Men&quot; run, such as Chris Claremont&#x27;s &quot;X-Treme X-Men&quot;, occasionally lending support to the characters.

Jean and her connection with the Phoenix Force was examined again one year after the conclusion of Morrison&#x27;s run on &quot;New X-Men&quot; in &quot;X-Men: Phoenix – Endsong&quot; written by Greg Pak in 2005. At the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con X-Men panel, when asked whether or not Jean would return, editor Nick Lowe responded by saying, &quot;She&#x27;s dead.&quot;

Regarding Jean&#x27;s actual return to the &quot;X-Men&quot; franchise, Marvel indicated that Jean&#x27;s eventual return is being discussed but stated that the return of Jean Grey was &quot;a story Marvel does not want to rush&quot;. Marvel loosely tied questions regarding Jean Grey&#x27;s eventual return to the events in 2007&#x27;s &quot;X-Men: Messiah Complex&quot; in which a mutant girl named Hope—who has red hair, green eyes, and immense mutant powers—is born, and 2010&#x27;s &quot;X-Men: Second Coming&quot; which sees both Hope&#x27;s return as a teenager and the return of the Phoenix Force.
Following the conclusion of &quot;Avengers vs. X-Men&quot; as part of the Marvel NOW! event, a teenage Jean Grey and the four other founding members of X-Men are transported across time to the present day by Beast in the series &quot;All-New X-Men&quot; by Brian Michael Bendis.

The original adult Jean Grey returned to the Marvel Universe in a new series titled &quot;Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey&quot;, released on December 27, 2017. The series was written by Matthew Rosenberg with art by Leinil Francis Yu.

Following the events of Extermination story, the time-displaced Jean Grey and the other original X-Men were returned to their original time, as part of Jonathan Hickman&#x27;s plan to reboot the entire X-Men franchise.

==Fictional character biography==
===Youth===
Jean Elaine Grey was born the second daughter of John and Elaine Grey. She had an older sister, Sara Grey-Bailey. John Grey was a professor at Bard College in upstate New York. Depictions of Jean&#x27;s childhood and her relations with her family have shown a stable, loving family life growing up.

===Emergence of powers and joining the X-Men===
Jean&#x27;s mutant powers of telepathy and telekinesis first manifested when her best friend was hit by a car and killed. Jean mentally linked with her friend and nearly died as well. The event left her comatose, and she was brought back to consciousness when her parents sought the help of powerful mutant telepath, Charles Xavier. Xavier blocked her telepathy until she was old enough to be able to control it, leaving her with access only to her telekinetic powers. Xavier later recruited her as a teenager to be part of his X-Men team as &quot;Marvel Girl&quot;, the team&#x27;s sole female member. After several missions with the X-Men, Xavier removed Jean&#x27;s mental blocks and she was able to use and control her telepathic powers. She began a relationship with teammate Cyclops, which persisted as her main romantic relationship.

===Phoenix Force and first death===

During an emergency mission in space, the X-Men find their shuttle damaged. Jean pilots the shuttle back to Earth, but is exposed to fatal levels of radiation. Dying, but determined to save Cyclops and her friends, Jean calls out for help and is answered by the cosmic entity the Phoenix Force. The Phoenix Force, the sum of all life in the universe, is moved by Jean&#x27;s wish to save herself and her friends. It takes the form of a duplicate body to house Jean&#x27;s psyche. The duplication is so exact that the Phoenix Force believes itself to be Jean Grey, and places Jean&#x27;s dying body in a healing cocoon. This cocoon is later described as a Phoenix Egg. The ship crashes in Jamaica Bay, with the other X-Men unharmed.

The Phoenix Force, assuming Jean&#x27;s identity, emerges wearing a new costume and adopts the codename &quot;Phoenix&quot;; meanwhile, the cocoon containing the real Jean Grey sinks to the bottom of the bay, unnoticed. Phoenix continues her life as Jean Grey with the other X-Men, joining them on missions and even helping to save the universe. During &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot;, Phoenix becomes overwhelmed and corrupted by her first taste of evil and transforms into a force of total destruction called &quot;Dark Phoenix&quot;, inadvertently killing the inhabitants of a planetary system after consuming its star, and jeopardizing the entire universe. However, Jean&#x27;s personality manages to take control and Phoenix commits suicide to ensure the safety of the universe.

===Revival===

Upon its suicide by way of a disintegration ray, the Phoenix Force disperses into its original form and a fragment locates the still-healing Jean at the bottom of Jamaica Bay. In trying to bond with her, Jean senses its memories of death and destruction as Dark Phoenix and rejects it, causing it to bond with and animate a lifeless clone of Jean Grey created by the villain Mister Sinister. Sinister created the clone to mate with Cyclops to create genetically superior mutants. Named &quot;Madelyne Pryor&quot;, the unaware clone meets Cyclops in a situation engineered by Sinister and the two fall in love, marry, and have a child, Nathan Christopher Summers. Meanwhile, the cocoon is discovered and retrieved by the Avengers and the Fantastic Four. Jean emerges with no memory of the actions of the Phoenix/Dark Phoenix. The Avengers and Fantastic Four tell her of what happened and that she was believed dead until now. She is reunited with the original X-Men and convinces them to form the new superhero team X-Factor, reusing her &quot;Marvel Girl&quot; codename. Madelyne is angered over Cyclops&#x27;s decision to lead X-Factor and neglect his family. Though Jean encourages Cyclops to return to Madelyne, he finds their house abandoned and assumes that Madelyne has left him and taken their infant son. Cyclops returns to X-Factor and he and Jean continue their relationship, but the Phoenix Force&#x27;s impersonation, and his marrying Madelyne, damaged their mutual trust. The team&#x27;s adventures continue throughout the series, culminating in the line-wide &quot;Inferno&quot; crossover. Madelyne reappears, now nearly insane and with powers awakened by a demonic pact, calling herself the Goblyn Queen.

Learning of her true identity and purpose as a clone created by Mister Sinister drove her completely insane and she plans to sacrifice Nathan Christopher to achieve greater power and unleash literal Hell on Earth. While attempting to stop her, Jean is reunited with the other X-Men, who are happy to learn that she is alive. Jean and Madelyne confront each other, and Madelyne attempts to kill them both. Jean manages to survive only by absorbing the remnant of the Phoenix Force housed within Madelyne, giving her both Madelyne&#x27;s memories and the Phoenix&#x27;s memories from &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot;.

===Return to the X-Men and marriage to Cyclops===
Unsure of herself since returning to life, Jean finds possessing the Phoenix Force and Madelyne&#x27;s memories to be difficult. Cyclops proposes to her and she meets her alternate future daughter Rachel Summers (who goes by the codename &quot;Phoenix&quot; as well and is also able to tap into the Phoenix Force), but Jean rejects them both out of the feeling that they indicate that her life is predetermined. Jean had learned during the Inferno event that her rejecting the Phoenix Force caused Madelyne to wake; Cyclops admits to Susan Storm Richards that Jean sometimes wishes that the Fantastic Four had not found her, and that he does not know how to communicate with her. When X-Factor unites with the X-Men, Jean joins the Gold Team, led by Storm. She deliberately chooses not to use a codename, so the team simply uses her civilian name. After some time, she makes up with Rachel, welcoming her into her life, and proposes to Cyclops and the two marry. On their honeymoon, the couple is immediately psychically transported 2000 years into the future to raise Cyclops&#x27;s son Nathan, who had been transported to the future as an infant in hopes of curing him of a deadly virus. Jean adopts the identity of &quot;Redd&quot; along with Cyclops (&quot;Slym&quot;) and they raise Nathan Christopher for twelve years before they are sent back into their bodies on their wedding honeymoon. Jean learns that a time-displaced Rachel had used her powers to transport them to the future to protect Nathan; per Rachel&#x27;s request, Jean adopts the codename &quot;Phoenix&quot; once again to establish it as a symbol of good after all the bad it had caused. As her powers increase, Jean also decides to wear the original Phoenix&#x27;s gold-and-green costume. Jean also met another alternate future child of hers and Scott&#x27;s: the immensely powerful Nathan Grey, who accidentally revived the psionic ghost of Madelyne Pryor, leading to another confrontation between the two women.

===Onslaught===
In Bishop&#x27;s original timeline before he ends up in the present he finds the X-Men&#x27;s war room and finds a garbled distress signal from Jean about a traitor destroying the X-Men from within. Meanwhile, in the present, the X-Men begin to hear increasing news about a malevolent entity called Onslaught. Jean first sees Onslaught as a psionic image with the rest of the X-Men after Onslaught coerces Gateway to kidnap Cyclops, Wolverine, Storm, and Iceman. He later appears to her again in a similar way after rescuing her and Gambit from Bastion and offers her a chance to join him. Onslaught makes his first full appearance to Jean on the astral plane and shows her how humanity is closing in on mutants as well as revealing that Xavier was in love with her while she was a student to convince her to join him. He then telepathically brands his name to her mind when she refuses and asks him his name. When Juggernaut comes to the mansion with information about Onslaught&#x27;s true identity but has a mental block preventing him from divulging it, Jean enters his mind and helps him to remember who Onslaught really is and to her horror she discovers that Onslaught is really Professor X, having gone insane ever since wiping Magneto&#x27;s mind.

Professor Xavier calls the X-Men together for a meeting and Jean tries unsuccessfully to rally the X-Men against him before he manifests Onslaught. While Onslaught easily overtakes the rest of the X-Men, Jean escapes to the war room and sends out the distress signal that Bishop found in the future. After a massive battle against Jean and the rest of the X-Men, Onslaught escapes to carry out his plans. After Onslaught nearly kills the X-Men they team up with the Avengers to make a plan to stop him, knowing full well that it may come down to them killing Xavier if the world is to survive. Jean accompanies Cyclops, Archangel, and Psylocke to Muir Island where they and Moira McTaggert discover the &quot;Xavier Protocols&quot;, secret plans that Xavier made to kill any of the individual X-Men should anyone become a threat against the world. Meanwhile, Jean&#x27;s earlier distress signal makes it to X-Factor, Excalibur, and X-Force. After returning to New York, Jean works closely with Reed Richards to help build up defenses against Onslaught as well as to help create the psionic armor that could block Xavier&#x27;s telepathic powers as seen in the &quot;Xavier Protocols&quot;. When Jean senses that Xavier has been freed from Onslaught and is going to confront him on his own, she and Cyclops bring together the rest of the X-Men to back him up. The rest of the Avengers and Fantastic Four join them in a final stand against Onslaught before he completely destroys the world. In a final act of desperation Jean finds Hulk and locks away Bruce Banner&#x27;s mind, leaving only the Hulk in control so he can fight Onslaught unencumbered. With the vast majority of earth&#x27;s heroes missing and assumed dead after Onslaught is finally defeated, Jean and Cyclops open their home to Quicksilver and his daughter and try to help the X-Men to get their lives back together.

===New X-Men===
Following Cyclops&#x27;s possession by the mutant villain Apocalypse and apparent death, Jean continues with the X-Men, but is distraught by the loss of her husband. She later learns that she is an &quot;Omega-level&quot; mutant with unlimited potential. Jean begins to suspect that Cyclops may still be alive and with the help of Nathan Summers (now the aged superhero &quot;Cable&quot;), is able to locate and free Cyclops of his possession by Apocalypse. The couple return to the X-Men as part of the Xavier Institute&#x27;s teaching staff to a new generation of mutants. While Jean finds she is slowly able to tap into the powers of the Phoenix Force once again, her marriage to Scott begins to fail. Jean and Wolverine meet in the woods where Jean confides her feelings of distance towards Scott while Wolverine also shuts down any interest in a relationship he himself had with Jean by telling her that he knew a relationship between the two would never work and walks away from her; Cyclops grows further alienated from Jean due to her growing powers and institute responsibilities and seeks consolation from the telepathic Emma Frost to address his disillusionment and his experiences while possessed by Apocalypse. Emma psychically manipulates Scott and tries to psychically seduce him, which Jean interrupts and discovers, though she would later learn Emma was in love with Scott. Jean also realizes that Scott and Emma never had a physical affair and that Emma had, to an extent, taken advantage of Scott to telepathically seduce him.

===Second death===
In a final confrontation with a traitor at the institute (the X-Men&#x27;s teammate Xorn, posing as Magneto) Jean fully realizes and assumes complete control of the powers of the Phoenix Force, but is killed in a last-ditch lethal attack by Xorn. Jean dies, telling Scott &quot;to live&quot;. However, after her funeral, Scott rejects Emma and her offer to run the school together. This creates a dystopian future where all life and natural evolution is under assault by the infectious, villainous, sentient bacteria &quot;Sublime&quot;. Jean is resurrected in this future timeline and becomes the fully realized White Phoenix of the Crown, using the abilities of the Phoenix Force to defeat Sublime and eliminate the dystopic future by reaching back in time and telling Cyclops to move on. This leads him to accept Emma&#x27;s love and her offer to run the school together. Jean then reconciles with Cyclops and fully bonds with the Phoenix Force and ascends to a higher plane of existence called the &quot;White Hot Room&quot;.

===Endsong===
A weakened Phoenix Force returns to reanimate Jean. Jean tries to convince the Phoenix Force to let her go so they can return to the White Hot Room together, but once again the Phoenix Force takes over. Jean lets Wolverine find her and tries to convince him to kill her again before the Phoenix does more damage. The Shi&#x27;ar track the Phoenix Force and make an alliance with Storm to find her and defeat her. Jean takes Wolverine to the North Pole before the Shi&#x27;ar can kill her and convinces him to kill her. He stabs her numerous times but Phoenix keeps reanimating her, prompting Jean to dive deep into the ice and freeze herself. The Phoenix Force leaves her body and once again assumes Jean&#x27;s form to tempt Cyclops to attack her so she can absorb his optic blasts and become strong again. When the Phoenix Force merges with and overwhelms Emma Frost, Cyclops frees Jean from the ice. Once freed Jean ejects the Phoenix from Emma and accepts that she is one with the Phoenix Force. After feeling the love from the X-Men, the Phoenix relents and returns with Jean back to the White Hot Room. Before she departs, Jean and Cyclops share a telepathic emotional farewell.

===Postmortem manifestations===
Though she had yet to fully return, the Phoenix Force and Jean continued to manifest themselves, particularly the Phoenix through the red-haired, green-eyed &quot;mutant messiah&quot; who slightly resembles Jean named Hope Summers, and Jean briefly appears in a vision to Emma Frost from the White Hot Room, warning the X-Men to &quot;prepare&quot;. She again appears in a vision to Cyclops when he is overwhelmed by the power of Dark Phoenix, helping him abandon the power so that it can pass on to its true host. After Nightcrawler is fatally wounded by the Crimson Pirates, Jean appears to him along with Amanda Sefton and the recently deceased Wolverine to help coax him back to life. Jean&#x27;s spirit begins to manifest in a more straightforward and aggressive manner to the time-displaced Jean from an alternate timeline, seemingly training her for the arrival of the Phoenix. However, after the younger Jean begins to ignore her, she possesses the time displaced Jean and uses her as a means to ambush Emma Frost.

===Return===

Strange psych occurrences around the world, which include a large bird flaring out from the sun and an explosion on the moon, raise red flags for the X-Men, who quickly launch an investigation of these events. After a string of bizarre encounters with familiar enemies, many of them considered deceased, the X-Men come to one conclusion: the Phoenix Force is back on Earth. The X-Men also discover that psychs are going missing or falling ill, which prompts the team to investigate the grave of Jean Grey. As they find the coffin of their long-dead teammate empty, they race to locate the Phoenix before it can find a suitable host. As it turns out, with the time-displaced teen Jean Grey out of the Phoenix Force&#x27;s way, the cosmic entity has already resurrected the present adult Jean Grey. However, she does not recall her life as a mutant and an X-Man, and terrible visions from her previous life have left Jean unsure of the difference between reality and fiction. As she lies inside of what appears to be a Phoenix Egg, the X-Men theorize that the strange psych occurrences are subconscious cries for help made by Jean Grey and that they must try to stop the Phoenix from merging with their old friend. Old Man Logan is able to make Jean Grey remember her true life and she learns about the fate of her family and several of her friends, among them Cyclops. As Jean faces the Phoenix Force, she is finally able to convince the cosmic entity to stop bringing her back and let her go. Alive once again, Jean is reunited with her friends as the Phoenix Force journeys back to space.

Restored to life, Jean gathers some of the greatest minds on Earth together so that she can read their minds to plan her next move. Recognizing that there has been a sudden surge in anti-mutant sentiment, to the point where there are plans to abort pregnancies if the mutant gene is detected, Jean announces her plans to establish a more official mutant nation, making it clear that she will not establish a geographic location for said nation as past examples make it clear that doing so just makes mutants a target. To support her in this goal, she assembles a team including Nightcrawler, X-23 and Namor, but is unaware that her actions are being observed by Cassandra Nova.

===House of X / Dawn of X===
The adult Jean returns to using her original Marvel Girl codename and wears her second green-and-yellow Marvel Girl costume. She is sent as part of a strike team to outer space to stop a satellite near the sun from being used as a Sentinel factory. Sentinels crush Jean&#x27;s escape pod and she dies, but is resurrected into a cloned body. She is also a member of the Quiet Council, Krakoa&#x27;s provisional government. Following the events of House of X, Jean briefly joins the Krakoan incarnation of X-Force, before resigning in protest of Beast&#x27;s actions in Terra Verde.

The Phoenix Force soon hosts a tournament to determine its new host, ultimately selecting Maya Lopez, also known as Echo. With the new host revealed, Jean Grey telepathically asks Wolverine to let Maya be and return to their home on the moon. Wolverine had been awaiting the new host and had vowed to kill anyone who took on the Phoenix Force. Jean also reaches out to Maya, advising her not to undertake this journey alone. She explains that the Phoenix favors isolated individuals, and to remain whole and avoid being consumed by its god-like power, Maya should rely on others to help ground her and keep her connected to her humanity.

==Powers and abilities==
Jean Grey is an Omega-level mutant, and at her highest and strongest potential was fully merged with the Phoenix Force and with it was able to defeat even Galactus.

===Empathy===
Jean is a powerful empath, as she can feel and manipulate emotions of other people, as shown when her power first emerged and she felt her friend Annie Richardson slowly dying. Jean can also connect people&#x27;s minds to the feelings of others and make them feel the pain they inflicted.

===Telepathy===
When her powers first manifested, Jean was unable to cope with her telepathic abilities, forcing Professor Charles Xavier to suppress her access to them altogether. Instead, he chose to train her in the use of her psychokinetic abilities while allowing her telepathy to grow at its natural rate before reintroducing it. When the Professor hid to prepare for the Z&#x27;Nox, he reopened Jean&#x27;s telepathic abilities, which was initially explained by writers as Xavier &#x27;sharing&#x27; some of his telepathy with her.
Jean is also one of the few telepaths skilled enough to communicate with animals (animals with high intelligence, such as dolphins, dogs, and ravens). As a side effect of her telepathy, she has an eidetic memory. Jean was able, through telepathic therapy with the comatose Jessica Jones, to grant Jessica immunity to the Purple Man&#x27;s mind control abilities, despite his powers being chemical in nature rather than psychic. When Jean absorbed Psylocke&#x27;s specialized telepathic powers, her own telepathy was increased to the point that she could physically manifest her telepathy as a psionic firebird whose claws could inflict both physical and mental damage. She briefly developed a psychic shadow form like Psylocke&#x27;s, with a gold Phoenix emblem over her eye instead of the Crimson Dawn mark possessed by Psylocke. Jean briefly lost her telekinesis to Psylocke during this exchange, but her telekinetic abilities later came back in full and at a far stronger level than before. It was later stated that Jean has been an omega-level telepath.

===Telekinesis===
Jean possesses a high level of telekinetic ability that enables her to psionically levitate and rapidly move about all manner of animate and inanimate matter. She can use her telekinetic abilities on herself or others to simulate the power of flight or levitation, stimulate molecules to increase friction, create protective force fields out of psychokinetic energy, or project her telekinetic energy as purely concussive force. The outer limits of her telekinetic power have never been clearly established, though she was capable of lifting approximately fifty tons of rubble with some strain. Jean was later stated to have become an Omega Level Telekinetic.

===Psychic Energy Synthesis===
Jean&#x27;s younger self, who had been brought from the past into the present by an older Hank McCoy, eventually found an entirely new way to use her powers separate from the Phoenix Force. The teenage Marvel Girl learned she has the ability to harness ambient psychic energy and channel it into powerful blasts of force, which are a combination of both her telepathy and telekinesis. Its potency is such that she can match and overpower the likes of Gladiator, magistrate of the Shi&#x27;ar, with relative ease. When using this ability, Jean&#x27;s whole body glows with pink psychic energy, obscuring her human form.

====Telekinetic weapons====
Under the tutelage of Psylocke, teenage Marvel Girl learned the ability to create psionic weapons that damage a target either physically or mentally. She showed skill in constructing multiple types of psionic weapons that differ in size, length and power which she uses in combat.

===Phoenix Force===
The relationship between Jean Grey and the Phoenix Force (and the nature of the powers she has) is portrayed in a variety of ways throughout the character&#x27;s history. In the initial plotline of the Phoenix being a manifestation of Jean&#x27;s true potential, these powers are considered her own, as part of Claremont and Byrne&#x27;s desire to create &quot;the first cosmic superheroine&quot;. However, since the retcon of the Phoenix as a separate entity from Jean Grey, depictions of these powers vary; these include Jean being one of many hosts to the Phoenix and &quot;borrowing&quot; its &quot;Phoenix powers&quot; during this time, being a unique host to the Phoenix, and being one with the Phoenix. She is later described as the only one currently able to hold the title of &quot;White Phoenix of the Crown&quot; among the many past, present, and future hosts of the Phoenix. Jean — both young and adult versions — is also the only character ever to force the Phoenix against its own cosmic will to do anything while not presently a host. In one instance Jean forcibly ripped the Phoenix out of Emma Frost and imposed its status upon herself. Young Jean was able to keep her psyche anchored in the Phoenix&#x27;s mind postmortem despite the Phoenix&#x27;s own efforts to forcibly remove her after it murdered her. Jean then subsequently forced the Phoenix to resurrect her after manipulating the Phoenix&#x27;s mental landscape against it.

Over the years, Jean&#x27;s abilities while bonded to the Phoenix Force have fluctuated, but the &quot;Women of Marvel: Celebrating Seven Decades Handbook&quot; has detailed what Jean is capable of as Phoenix:
The Phoenix Force also seems to render its host unaging and, at least in some adaptations, enhances the physical strength of its avatar to superhuman levels; in certain incarnations, Jean, namely while acting as Dark Phoenix, seemed to possess some level of superhuman strength.

====Resurrection====
For one reason or another, Jean Grey (both young and old) has, on more than one occasion, been repeatedly resurrected by either the Phoenix or apparently her sheer force of will. In some depictions, these resurrections are immediately after she or whoever she is reviving is killed, while other depictions indicate that a resurrection must occur at a &quot;correct&quot; time, sometimes taking a century. During the height of the Psych Wars, Young Jean was able to forcibly make the Phoenix Force restore her to life, despite the Phoenix&#x27;s adamant resolve not to do so, completely recreating her body after it had been vaporized. After her body was taken over and completely devoured by a Poison, a small part of Jean&#x27;s mind survived and, despite itself, was able to infect the whole Poison Hive and destroy it from the inside out, subsequently using nothing but her mind to reconstruct her body. This leaves Jean believing that she may not even be human anymore. This is not the first time Jean was resurrected without the Phoenix; in one instance, she was even able to fully resurrect herself after being clinically dead completely independent of the Phoenix Force.

In their most recent meeting, Jean tells the Phoenix Force that she should have died on the shuttle, and asks it to not resurrect her again.

===Miscellaneous abilities===
Jean Grey is a trained pilot and proficient unarmed combatant. She also has some degree of teaching ability, experience as a fashion model, and training in psychology.

== Cultural impact and legacy ==

=== Critical response ===
Maite Molina of &quot;ComicsVerse&quot; called Jean Grey one of the most &quot;powerful, recognizable, and admirable heroes in Marvel Comics history,&quot; writing, &quot;Jean Grey is undoubtedly one of the most iconic characters in comic book history. Her telekinetic abilities prove her to be an incredibly formidable superhero. She has battled some of the most notorious villains in Marvel Comics while fearlessly leading her own team of heroes. With this, she has also explored her own dark side. Epic sagas such as the notable &quot;Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; depict Jean as an exemplification of evil itself. However, during this trying period, Jean still overcame the corruption within. She showed readers that even heroes can fall into the clutches of darkness and rise above. Most importantly though, Jean Grey is and always has been an incredibly multi-faceted character. She has been a student and a teacher as well as the tether between good and evil.&quot; Nigel Mitchell of &quot;Comic Book Resources&quot; said, &quot;Jean Grey was always a really popular character for readers. Partly, it was because she was one of the most sensitive and intelligent members of the X-Men, the heart of the team. The fact that she was the team&#x27;s first woman also made her unique, and her beauty was a major source of crushes for the fans. She was also involved in a love triangle between herself, Cyclops, and Wolverine, which drove a lot of emotional storylines. When she became Phoenix, she became the most high-profile female superhero in comics, but the other X-Men creative team Jim Salicrup and John Byrne felt her powers overshadowed the other members and stories. That&#x27;s why Marvel decided to do something that hadn&#x27;t really been done before: take one of its greatest superheroes and turn her into one of its greatest supervillains. It was a journey unlike any we&#x27;d seen before &quot;The Phoenix Saga&quot; and is compelling to watch.&quot; David Caballero of &quot;Screen Rant&quot; stated, &quot;Jean Grey served no important purpose in the team before &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot;, especially during the X-Men&#x27;s early days. The character existed as a love interest for the group-- every member of the X-Men&#x27;s original roster had feelings for her at one point-- and a mother figure to provide support and encouragement. As more and more female characters arrived--Storm, Scarlet Witch, and Mystique all debuted throughout the 60s and 70s--it became increasingly complicated to use Jean in any meaningful way. &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; was not only a showcase but, as it turns out, a victory lap for the X-Men&#x27;s first lady. The storyline took a nearly irrelevant character and elevated it to the apex of importance, turning her into one of Marvel&#x27;s most overpowered figures in the process.&quot;

Elle Collins of &quot;ComicsAlliance&quot; referred to Jean Grey as one of the &quot;first ladies of Marvel Comics as well as one of the most powerful,&quot; saying, &quot;In both the movies and the comics, we have a young Jean who&#x27;s still learning her full potential as a mutant and a hero, and who&#x27;s written as a real person with a real personality. That&#x27;s not to say Jean hasn&#x27;t accumulated fans over the preceding years; she absolutely has. Whether your first Jean was the Marvel Girl in her green Go Go dress, the Phoenix (who we were later told wasn&#x27;t Jean, but let&#x27;s be real it was basically Jean), the hyper competent blue-headsock-wearing Jean of the &#x27;90s comic and cartoon, or the cool black leather Jean of the turn of the Century (whether drawn by Frank Quitely or played by Famke Janssen) --- it&#x27;s hard not to be excited about this next era of the character.&quot; Tamara Jude of &quot;Sideshow&quot; asserted, &quot;As the only female superhero of the X-Men, Jean Grey (initially introduced as Marvel Girl) lacked an impactful role in the comic series. Her biggest storyline involved her love triangle with Cyclops and Wolverine. Claremont wanted to expand her powers with the Phoenix Force and re-brand her as an influential teammate with cosmic abilities. Much like Thor’s significant addition to the Avengers, Claremont wanted Jean to hold a similar importance with the X-Men. However, as they wrote the &quot;Phoenix Saga&quot;, her powers proved too dominant, and the character’s presence took over the focus of the comic. Their cosmic hero proved too much for everyone involved.&quot; Sara Century of &quot;Syfy&quot; stated, &quot;When Jean Grey is introduced in &quot;X-Men #1&quot; all the way back in late 1963, she asks herself what kind of person she is going to be. The answer to that question doesn&#x27;t come to her immediately, yet it is true that from her relatively one-dimensional origins eventually sprang a complex personality full of nuance and empathy that has only grown more interesting as time has gone on. From the &quot;Phoenix Saga&quot; to &quot;X-Factor&quot; to &quot;Inferno&quot; to the &quot;X-Cutioner&quot;’s to &quot;Onslaught&quot; to &quot;New X-Men&quot; to &quot;Phoenix: Resurrection&quot; and countless alternate realities in between, Jean Grey has truly been beyond and back. Still, many writers have struggled to define her. The complicated, fiercely compassionate Jean Grey has not always translated well to other mediums, and even in comics Jean has been known to experience long dormant periods in which her persona is secondary to other characters. Yet her fanship has remained ever vigilant, because while she is not often cited as people’s favorite X-Man, a whole lot of folks relate to her in very specific and incredibly personal ways. Also, it turns out that there’s a pretty solid queer allegory in Jean’s story. Though a parable about a straight character is not to be mistaken for actual queer representation, it is still worth noting that a lot of Jean Grey’s most avid advocates are LGBTQIA people.&quot;

Deirdre Kaye of &quot;Scary Mommy&quot; called Jean Grey a &quot;role model&quot; and a &quot;truly heroic&quot; female character. Chris Arrant of &quot;Newsarama&quot; ranked Jean Grey&#x27;s Dark Phoenix persona 1st in their &quot;Marvel&#x27;s Best Phoenix Force Hosts&quot; list, calling her one of the &quot;X-Men&#x27;s core characters,&quot; while George Marston ranked her 5th in their &quot;Best X-Men Members Of All Time&quot; list. &quot;IGN&quot; ranked Jean Grey 6th in their &quot;Top 25 X-Men&quot; list, her Dark Phoenix persona 9th in their &quot;Top 100 Comic Book Villains of All Time&quot; list, and 13th in their &quot;Top 100 Comic Book Heroes&quot; list, while Hilary Goldstein and Richard George of &quot;IGN&quot; said, &quot;Jean Grey is host to the most powerful entity in the universe. One of the original X-Men, Jean has become the symbol (and cruel joke) of death and rebirth among the mutant population. Partnered with the Phoenix Force, Jean has returned to the X-Men on several occasions. However, it&#x27;s her first death that remains both memorable and significant to X-Men lore. Jean sacrificed herself, choosing to die as a human than live as a God. In a universe where self-worth is almost exclusive judged on power level, Jean held her humanity so dear she was willing to give up everything she loved. The strong-willed redhead is an integral part of the X-Men&#x27;s legacy.&quot;

Gavia Baker-Whitelaw of &quot;The Daily Dot&quot; ranked Jean Grey 7th in their &quot;Top 33 Female Superheroes Of All Time&quot; list. Jordan St James of &quot;Collider&quot; ranked Jean Grey 8th in their &quot;10 Most Powerful Marvel Mutants&quot; list, saying, &quot;Jean Grey has gone from sweet-natured powerhouse to planet-destroying villainess to perpetual Lazarus figure.&quot; Lance Cartelli of &quot;GameSpot&quot; ranked Jean Grey 10th in their &quot;50 Most Important Superheroes&quot; list, writing, &quot;She is super important to the X-Men and to all of us.&quot; Matthew Aguilar of &quot;ComicBook.com&quot; wrote, &quot;While Charles Xavier put the X-Men together, there is one of his students who simply dwarfs all others when it comes to power and their effect on mutant history. That honor falls to one of his first students, Jean Grey, a powerful telepath in her own right who became part of the original five X-Men. She would later grow even more powerful though, setting up some of the X-Men&#x27;s most epic moments into motion. Over the years she&#x27;s undergone transformations not only in her skills and abilities but also regarding her costumes. She started out in the early days like everyone else, eventually adopting the Marvel Girl suit and persona. It fit her quieter nature at the time, but she would then adopt several looks over the years that changed according to her ever-evolving personality,&quot; while Lance Cartelli ranked her 16th in their &quot;50 Most Important Superheroes Ever&quot; list. Darren Franich of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; ranked Jean Grey 30th in their &quot;Let&#x27;s Rank Every X-Man Ever&quot; list. &quot;The A.V. Club&quot; ranked Jean Grey 60th in their &quot;100 Best Marvel Characters&quot; list.

Joe Garza of &quot;Slashfilm&quot; ranked Jean Grey 1st in their &quot;Most Powerful X-Men Characters&quot; list. Rachel Ulatowski of &quot;The Mary Sue&quot; ranked Jean Grey 1st in their &quot;10 Most Powerful X-Men of All Time&quot; list. &quot;Comics Buyer&#x27;s Guide&quot; ranked Jean Grey 3rd in their &quot;100 Sexiest Women in Comics&quot; list. Joshua Corvington of &quot;Sportskeeda&quot; ranked Jean Grey 6th in their &quot;10 Most Overpowered Superheroes In The Marvel Universe&quot; list.

&quot;Screen Rant&quot; included Jean Grey in their &quot;10 Female Marvel Heroes That Should Come To The MCU&quot; list, and ranked her 1st in their &quot;X-Men: The 10 Most Powerful Members Of The Summers Family&quot; list, 5th in their &quot;25 Most Powerful Mutants&quot; list. &quot;Comic Book Resources&quot; ranked Jean Grey 1st in their &quot;X-Men: The Strongest Members Of The Summers Family&quot; list, 1st in their &quot;X-Men: All Of Marvel&#x27;s Omega-Level Mutants, Ranked By Power&quot; list, 2nd in their &quot;10 Best Female X-Men Characters&quot; list, 2nd in their &quot;10 Most Attractive Marvel Heroes&quot; list, 3rd in their &quot;10 Strongest Female Villains&quot; list, and 5th in their &quot;10 Bravest Mutants in Marvel Comics&quot; list.

=== Impact ===
== Literary reception ==

=== Volumes ===

==== &quot;X-Men: The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; (1980) ====
David Caballero of &quot;Screen Rant&quot; stated, &quot;During the Silver and Bronze Ages of comic books, many Marvel teams had their obligatory female figure. The X-Men had Jean as Marvel Girl, the Fantastic Four had the Invisible Girl, and the Avengers had the Wasp. They provided considerable support to their men-dominated teams but never excelled in the same way their teammates did. By the 70s, more female characters were a part of the conversation, but they never took control of it. &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; changed the discourse by having a woman take the microphone, then blowing the roof and making the entire world her stage. The mightiest being in Marvel comics was a woman, a normally obedient female character who was finally letting loose. &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; did more for female heroes and villains with just a few numbers than an entire decade of comic book continuity.&quot; Tyler Huckabee of &quot;IGN&quot; included &quot;X-Men: The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; in their &quot;7 Best Jean Grey Comics&quot; list, stating, &quot;We begin at the end — one of the many that Jean Grey has endured during her time as an X-Man. It’s The Dark Phoenix Sagae how influential John Byrne and Chris Claremont’s 1980 epic is. It was, perhaps, the first superhero stoDark Phoenix Sagatalize on just how sweeping the medium could be, while never losing sight of the tender heart that beat at the center of all Claremont’s finest work. Every superhero story that came after &quot;The Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; is indebted to it in some way. Like any X-Man worth her salt, Jean’s story is a bit convoluted, and the &quot;Dark Phoenix Saga&quot; is a trippier ride than most, but Claremont keeps things clipping at an even pace that helps even the wildest plot twist go down easily. And more importantly, he centers the all-important romance between Cyclops and Jean Grey, leading to some profoundly moving moments. These moments are all captured exquisitely by legendary superhero artist John Byrne, who was as deft as crafting crackling fight scenes as he was with intimate confessions of love. Nearly forty years after its publication, it’s hardly a spoiler to say the Dark Phoenix ended with Jeans’ (first) (temporary) death, but what rose from the ashes was a whole new era for how grand comic books could be.&quot;

==== &quot;X-Men Origins: Jean Grey&quot; (2008) ====
According to Diamond Comic Distributors, &quot;X-Men Origins: Jean Grey&quot; #1 was the 85th best selling comic book in August 2008.

Michael Austin of &quot;Comic Book Resources&quot; asserted, &quot;This 2008 one-shot written by Sean McKeever was a true standout for the character. While the photorealism of the outwork is truly outstanding, it is the story that makes this comic great. As Jean&#x27;s childhood best friend, Annie, is hit by a car, her telepathic abilities manifest for the first time. Jean is forced to experience the final thoughts of her dying friend and is traumatized as a result. With Professor Xavier&#x27;s help, she works past her trauma and goes on to become a hero. The tragic, lifelike beauty of this story and illustration makes &quot;X-Men Origins: Jean Grey&quot; a stand-out among her many stories. It is a must-read for the character, as it helps inform both how she became such a powerful entity and what monsters she has lurking in the back of her mind.&quot; Jesse Schedeen of &quot;IGN&quot; gave &quot;X-Men Origins: Jean Grey&quot; #1 a grade of 7.5 out of 10, writing, &quot;Mostly, this issue is meant to appeal to fans of Mayhew&#x27;s art (of which I&#x27;m sure there are plenty) and those who really want Jean back in the X-books (no clue on that one). Those two groups will be satisfied, so I suppose that means mission accomplished.&quot;

==== &quot;Jean Grey&quot; (2017) ====
According to Diamond Comic Distributors, &quot;Jean Grey&quot; #1 was the 13th best selling comic book in May 2017. &quot;Jean Grey&quot; #2 was the 84th best selling comic book in May 2017.

Mya Nunnally of &quot;ComicsVerse&quot; gave &quot;Jean Grey&quot; #1 a score of 95%, stating, &quot;In a world where teenage girls get insulted endlessly for their music choice, their taste in movies, and their hobbies, we need Jean Grey. Specifically, we need &quot;Jean Grey&quot; #1, her new solo run written by Dennis Hopeless. In this comic, Jean is an unapologetic teenage girl. A silly, pretty, emotional, selfie-taking teenage girl. And that’s what makes her wonderful. Too often we see female superheroes stripping themselves of their identity to fit the mold of what a superhero should be. Maybe they wear completely ineffective armor. Or perhaps they’re essentially a male character with boobs. Maybe they try to be cold and distant and masculine so that they’re really just another testosterone bump to the already male team. [...] &quot;Jean Grey&quot; #1 ends in a crazy cliff-hanger, which I believe is how all first episodes should end. However, it’ll definitely be divisive. Some might see it as weak storytelling relying on previous Jean-related drama. But I thought it was a natural way to go and a good way to make sure readers want to continue reading. I’ll definitely keep up with this, even if it’s just to keep a character I love close to my heart. Jean Grey deserved better, and now here she is, getting it.&quot; Jesse Schedeen of &quot;IGN&quot; gave &quot;Jean Grey&quot;#1 a grade of 7 out of 10, asserting, &quot;Jean Grey seems like it&#x27;ll develop into a worthwhile addition to the growing ResurrXion lineup. The art is strong, and Dennis Hopeless shows a decent handle on the title character. Unfortunately, the series gets off to a needlessly slow start in this first issue, dwelling on an overlong battle with the Wrecking Crew rather than diving into the heart of Jean&#x27;s struggle.&quot;

==== &quot;Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey&quot; (2017) ====
According to Diamond Comic Distributors, &quot;Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey&quot; #1 was the 3rd best selling comic book in December 2017.

Joe Glass of &quot;Bleeding Cool&quot; wrote, &quot;Nothing with the Phoenix is ever easy and straightforward, but it is dramatic and fun, and Rosenberg has managed that tight rope expertly in this first issue. Yu&#x27;s artwork is great for the issue, too. There are some really creepy moments, which Yu draws well and manages to make it creepy to look at. We get to see a fairly big number of X-Men, and he gives each their own identity clearly and the story flows well. &quot;Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey #1&quot; is a really great, intriguing and bizarre start for this series, and it certainly has me hooked to see how this series will evolve.&quot; Jesse Schedeen of &quot;IGN&quot; gave &quot;Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey&quot; #1 a grade of 6.3 out of 10, writing, &quot;The prospect of having Jean Grey back as an active player in the X-Men franchise is plenty appealing, but Phoenix Resurrection only partly realizes that potential. When this issue focuses on the enigmatic status quo of this all-powerful mutant heroine, it makes for fascinating reading. But when the rest of the X-Men enter the picture, the book begins to drag. It doesn&#x27;t help that artist Leinil Yu struggles to make the most of the material. Hopefully this series can find its groove as it gets deeper into Jean&#x27;s latest return to life.&quot;

==== &quot;Giant-Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost&quot; (2020) ====
According to Diamond Comic Distributors, &quot;Giant Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost&quot; #1 was the 5th best selling comic book in February 2020. &quot;Giant Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost&quot; #1 was the 26th best selling comic book in 2020.

Matthew Aguilar of &quot;ComicBook.com&quot; stated, &quot;This story is a joy from beginning to end, but it also subtly hints at larger ramifications for not only Storm but every other mutant on the planet. Macro-level ideas regarding the soul, mutant resurrection, and the state of the mind are all explored in one way or another—anchored by the imminent danger to one of the X-Men&#x27;s most iconic faces, and it makes for one very compelling mix. Whether you&#x27;re looking for an entertaining adventure between two of your X-Men favorites, a thoughtful and action-packed journey through the mind, or another step forward in the evolution the X-Men, you&#x27;ll find all of it in &quot;Giant Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost&quot; #1. It is one of the most stunning one-shots on the market today. In short, don&#x27;t miss out on this issue; you&#x27;ll regret it.&quot; Mike Fugere of &quot;Comic Book Resources&quot; wrote, &quot;&quot;Giant-Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost&quot; #1 is an obvious tribute to an issue of Grant Morrison and Frank Quitely&#x27;s iconic run on &quot;New X-Men,&quot; but its tone is far less psychedelic and far more ethereal. There is a sense of peace throughout Storm&#x27;s mind, despite the horrific revelation that&#x27;s discovered by the end of the issue. How the various emotional avatars within our Omega-Level mutant&#x27;s mind interact with Jean and Emma are probably the most compelling part of this issue from a storytelling standpoint. It does a wonderful job at expressing emotions that are not always openly expressed between characters with conflicting ideologies with humor and a wonderful sense of whimsy.&quot;

== Other versions ==
===Time-displaced incarnation===
====All-New X-Men====
In &quot;All-New X-Men&quot;, present-day Beast goes to the past and brings a younger version of Jean to the present day along with the other original X-Men in hopes of helping the present-day Cyclops to see how far he&#x27;s fallen. This version has experienced a surge in her abilities due to the trauma of being brought to the future. The time travel also caused her suppressed telepathic powers to awaken much earlier in her life than they were supposed to. She also has a habit of reading people&#x27;s minds without their permission, to the great frustration of her team. During the &quot;Battle of the Atom&quot; crossover, a future version of this Jean Grey, who had never returned to the past and whose powers had grown beyond her control, would return to the present as Xorn, a member of the future Brotherhood of Mutants. Xorn perished during the battle, but in the process the X-Men also found out that there is something preventing the All-New X-Men from returning to the past. During this timeline, she reads the mind of current Beast, who regrets never admitting his feelings for her, so confronts younger Beast and gives him a kiss, which creates problems with the younger Cyclops. She and her team also leave the Jean Grey School for mutants and go to Cyclops&#x27;s school, where she forms a reluctant friendship with Emma Frost as she trains her psychic abilities.

====The Trial of Jean Grey====
Jean is later kidnapped by the Shi&#x27;ar and placed on trial for the destruction done by the Phoenix Force years earlier in a 2014 crossover storyline &quot;The Trial of Jean Grey&quot;. The All-New X-Men team up with the Guardians of the Galaxy to rescue Jean from the Shi&#x27;ar homeworld, but Jean awakens a new power that she never had, in which she is able to absorb massive amounts of psionic energy from others and combine her telepathy and telekinesis, which she used to defeat the powerful Gladiator, leader of the Shi&#x27;ar.

====Traveling to the Ultimate Universe====
While searching for new mutants, Jean and the All-New X-Men get teleported into the Ultimate Marvel universe. She teams up with Spider-Man (Miles Morales) to rescue Beast, who has been trapped by the local Doctor Doom. Before she is teleported back she gives Miles Morales a kiss. Upon their return to Earth 616, she and the All-New X-Men team up with the Guardians of the Galaxy a second time in search of The Black Vortex.

====Extraordinary X-Men====
Following the reconstruction of reality after the Battleworld crisis, Jean has parted ways from the rest of the time-displaced X-Men as she attempts to find her own life in the present by living a normal civilian life in College until Storm recruits her to join her new team of X-Men to help protect mutants from Terrigen. She mentions having broken up with Hank McCoy, considering him to be more of a brother. After the X-Men go to war against the Inhumans to destroy the Terrigen, Jean leaves Storm&#x27;s team and attempts to return to her original timeline along with the rest of the time-displaced X-Men but realizes that they&#x27;re not from the 616 timeline, leaving them stranded on Earth 616 with no idea which timeline they&#x27;re from. With this new knowledge that they are from an unknown alternate timeline, Jean becomes the time-displaced X-Men&#x27;s new leader and they quit the X-Men in hopes of finding their place in the current world.

====X-Men: Blue====
Jean ends up approached by Magneto, who offers her and her team to join him in preserving Xavier&#x27;s dream by defeating those who oppose it. Jean accepts and her team joins him, but in secret they train themselves in case Magneto ever reverts to his villainous roots to kill them.

====Phoenix premonition====
As part of the Marvel&#x27;s &quot;RessurXion&quot; event, Jean Grey received her first-ever solo series. While on a solo mission against the Wrecking Crew, Jean receives a vision that the Phoenix Force is coming back to Earth. She goes to the rest of the X-Men to warn them about her vision but as there haven&#x27;t been any Phoenix sightings since the X-Men went to war against the Avengers to decide the fate of the Phoenix, she has a hard time getting Beast, Captain Marvel, and Kitty Pryde to accept that her vision was real even though they assure her that if the Phoenix ever does return then the X-Men and Avengers will come together and do all they can to stop it. Jean feels even less taken seriously when Beast begins examining her for signs of delusional hallucinations. Jean then meets with other former Phoenix hosts Colossus, Magik, Rachel Summers, Hope Summers and Quentin Quire, where the latter uses his powers to show her how the aftereffects of bonding with the Phoenix Force has individually affected each of them. A meeting with Namor helps Jean come to the conclusion that she can refuse the Phoenix and even possibly defeat it. After meeting with Thor and training with Psylocke, Jean learns how to create telekinetic weapons to help with her impending battle against the Phoenix.

====Meeting Phoenix====
Jean ends up sent back in time for unknown reasons and ends up meeting that timeline&#x27;s Jean Grey shortly after she first becomes Phoenix. Time-displaced Jean attempts to ask Phoenix questions about the Phoenix Force but she dodges Jean&#x27;s questions. Instead Phoenix takes Jean for a night out and shows off her powers. After witnessing Phoenix use her cosmic powers to prevent Galactus from consuming a defenseless planet, Jean contemplates warning Phoenix of her fate until an encounter with The Watcher stops her from doing so. The Watcher commends Jean and tells her that choosing to not change her future means that her ultimate fate is in her own hands whether or not she ends up hosting the Phoenix Force back in her present. As Jean returns to her present, Phoenix cryptically states that they will meet again.

====Psych War====
Backed by a host of former Phoenix Force wielders, Emma Frost, Quentin Quire, Hope Summers, the Stepford Cuckoos and even the spirit of the adult Jean Grey, the teen Jean tries to defy destiny and stop the Phoenix before it can take her over and bend her to its will. With the Phoenix Force now on Earth, the team realizes it&#x27;s going to take a lot more than they have to stop it. And while the young Jean is able to wound the Phoenix with the aid of Cable&#x27;s Psi-mitar, the Phoenix seems just too strong for anyone to overcome. Teen Jean eventually managed to push the cosmic force far away from her friends and allies, where a final battle can take place. However, both Jean Greys learned how wrong they were, as the Phoenix was never coming for teen Jean, at least not like they believed. Actually, the Phoenix wants the adult Jean, but to do that it needs the young Jean out of the way. Thus, the force floods her body with flaming psychic energy, incinerating her from the inside out, leaving only a skeleton. This was done to resurrect the adult Jean Grey, which the Phoenix considers its one true host. However, after dying, the younger Jean found herself somehow in the White Hot Room despite not being a Phoenix host. Angry, the Phoenix attempted to destroy her using mental manifestations of its past hosts, created from pieces of their life forces left in the Room. Jean realized that she could control the White Hot Room against the Phoenix wishes and commanded the cosmic entity to resurrect her, which it did so in order to get rid of her. After returning to Madripoor, she was approached by her resurrected older Earth-616 counterpart, much to her surprise.

===1602===
In the &quot;Marvel 1602&quot; alternative universe miniseries, Jean Grey fakes her identity (and gender), posing as &quot;John Grey&quot;, a member of the &quot;Witchbreed&quot;. The group was led by Carlos Javier (the Charles Xavier of the 1602 universe). Like her Marvel Universe counterpart, Jean has telekinetic powers. Besides Javier and Nicholas Fury, the only one who knows of Jean&#x27;s deception is Scotius Summerisle (Scott Summers), who is attracted to her. &quot;John&quot; also has a close friendship with Werner (Angel) who only learns her true gender after she sacrifices her life for her comrades, during their battle against Otto Von Doom (Doctor Doom). Werner tells Scott that he was attracted to Jean, although he had thought that she was male. After her death, her friends gave her a burial at sea. When her corpse is cremated, the fire forms a giant Phoenix raptor before disappearing.

===Age of Apocalypse===
In the &quot;Age of Apocalypse&quot; storyline, Jean is a student of Magneto. She is forced to suppress her telepathic powers in order to escape from the Shadow King&#x27;s attacks. She eventually falls in love with fellow student, Weapon X. Jean is later kidnapped by Mr. Sinister, who offers her a place among his team. She refuses, and is sent to Sinister&#x27;s breeding pens. Weapon X rescues her, but not before Sinister extracted her DNA and combined it with that of Cyclops to engineer the perfect mutant, X-Man. Weapon X, and Jean leave the X-Men and join forces with the Human High Council. She learns of a plan to drop nuclear bombs on the United States to kill Apocalypse. She confronts Weapon X, then leaves him to try to stop the attack with the aid of Cyclops. She&#x27;s apparently killed at the hands of Cyclops&#x27; brother, Prelate Havok, before she can hold back the nuclear bombs with her telekinesis.

In the tenth-anniversary limited series, it is revealed that Jean was the one that stopped the nuclear attack from the Human High Council with the last of her powers. She was also &quot;resurrected&quot; by Sinister and began displaying Phoenix Force powers, known in this reality as &quot;Mutant Alpha&quot; abilities. Jean does not remember her old life at first, so Sinister manipulated her to create a new team to fight the X-Men, the Sinister Six. During the fight between the two teams, Logan is able to connect emotionally with Jean. She turns on Sinister and incinerates him. Jean and Logan reunite, and she becomes leader of the X-Men at Magneto&#x27;s behest.

===Amazing Spider-Man: Renew Your Vows===
In this continuity, she is married to Wolverine and is a co-director of education for Xavier&#x27;s School of Gifted Youngsters. The two have a daughter named Kate whom the others nickname &quot;Shine.&quot; It&#x27;s revealed that she broke up with Scott after he lost faith in Xavier&#x27;s vision when Xavier and the Avengers proposed self-policing of mutant and superhero kind with the Avengers to prevent the Superhuman Registration Act. When Xavier offers an invitation for Spider-Man and Mary-Jane&#x27;s daughter to enroll in their school, she tries to convince the couple that it&#x27;s the right decision.

===Days of Future Past===
In the timeline known as the &quot;Days of Future Past&quot;, Jean dies when Mastermind detonated a nuclear device at Pittsburgh, after she had given birth to her and Scott&#x27;s daughter, Rachel, a few months before. There are conflicting reports whether this Jean had been replaced by the Phoenix Force.

===Earth X===
The past of Jean Grey of Earth-9997/&quot;Earth X&quot; mirrors that of her Earth-616 counterpart. In recent history, Jean had once again lost her telepathic abilities— the circumstances behind her loss of this ability are as yet unrevealed. However, this would eventually spare Jean&#x27;s life when the psychic birth of the Skull resulted in the death of every telepathic being on the planet, killing Jean&#x27;s mentor Professor Xavier. Shortly after his death, the X-Men disbanded. Either prior to, or shortly after the disbanding of the X-Men, Jean would leave Cyclops after a long relationship to pursue a romance with Wolverine. However, Wolverine and Jean&#x27;s life would devolve into a New York stereotype of the bickering couple. Both would put on significant amounts weight and would resort to arguing with each other. When Wolverine would refuse to help the heroes defend New York from the Skull and his army, Jean would leave Wolverine in disgust, telling him that she was really Madelyne Pryor to rankle Wolverine even more. Jean would resurface years later at the wedding of Medusa and King Britain, which served as a brief reunion of the surviving members of the X-Men. Jean would eventually reconcile with Wolverine but the two would remain apart. Her current whereabouts are unknown.

===Marvel Mangaverse Jean Grey===
In the original&quot; Marvel Mangaverse X-Men&quot; and &quot;X-Men Ronin&quot; stories, Jean is a powerful telepath and telekinetic and calls herself Marvel Girl, but she also has access to the Phoenix Force. The three-issue &quot;X-Men: Phoenix – Legacy of Fire&quot; limited series, involves a separate character based on Jean Grey named &quot;Jena Pyre&quot;. Jena and her sister Madelyne are the guardians of the &quot;Phoenix Sword&quot;, whose power Jean absorbs. The miniseries depicts the lead characters in near-nudity. The series&#x27; rating was raised from PG to PG+ before issue #1 was released, and the series was moved to the MAX mature readers imprint for issues #2 and #3.

===Marvel Zombies 2===
Jean Grey as Dark Phoenix appears in the sequel to &quot;Marvel Zombies&quot;, now a member of the Zombie Galactus, or rather Galacti, alongside other heroes. The zombie Hulk punches through her body and squishes her head while she attempted to subdue him, thus killing her.

===Mutant X===
Jean&#x27;s history in the &quot;Mutant X&quot; universe is quite muddled. Under the name of Ariel, she was a founding member of the X-Men and in love with their leader, Havok. Some time later during a mission, Jean was believed dead and later on Havok married her lookalike, Madelyne Pryor, Jean&#x27;s clone. In reality, Jean was saved by Apocalypse and Magneto, and hidden from Professor X who was capturing all the telepaths in the world for his evil plans. When she re-surfaced, Jean was working together with Sinister and Apocalypse to recruit the aid of Havok&#x27;s new team, the Six, against an evil Xavier. That crisis having passed, Jean joined the Six, as Madelyne had been turned into the Goblin Queen and was no longer with them. Jean also mentioned having been in a relationship with Wolverine, and having worked with SHIELD for a while, though it was unclear where exactly these events fit in with her history and also whether Jean had access to the Phoenix Force.

===Amalgam Comics===
In the Amalgam Comics community, Jean Grey was combined with DC&#x27;s Fire to create Firebird. She was part of the JLX until the Dark Firebird Saga where she joined the Hellfire League of Injustice.

===Exiles===
On the Exiles&#x27;s second mission lands them in the middle of an alternative reality Dark Phoenix Saga. The team learns that in this world Jean actually is the Dark Phoenix, and they participate in the Shiar trial by combat, disguised as representatives of the world she destroyed. Their goal is to prevent the Shiar Imperial Guard from killing Jean before she can overcome the Dark Phoenix, however when Jean vaporizes Storm, Gladiator, and Cyclops, they realize that this version of Jean has lost herself to the Dark Phoenix and must die. They are able to overwhelm her momentarily, allowing Wolverine to get close enough to stab her through the heart, resulting in an explosion that kills her and vaporizes the moon and the Shiar ships orbiting it. The Exiles are removed from this reality, right before the blast.

===New Exiles===
After the &quot;New Exiles&quot; land on the world of warring empires, they encounter Dame Emma Frost, head of Britain&#x27;s Department X and founder of Force-X. This team includes John Grey, a male version of Jean who is codenamed Sunspot and displays telekinetic abilities.

===Red Queen===
A counterpart of Jean Grey from Earth-9575, who had most of her powers taken away for crimes unknown and for that reason it is not clear whether she had access to the Phoenix Force. Banished from her own universe, she ended up on Earth-998, where she pretended to be a reincarnation of the recently deceased Queen Madelyne. Jean then set out to become not only queen of Britain but of the entire world. To reach that goal and find a way of restoring her powers, she looked for the ultimate weapon across the multiverse: the various incarnations of Nate Grey. She lured many of them to her kingdom, though most of them died after having been used by her for a while. Queen Jean also traveled to the main 616 universe where she replaced Nate Grey&#x27;s companion, Madelyne Pryor, wormed her way into Nate&#x27;s mind, and returned to her world with him as her weapon. However, Nate broke free and fought against her, culminating in her draining the life-force of all her &quot;subjects&quot; in an attempt to use the power to kill him. He eventually kills her by creating a sun around her, burning her to death.

Ironically some time later, Madelyne Pryor herself would use the &quot;Red Queen&quot; moniker.

===Ruins===
A young prostitute in Washington, D.C., Jean was gunned down by Nick Fury after soliciting him in &quot;Marvel Ruins&quot; .

===Shadow-X===
New Excalibur battles an evil counterpart of Jean Grey, who is a member of the Shadow-X, the X-Men of an alternative reality in which Professor X was possessed by the Shadow King. They are brought to Earth-616 as a result of M-Day. This counterpart of Jean seemed to have access to the Phoenix Force too. In &quot;New Excalibur&quot; #24, she was stabbed in the shoulder with a broadsword by Petrie, one of Albion&#x27;s Shadow Captains (de-powered mutants given ability-enhancing suits). After beating him, she used her power to gain the knowledge necessary to deactivate the device Albion had used to nullify London&#x27;s supply of electricity. The energy required to perform this, as well as the blood loss caused by the stab wound, killed her.

===Ultimate Marvel===

In the Ultimate Marvel continuity, Jean Grey is a responsible, but extroverted young woman; scathingly sarcastic and a bit of a tease, and she secretly reads other people&#x27;s minds, particularly the other members of the X-Men. Early in the series, she has very short, cropped hair and dresses in punkish clothes. As she matures through both her studies and her role as an X-Man, she gradually shifts to more conservative outfits and grows out her hair to match the character&#x27;s classic style. She has a brief affair with Wolverine, but when Wolverine reveals he was sent to kill Professor X, Jean is angry and ends the relationship. She later begins to date Cyclops although she is occasionally frustrated by his shyness. Xavier found Jean Grey while she was in a mental hospital, having problems controlling her telepathy and having troublesome visions of a &quot;Phoenix raptor&quot;. It is established at the start of the series that her age is 19 and was Xavier&#x27;s second student after Cyclops.

The exact nature of the Phoenix in the Ultimate Universe has not been revealed, but very often Jean is haunted by visions and hallucinations of the Phoenix early in the Ultimate timeline. The powers seem to reveal themselves when Jean gets angry. It appears, due to tests conducted in Ultimate X-Men #71, that the Phoenix is an actual entity and not an uncovered aspect of Jean&#x27;s own mind. According to the Fire and Brimstone story arc, Jean&#x27;s Phoenix powers come from the Phoenix God, although Xavier does not believe this.

Jean kills many members of the Hellfire Club in a fit of Phoenix powered rage before Xavier calms her down. Much later in the story, Jean uses her Phoenix powers often. She starts with her powers out of her control due to her anger, accidentally killing two mercenaries who were attacking the X-Men. She feels guilty over the incident for weeks, but after a while, she manifests signs of the Phoenix, beginning to draw upon more and more of the residual Phoenix energies buried within her mind to help the X-Men on several occasions, combating Magneto and the deceptive and manipulative Magician. It has been revealed that Jean envisions imaginary tiny, green goblins carrying out her telekinetic activities.

When the man from the future, &quot;Cable&quot;, attacks the X-Men, he kidnaps Jean Grey, but she is later rescued by the X-Men and Bishop. After Professor X&#x27;s apparent death, Jean has become the headmistress of the school, along with Cyclops. She did not join Bishop&#x27;s new team of X-Men, but has assisted the team when needed, often butting heads with Cyclops over when to help and when not to help.

Further down the line, The X-Men hunt Sinister down, finding him in the Morlock tunnels slaughtering several Morlocks in order to reach his goal; to be reborn as Apocalypse. He has the power to control mutants and brings former X-Men Cyclops, Jean, Iceman, Rogue, and Toad to NYC for a giant survival battle royal. The Fantastic Four intercept Cyclops&#x27; team, where Sue Storm traps Jean in a force field, rendering her a mere spectator. Jean is broken free of the bubble when Professor X, able to walk, uses his telepathy to free her and the other reserve X-Men, leaving her to subdue the other team of X-Men and the Morlocks. She hesitantly calls for help when Apocalypse puts Xavier on the brink of death and the Phoenix Force responds, physically manifesting herself and merging with Jean to fight Apocalypse. Using her unimaginable powers, she brings Apocalypse to his knees and melts his armor. Having fully merged with the Phoenix, Jean reverts recent history, allowing the X-Men to remember. She then travels across the universe, causing war and suicide among different races. When she reaches her destination, the Silver Surfer arrives to warn her but she pushes on to find Heaven.

Jean later inexplicably turns up at the Mansion and resettles with the X-Men. When Alpha Flight kidnaps Northstar, Jean strives to push the X-Men to fight harder, especially when Cyclops leaves to protect Colossus, Rogue, Dazzler, and Angel, who were using Banshee to rescue Northstar. Unfortunately, they believe they&#x27;ve failed and become Banshee addicts. Jean leads her X-Men to deal with Colossus but falls into a trance, having visions of her father, who tells her not to push her friends to failure. She recovers Northstar, crippled from the waist down, and less aggressive. Everyone but Scott returns home, so Jean tracks him into space, where he is staring down at Earth, feeling omnipotent. Jean reminds him he&#x27;s in need, provoking him into attacking her. During the ensuing fight Banshee were wears off and Scott almost succumbs to vacuum. Jean encompassed him in her fire.

During the events of the Ultimate Marvel crossover event Ultimatum, Magneto&#x27;s Manhattan tidal wave kills Nightcrawler and Dazzler. Scott, Jean, and Logan go as the &quot;original X-Men&quot; to stop Magneto once and for all. The remaining X-Men along with the Fantastic Four, Ultimates, and SHIELD assault Magneto&#x27;s base, during which they lose several more members including Wolverine, who has his Adamantium ripped from his bones by Magneto. In the end Magneto is defeated when Jean downloads Nick Fury&#x27;s memories into Magneto, which reveals that mutants are not the next stage of human evolution, but rather a super-soldier experiment gone wrong. Horrified by the truth, Magneto surrenders, and Cyclops executes him with his optic blast.

Soon after, Jean is in Washington with the remaining X-Men, where Cyclops makes a speech, attempting to bring peace to the anti-mutant hostilities and to ask that all mutants surrender to the government. He is then assassinated by Quicksilver, who lodges a bullet into his skull, and declares his intention to reform the Brotherhood. Scott dies in the arms of Storm and Colossus, while Rogue rushes a distraught Jean to safety. Jean is later seen in &quot;Ultimate X-Men Requiem&quot; alongside Rogue and Iceman as they tear down the Xavier Institute and raze their mentor&#x27;s estate. They bury the bodies of the various deceased X-Men in unmarked graves on the estate grounds.

Jean then moves to Baltimore, changing her hair color to black and assuming the identity of &quot;Karen Grant&quot;. She takes a nondescript job managing a store at the Cherry Square Shopping Center, where her security guard boyfriend Dave works. Despite having only worked at the mall for four months, Jean uses her telepathy to alter the memories of her coworkers so that they believe she has worked there for three years.

Jean discovers that Dave has put her photo on Facebook without permission, making her angry and culminating in their separation. Mystique and Sabretooth then ambush Dave and kill him while torching Jean&#x27;s store. Meanwhile, while packing up to disappear, Jean meets the son of Wolverine, Jimmy, for the first time. Jean is later seen travelling with Jimmy to Chicago to recruit a mutant known as Derek Morgan, then to southern California to locate Liz Allan.

One night, Jimmy is attacked by Sabretooth. Jean had sought Bruce Banner for help and a fight ensues. Quicksilver then arrives with his newly formed Brotherhood of Mutant Supremacy but is defeated by Jean and her recruits. Nick Fury reveals that the team Jean made was part of the Xavier Protocols, and that he has been clandestinely helping mutants on the run from the government. To protect Jean&#x27;s followers, Fury enlists them in S.H.I.E.L.D. as a support group known as the Ultimate X.

Jean and her team are seen en route to the SEAR to aid Hawkeye. After witnessing the heaven created by the Xorn/Zorn brothers in Tian, the Ultimate X group deserts, deciding to remain there. Nick Fury reveals that Jean is using her telekinetic powers to make the brothers believe she is in Tian in order to have an &quot;inside man&quot; when she is really in America. However, a recent meeting between Karen and Zorn implies that she may be double crossing Fury, as she is physically in Tian as well as revealing her real identity as Jean Grey.

She sends a spy to keep tabs on what Kitty is up to with Reservation X, forming a wide Resistance in the pages of &quot;Ultimate Comics: X-Men&quot; consisting of past members like Iceman, Strom and Colossus.

===&quot;What If?&quot;===
In &quot;What If&quot; vol. 2 #27, Jean Grey was not the last X-Man standing during the fight with the Imperial Guard and was successfully &#x27;lobotomised&#x27;, remaining with the X-Men as mansion staff, eventually re-manifesting her powers when a mission to aid the Shi&#x27;ar forced the X-Men to fight Galactus so that Jean could drive him away. Although she appeared redeemed from her past, her Phoenix persona secretly manifested itself at night to feed on dead worlds and uninhabited stars until Jean was confronted about her actions, her resulting anger when discovered causing her to lash out and accidentally kill the X-Men, especially Cyclops, her guilt and grief result in her consuming the entire universe as the entire Phoenix was unleashed.

Another version of Phoenix remains powerless and happily married to Cyclops until an attack by Mastermind causes her to remember her true origin; she accidentally kills the original Jean Grey. Although Phoenix tries to help the X-Men in secret, she leaves Earth and her husband and child when Destiny tells her that only death and destruction would result if she remains on Earth.

In another story, Vulcan ends up inside the M&#x27;kraan Crystal instead of Professor X, and from there he gained the power of the Phoenix Force after entering the White Hot Room and killing all the Phoenix&#x27;s hosts. Using the Phoenix Force he destroys seven galaxies, the entire Annihilation Wave, the Shi&#x27;ar and Kree Empires before travelling to Earth. Using the Phoenix Force, he restores Krakoa before engaging in battle with Cyclops, Havok, Rachel and Cable. Vulcan appears to be winning until a strange outside force causes Vulcan to lose control of the Phoenix Force. After a brief mental battle between Vulcan and his family, Vulcan accepts his defeat by letting go of the rage and hate inside him as he dies. As the host of the Phoenix Force, Vulcan travels to the White Hot Room, where he reverts to the form of a child, and is comforted by the strange force who reveals to Gabriel that wielding the ultimate power would not give him what he truly wanted, which was the wish of being loved. The force then reveals herself to be Jean Grey, White Phoenix of the Crown. As she reclaims the power from Vulcan it&#x27;s revealed that it was Jean that had helped Rachel and Havok escape from the Shi&#x27;ar Empire by opening a teleportation portal to Earth before the Empire&#x27;s fall at the hands of Vulcan, and it was her that prevented Vulcan from fully accessing the Phoenix Force in Krakoa.

===X-Men Noir===
In &quot;X-Men Noir&quot;, Jean Grey is depicted as the grifter for the X-Men, a group of sociopathic teenagers recruited by Professor Charles Xavier. Adept at running scams, she had a reputation of controlling the minds of men. She is seemingly found murdered, covered in slash marks, in the opening of the series. It is revealed later, however, that the victim was in fact Anne-Marie Rankin, whom Jean switched places with in order to collect the millions Anne-Marie was to inherit. She is also revealed to be a complete sociopath, who does what she does not because of any past trauma, but because that&#x27;s just what she is. She then dies when she is tackled off the roof of a building by Robert Halloway.

===X-Men Forever===
In Chris Claremont&#x27;s &quot;X-Men Forever&quot;, Jean is in nearly all respects the same character as the mainline Marvel Universe character. Her flirtations with Logan are explored more in-depth in the first few issues of the title, and she confesses shortly after Logan&#x27;s death that she loved him. She and Scott both recognize their romantic relationship is over, due to the revelations. Claremont has also shown that Jean still possesses the Phoenix Force, and has manifested it twice, once in the first issue to subdue Fabian Cortez after he has apparently killed Logan and Kitty Pryde, and again to attack Storm in retaliation for her killing of Logan. She has, recently, been acknowledged as the field leader of the team during Cyclops&#x27; leave of absence. Jean continues to demonstrate signs of the Phoenix Force and wears a new blue and gold X-Men uniform which is cut in a similar style to her old Phoenix costume. After dealing with Logan&#x27;s loss Jean began a relationship with the Beast but it ended after he sacrificed himself. With Cyclops&#x27;s return, Jean began to share leadership of the X-Men with him and eventually she would be reunited with the true Storm. In the finale of the series, it is hinted that she and Scott resume their relationship.

===Prelude to Deadpool Corps===
In the second issue, Deadpool visits a world where Jean and Rogue are orphaned kids at an orphanage run by Emma Frost. There they go to a dance along with Prof. X&#x27;s Orphanage for Troubled kids. It seems at a young age she has a thing for Cyclops but tells him to wait 20 years.

===Battle of the Atom===
The Jean Grey of the future- established as the temporally-displaced young Jean Grey grown up- is depicted as a very powerful mutant who has to wear the Xorn mask to contain her powers, capable of removing it for only a few minutes before becoming dangerous to her environment. She is destroyed in a clash with the original five X-Men, including her younger self. Charles Xavier II, the new leader of the displaced Brotherhood, attempts to attack the team using a psychic illusion of Xorn, but this deception is exposed by the young Jean.

===X-Men: No More Humans===
When Raze – the future son of Wolverine and Mystique, now trapped in the present, attempted to force the X-Men to accept his new &#x27;status quo&#x27; by teleporting all humans off Earth and summoning other mutants from worlds where they were being oppressed, one of the mutants he summoned to be a member of his new Brotherhood was a Jean Grey who was still in her &#x27;Dark Phoenix&#x27; state, barely under the control of her world&#x27;s Mastermind. However, when she confronted the temporally-displaced Jean Grey, the younger Jean was able to appeal to her Dark Phoenix self to help them undo Raze&#x27;s actions and save the displaced humans while also creating a new Earth in a pocket dimension for the refugee mutants.

== In other media ==
==Collected editions==
===Phoenix===
===Jean Grey===
==See also==
* &quot;End of Greys&quot;, a story arc featured in the &quot;Uncanny X-Men&quot; comic book series.
* Rachel Summers, (also known as Rachel Grey) the daughter of the alternate future counterparts to Cyclops (Scott Summers) and Jean Grey. She inherited her mother&#x27;s telepathic and telekinetic powers and the code name Phoenix.

==References==
==External links==
* Phoenix (Jean Grey) at Marvel.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5350072" start="0" end="24" title="Jean Grey" label="Jean Elaine Grey-Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114502" start="53" end="72" title="American comic book" label="American comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="87" end="100" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="120" end="128" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="151" end="161" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563381" start="177" end="191" title="First appearance" label="first appeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399747" start="201" end="210" title="Uncanny X-Men" label="The X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094617" start="295" end="302" title="Mutant (Marvel Comics)" label="mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q220623" start="354" end="361" title="Psionics" label="psionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350072" start="407" end="418" title="Jean Grey" label="Marvel Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350072" start="420" end="427" title="Jean Grey" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350072" start="432" end="444" title="Jean Grey" label="Dark Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q127260161" start="636" end="654" title="Omega-level mutants" label="Omega-level mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q64398655" start="700" end="713" title="Phoenix Force (comics)" label="Phoenix Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q60349" start="809" end="830" title="The Dark Phoenix Saga" label="The Dark Phoenix Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q551989" start="845" end="855" title="Mastermind (Jason Wyngarde)" label="Mastermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q931597" start="1019" end="1034" title="Marvel Universe" label="Marvel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="1058" end="1063" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q857921" start="1087" end="1094" title="Cyclops (Marvel Comics)" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q838076" start="1125" end="1139" title="Professor X" label="Charles Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="1175" end="1180" title="Storm (Marvel Comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q258015" start="1207" end="1221" title="Rachel Summers" label="Rachel Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267017" start="1223" end="1228" title="Cable (comics)" label="Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265799" start="1230" end="1236" title="Stryfe" label="Stryfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602677" start="1241" end="1246" title="Nate Grey" label="X-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q19623" start="1331" end="1349" title="Shi&amp;#x27;ar Empire" label="Shi&amp;#x27;ar Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q60349" start="1574" end="1595" title="The Dark Phoenix Saga" label="The Dark Phoenix Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="1963" end="1974" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="1976" end="1984" title="animated" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="1985" end="2002" title="television series" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q190794" start="2021" end="2034" title="Famke Janssen" label="Famke Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="2078" end="2094" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006869" start="2095" end="2118" title="X-Men (film series)" label="&amp;quot;X-Men&amp;quot; films"/>
<link wikidata="Q240573" start="2126" end="2139" title="Sophie Turner" label="Sophie Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399747" start="2268" end="2277" title="Uncanny X-Men" label="The X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="2323" end="2331" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="2353" end="2363" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="2527" end="2538" title="psychokinesis" label="telekinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="2585" end="2594" title="telepathy" label="telepathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="2611" end="2620" title="retroactive continuity" label="retconned"/>
<link wikidata="Q631369" start="2690" end="2705" title="Chris Claremont" label="Chris Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q902536" start="2731" end="2743" title="Dave Cockrum" label="Dave Cockrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q475618" start="2753" end="2763" title="John Byrne (comics)" label="John Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q60349" start="3852" end="3873" title="The Dark Phoenix Saga" label="The Dark Phoenix Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643429" start="3972" end="3988" title="superhero comics" label="superhero comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="4089" end="4104" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q896903" start="4415" end="4436" title="Round table (discussion)" label="roundtable discussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068062" start="4480" end="4492" title="Jim Salicrup" label="Jim Salicrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q469794" start="4497" end="4509" title="Louise Simonson" label="Louise Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405559" start="4521" end="4533" title="Terry Austin (comics)" label="Terry Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q631369" start="4739" end="4754" title="Chris Claremont" label="Chris Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="4994" end="4998" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207095" start="5030" end="5042" title="The Avengers (comic book)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476318" start="5604" end="5615" title="Jim Shooter" label="Jim Shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="6183" end="6189" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="6816" end="6822" title="retcon" label="retcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7708" end="7719" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="8095" end="8102" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q971041" start="8429" end="8440" title="Kurt Busiek" label="Kurt Busiek"/>
<link wikidata="Q721268" start="8779" end="8790" title="Roger Stern" label="Roger Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907736" start="8919" end="8929" title="Bob Layton" label="Bob Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677338" start="8941" end="8954" title="Jackson Guice" label="Jackson Guice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211423" start="8993" end="9001" title="X-Factor (comics)" label="X-Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584217" start="9099" end="9106" title="Dazzler (Marvel Comics)" label="Dazzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000508" start="11588" end="11598" title="prolicide" label="prolicidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="12822" end="12827" title="Storm (Marvel Comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071805" start="12994" end="13004" title="Apocalypse (comics)" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q106182" start="13668" end="13673" title="X-Men (film)" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q973050" start="13980" end="13988" title="Betsy Braddock" label="Psylocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041482" start="14107" end="14120" title="X-Men Forever" label="X-Men Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994601" start="14138" end="14152" title="Fabian Nicieza" label="Fabian Nicieza"/>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="14525" end="14539" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q302186" start="14604" end="14609" title="Beast (comics)" label="Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995969" start="14622" end="14632" title="Emma Frost" label="Emma Frost"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15249" end="15273" title="X-Men: Phoenix – Endsong" label="X-Men: Phoenix – Endsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992698" start="15291" end="15299" title="Greg Pak" label="Greg Pak"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="15321" end="15340" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15810" end="15832" title="X-Men: Messiah Complex" label="X-Men: Messiah Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398372" start="15868" end="15872" title="Hope Summers (comics)" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15960" end="15980" title="X-Men: Second Coming" label="X-Men: Second Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q76790" start="16107" end="16125" title="Avengers vs. X-Men" label="Avengers vs. X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043766" start="16147" end="16158" title="Marvel NOW!" label="Marvel NOW!"/>
<link wikidata="Q302186" start="16281" end="16286" title="Beast (comics)" label="Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033729" start="16307" end="16320" title="All-New X-Men" label="All-New X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q720012" start="16330" end="16350" title="Brian Michael Bendis" label="Brian Michael Bendis"/>
<link wikidata="Q99776207" start="16553" end="16570" title="Matthew Rosenberg (writer)" label="Matthew Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229194" start="16583" end="16600" title="Leinil Francis Yu" label="Leinil Francis Yu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16627" end="16640" title="Extermination (comic s)" label="Extermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809926" start="16755" end="16771" title="Jonathan Hickman" label="Jonathan Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589353" start="16918" end="16922" title="Dr. John Grey (comics)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589353" start="16927" end="16938" title="Elaine Grey" label="Elaine Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589353" start="16965" end="16981" title="Sara Grey-Bailey" label="Sara Grey-Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="17012" end="17024" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="17028" end="17044" title="upstate New York" label="upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q857921" start="17998" end="18005" title="Cyclops (Marvel Comics)" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q60349" start="19188" end="19209" title="The Dark Phoenix Saga" label="The Dark Phoenix Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q741279" start="20123" end="20137" title="Madelyne Pryor" label="Madelyne Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152098" start="20368" end="20382" title="Fantastic Four" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q226077" start="21210" end="21217" title="Inferno (Marvel Comics)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q302534" start="21416" end="21431" title="Mister Sinister" label="Mister Sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q258015" start="22217" end="22231" title="Rachel Summers" label="Rachel Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q510450" start="22554" end="22574" title="Susan Storm Richards" label="Susan Storm Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602677" start="23876" end="23887" title="Nate Grey" label="Nathan Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296652" start="24027" end="24033" title="Bishop (comics)" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772543" start="24118" end="24126" title="war room" label="war room"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075745" start="24323" end="24332" title="Onslaught (Marvel Comics)" label="Onslaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764832" start="24430" end="24437" title="Gateway (comics)" label="Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639150" start="24557" end="24563" title="Gambit (Marvel Comics)" label="Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737565" start="24569" end="24576" title="Bastion (comics)" label="Bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q973050" start="25917" end="25925" title="Betsy Braddock" label="Psylocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361279" start="25956" end="25971" title="Moira McTaggert" label="Moira McTaggert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603976" start="26199" end="26208" title="Excalibur (comics)" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q938034" start="26214" end="26221" title="X-Force (comics)" label="X-Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q865017" start="26276" end="26289" title="Mister Fantastic" label="Reed Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="26812" end="26816" title="Bruce Banner" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q929273" start="27075" end="27086" title="Quicksilver (comics)" label="Quicksilver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071805" start="27239" end="27249" title="Apocalypse (comics)" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267017" start="27512" end="27526" title="Cable (comics)" label="Nathan Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995969" start="28312" end="28322" title="Emma Frost" label="Emma Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297125" start="28831" end="28835" title="Xorn (comics)" label="Xorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035490" start="29144" end="29160" title="Here Comes Tomorrow" label="dystopian future"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202575" start="29270" end="29277" title="Sublime (Marvel Comics)" label="Sublime"/>
<link wikidata="Q64398655" start="29755" end="29769" title="White hot room" label="White Hot Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="30233" end="30243" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398372" start="31228" end="31240" title="Hope Summers (comics)" label="Hope Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342183" start="31531" end="31543" title="Nightcrawler (comics)" label="Nightcrawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613591" start="31618" end="31631" title="Amanda Sefton" label="Amanda Sefton"/>
<link wikidata="Q186422" start="31658" end="31667" title="Wolverine (character)" label="Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q858901" start="34301" end="34315" title="Cassandra Nova" label="Cassandra Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q111812442" start="34716" end="34729" title="Quiet Council of Krakoa" label="Quiet Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q127260161" start="35609" end="35627" title="Omega-level mutant" label="Omega-level mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q64398655" start="35698" end="35711" title="Phoenix Force (comics)" label="Phoenix Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429836" start="35748" end="35756" title="Galactus" label="Galactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="36146" end="36166" title="telepathy" label="telepathic abilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q838076" start="36176" end="36200" title="Professor X" label="Professor Charles Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="36293" end="36316" title="psychokinesis" label="psychokinetic abilities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36441" end="36451" title="List of alien races in Marvel Comics#Z" label="Z&amp;#x27;Nox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="36724" end="36731" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="36734" end="36737" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="36744" end="36749" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q386001" start="36799" end="36813" title="eidetic memory" label="eidetic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q973050" start="37049" end="37057" title="Betsy Braddock" label="Psylocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q48444" start="37203" end="37211" title="phoenix (mythology)" label="firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q973050" start="37392" end="37404" title="Crimson Dawn" label="Crimson Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q973050" start="39041" end="39049" title="Betsy Braddock" label="Psylocke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41714" end="41724" title="Jean Grey#Psych War" label="Psych Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41978" end="41984" title="Symbiote (comics)#Weaknesses" label="Poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608065" start="42886" end="42897" title="ComicsVerse" label="ComicsVerse"/>
<link wikidata="Q60349" start="43396" end="43425" title="The Dark Phoenix Saga" label="&amp;quot;Dark Phoenix Saga&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="43855" end="43875" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="44854" end="44865" title="Screen Rant" label="Screen Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228108" start="45741" end="45755" title="ComicsAlliance" label="ComicsAlliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508472" start="46658" end="46666" title="Sideshow Collectibles" label="Sideshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="47386" end="47390" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760671" start="48862" end="48873" title="Scary Mommy" label="Scary Mommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774753" start="48993" end="49002" title="Newsarama" label="Newsarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="49289" end="49292" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="49569" end="49572" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986493" start="50293" end="50306" title="The Daily Dot" label="The Daily Dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q126730672" start="50424" end="50432" title="Collider (website)" label="Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="50673" end="50681" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q24075231" start="50867" end="50880" title="ComicBook.com" label="ComicBook.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="51825" end="51845" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="51940" end="51953" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q573998" start="52056" end="52065" title="/Film" label="Slashfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505371" start="52177" end="52189" title="The Mary Sue" label="The Mary Sue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684349" start="52285" end="52310" title="Comics Buyer&amp;#x27;s Guide" label="Comics Buyer&amp;#x27;s Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q120644228" start="52420" end="52431" title="Sportskeeda" label="Sportskeeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="52548" end="52559" title="Screen Rant" label="Screen Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="52830" end="52850" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="53452" end="53463" title="Screen Rant" label="Screen Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="54370" end="54373" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026083" start="55837" end="55863" title="Diamond Comic Distributors" label="Diamond Comic Distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="55983" end="56003" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="56847" end="56850" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026083" start="57267" end="57293" title="Diamond Comic Distributors" label="Diamond Comic Distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608065" start="57468" end="57479" title="ComicsVerse" label="ComicsVerse"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="58810" end="58813" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026083" start="59367" end="59393" title="Diamond Comic Distributors" label="Diamond Comic Distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130081" start="59530" end="59543" title="Bleeding Cool" label="Bleeding Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="60207" end="60210" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026083" start="60965" end="60991" title="Diamond Comic Distributors" label="Diamond Comic Distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q24075231" start="61235" end="61248" title="ComicBook.com" label="ComicBook.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="62112" end="62132" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033729" start="62975" end="62988" title="All-New X-Men" label="All-New X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q15730848" start="63561" end="63579" title="Battle of the Atom" label="Battle of the Atom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63746" end="63750" title="Xorn#Battle of the Atom" label="Xorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q514974" start="63775" end="63797" title="Brotherhood of Mutants" label="Brotherhood of Mutants"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64196" end="64224" title="X-Mansion#Post X-Men: Schism" label="Jean Grey School for mutants"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64235" end="64256" title="Uncanny X-Men#2013–2015: Volume 3" label="Cyclops&amp;#x27;s school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545790" start="64606" end="64629" title="Guardians of the Galaxy (2008 team)" label="Guardians of the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890491" start="65050" end="65065" title="Ultimate Marvel" label="Ultimate Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q59826" start="65094" end="65120" title="Spider-Man (Miles Morales)" label="Spider-Man (Miles Morales)"/>
<link wikidata="Q430178" start="65172" end="65183" title="Doctor Doom" label="Doctor Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627579" start="65373" end="65389" title="The Black Vortex" label="The Black Vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363451" start="65470" end="65488" title="Secret Wars (2015 comic book)" label="Battleworld crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="65655" end="65660" title="Storm (Marvel comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656903" start="65686" end="65732" title="Extraordinary X-Men" label="new team of X-Men to help protect mutants from"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858350" start="65733" end="65741" title="Terrigen" label="Terrigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28312343" start="65847" end="65901" title="Inhumans vs. X-Men" label="go to war against the Inhumans to destroy the Terrigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325529" start="66746" end="66756" title="RessurXion" label="RessurXion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659940" start="66853" end="66866" title="Wrecking Crew (comics)" label="Wrecking Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q76790" start="67062" end="67138" title="Avengers vs. X-Men" label="the X-Men went to war against the Avengers to decide the fate of the Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q302186" start="67168" end="67173" title="Beast (comics)" label="Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q726756" start="67175" end="67189" title="Carol Danvers" label="Captain Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q547306" start="67195" end="67206" title="Kitty Pryde" label="Kitty Pryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q60002" start="67543" end="67551" title="Colossus (comics)" label="Colossus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651308" start="67553" end="67558" title="Magik" label="Magik"/>
<link wikidata="Q258015" start="67560" end="67574" title="Rachel Summers" label="Rachel Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398372" start="67576" end="67588" title="Hope Summers (comics)" label="Hope Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q250443" start="67593" end="67606" title="Quentin Quire" label="Quentin Quire"/>
<link wikidata="Q613067" start="67763" end="67768" title="Namor" label="Namor"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="67883" end="67887" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q973050" start="67906" end="67914" title="Betsy Braddock" label="Psylocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429836" start="68428" end="68436" title="Galactus" label="Galactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q615226" start="68544" end="68555" title="The Watcher (comics)" label="The Watcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555261" start="70594" end="70605" title="Marvel 1602" label="Marvel 1602"/>
<link wikidata="Q975100" start="70925" end="70938" title="Nick Fury" label="Nicholas Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q857921" start="71011" end="71024" title="Cyclops (Marvel Comics)" label="Scott Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q430178" start="71240" end="71251" title="Doctor Doom" label="Doctor Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274103" start="71528" end="71545" title="Age of Apocalypse" label="Age of Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="71584" end="71591" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585469" start="71669" end="71680" title="Shadow King" label="Shadow King"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71747" end="71755" title="Alternative versions of Wolverine#Age of Apocalypse" label="Weapon X"/>
<link wikidata="Q302534" start="71784" end="71796" title="Mister Sinister" label="Mr. Sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602677" start="72029" end="72034" title="Nate Grey" label="X-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="72166" end="72179" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071805" start="72188" end="72198" title="Apocalypse (comics)" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72359" end="72372" title="Havok (comics)#Age of Apocalypse" label="Prelate Havok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691866" start="72447" end="72479" title="Age of Apocalypse (limited series)" label="tenth-anniversary limited series"/>
<link wikidata="Q64398655" start="72677" end="72690" title="Phoenix Force (comics)" label="Phoenix Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q467204" start="73831" end="73850" title="Days of Future Past" label="Days of Future Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q551989" start="73873" end="73883" title="Mastermind (Jason Wyngarde)" label="Mastermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="73914" end="73924" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q603822" start="74160" end="74167" title="Earth X" label="Earth X"/>
<link wikidata="Q838076" start="74540" end="74551" title="Professor X" label="Professor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778174" start="75479" end="75496" title="Marvel Mangaverse" label="Marvel Mangaverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q741279" start="75841" end="75849" title="Madelyne Pryor" label="Madelyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841218" start="76099" end="76102" title="MAX (comics)" label="MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q260234" start="76229" end="76243" title="Marvel Zombies" label="Marvel Zombies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429836" start="76278" end="76286" title="Galactus" label="Galactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="76342" end="76346" title="Hulk" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943698" start="76496" end="76504" title="Mutant X (comics)" label="Mutant X"/>
<link wikidata="Q452873" start="77473" end="77487" title="Amalgam Comics" label="Amalgam Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q967180" start="77537" end="77541" title="Fire (comics)" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195295" start="77552" end="77560" title="Firebird (Amalgam Comics)" label="Firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="77687" end="77693" title="Exiles" label="Exiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q834240" start="77999" end="78013" title="Imperial Guard (Marvel Comics)" label="Imperial Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602677" start="79360" end="79369" title="Nate Grey" label="Nate Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q741279" start="79575" end="79589" title="Madelyne Pryor" label="Madelyne Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q975100" start="80097" end="80106" title="Nick Fury" label="Nick Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378796" start="80137" end="80149" title="Ruins (comics)" label="Marvel Ruins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80174" end="80187" title="Excalibur (comics)#New Excalibur (2005–2007)" label="New Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460419" start="80253" end="80261" title="Shadow-X" label="Shadow-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585469" start="80341" end="80352" title="Shadow King" label="Shadow King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246088" start="80374" end="80383" title="Earth-616" label="Earth-616"/>
<link wikidata="Q721927" start="80399" end="80404" title="Decimation (comics)" label="M-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597794" start="80488" end="80501" title="New Excalibur" label="New Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80581" end="80587" title="Albion (Bran Bardic)" label="Albion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80595" end="80610" title="Shadow Captains" label="Shadow Captains"/>
<link wikidata="Q721927" start="80612" end="80622" title="Decimation (comics)" label="de-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890491" start="80954" end="80969" title="Ultimate Marvel" label="Ultimate Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81475" end="81484" title="Alternative versions of Wolverine#Ultimate Wolverine" label="Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81533" end="81544" title="Alternative versions of Professor X#Ultimate Charles Xavier" label="Professor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q64398655" start="82441" end="82452" title="Phoenix Force (comics)" label="Phoenix God"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83038" end="83045" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)#Ultimate Marvel" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253735" start="83081" end="83089" title="Magician (comics)" label="Magician"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83240" end="83245" title="Wolverine (Ultimate Marvel character)#Other versions" label="Cable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83336" end="83342" title="Bishop (comics)#Ultimate Bishop" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="84802" end="84808" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q281762" start="84894" end="84906" title="Alpha Flight" label="Alpha Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q251321" start="84915" end="84924" title="Northstar (Marvel Comics)" label="Northstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606714" start="85762" end="85771" title="Ultimatum (Ultimate Marvel)" label="Ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="87163" end="87172" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="87616" end="87624" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410619" start="87862" end="87867" title="James Hudson (comics)" label="Jimmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="87933" end="87940" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132203" start="88022" end="88031" title="Liz Allan" label="Liz Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297125" start="88636" end="88645" title="Xorn" label="Xorn/Zorn"/>
<link wikidata="" start="89196" end="89218" title="Ultimate Comics: X-Men" label="Ultimate Comics: X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429836" start="89621" end="89629" title="Galactus" label="Galactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051111" start="90365" end="90372" title="Destiny (Irene Adler)" label="Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597757" start="91893" end="91903" title="X-Men Noir" label="X-Men Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="91940" end="91947" title="Confidence trick" label="grifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q838097" start="92259" end="92276" title="Rogue (X-Men)" label="Anne-Marie Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="92407" end="92416" title="Psychopathy" label="sociopath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92579" end="92594" title="Angel (Thomas Halloway)#Other versions" label="Robert Halloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q631369" start="92620" end="92635" title="Chris Claremont" label="Chris Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041482" start="92649" end="92662" title="X-Men Forever" label="X-Men Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q64398655" start="93071" end="93084" title="Phoenix Force (comics)" label="Phoenix Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063514" start="93149" end="93162" title="Fabian Cortez" label="Fabian Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="Q547306" start="93204" end="93215" title="Kitty Pryde" label="Kitty Pryde"/>
<link wikidata="" start="93237" end="93242" title="Alternative versions of Storm#X-Men: Forever" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631090" start="93954" end="93962" title="Deadpool" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q838097" start="93993" end="93998" title="Rogue (comics)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995969" start="94040" end="94050" title="Emma Frost" label="Emma Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399747" start="95635" end="95647" title="End of Greys" label="End of Greys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399747" start="95689" end="95702" title="Uncanny X-Men" label="Uncanny X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q258015" start="95730" end="95744" title="Rachel Summers" label="Rachel Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="95794" end="95810" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="alternate future"/>
<link wikidata="Q857921" start="95827" end="95834" title="Cyclops (Marvel Comics)" label="Cyclops"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16563" wikidata="Q645673" url="?curid=16563" title="Jacques Dupuis (Jesuit)">
<text>Jacques Dupuis (5 December 1923 – 28 December 2004) was a Belgian Jesuit priest and theologian. He spent several decades in India and taught at the Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome.

==Career==

Jacques Dupuis became a Jesuit in 1941. After early religious and academic training in Belgium, he left for India in 1948. A three-year (1948–1951) teaching experience at St. Xavier&#x27;s Collegiate School, Calcutta, made him discover the way Hinduism shaped the personalities of the students entrusted to him. This discovery about the variety of religions was the beginning of a lifelong search: &quot;does God&#x27;s self-revelation necessarily pass for all through the person of Jesus Christ?&quot;

After being ordained priest in Kurseong, India he completed a doctorate at the Gregorian University in Rome on the religious anthropology of Origen of Alexandria. He was assigned to teach Dogmatic Theology at the Jesuit Faculty of Theology of Kurseong (later shifted to Delhi, and renamed &#x27;Vidyajyoti College of Theology&#x27;).

Director of the journal &quot;Vidyajyoti Journal of Theological Reflection,&quot; Father Dupuis was also an adviser to the Catholic Bishops&#x27; conference of India. Besides numerous articles on theological and inter-religious topics, he published in 1973 (with Josef Neuner) a collection of church documents, &quot;The Christian Faith&quot;, that went into seven editions over twenty years. Some considered it an invaluable instrument of theological learning for students of Catholicism.

In 1984, after 36 years in India, Dupuis was called to teach theology and non-Christian religions at the Gregorian University in Rome. His book &quot;Jésus-Christ à la rencontre des religions&quot; (1989) was well-received and promptly translated in Italian, English and Spanish. He was made director of the journal &quot;Gregorianum&quot; and appointed consultor at the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue.

==Under investigation==

In 2001, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, a department of the Roman Curia, determined that his book &quot;Toward a Christian Theology of Religious Pluralism&quot; contained ambiguities that present &quot;difficulties on important doctrinal points&quot; with respect to the proper understanding of &quot;the seeds of truth and goodness that exist in other religions.&quot; Even a positive reviewer, Gavin D&#x27;Costa, noted that in Depuis&#x27;s argument, &quot;there is no &#x27;necessity&#x27; (Lumen Gentium 14) of the Church as the mediator of salvation.&quot;

Dupuis was told to clarify his position in relation to that document, but he was never disciplined. Future editions of his book had to include a copy of the Congregation&#x27;s notification about areas in which it considered his work unclear. A visitor reported in 2003 that &quot;the ordeal he went through with the C.D.F. had caused havoc to his mental and physical health.&quot; The notification stated: &quot;It is consistent with Catholic doctrine to hold that the seeds of truth and goodness that exist in other religions are a certain participation in truths contained in the revelation of or in Jesus Christ. However, it is erroneous to hold that such elements of truth and goodness, or some of them, do not derive ultimately from the source-mediation of Jesus Christ.&quot;

Subsequently, however, Dupuis&#x27;s &#x27;pioneering&#x27; work was highly praised on the meaning of other religions in &quot;God&#x27;s plan of salvation of mankind.&quot;

== Christology ==
Many theologians argue for a Christology that is expressly based on the Trinity and an understanding of the interpersonal relationships between Father and Son and between Son and Holy Spirit. In Jacques Dupuis&#x27; &quot;Who Do You Say I Am?&quot;, he argues that, within the one person of Jesus Christ, we can distinguish between his two natures, human and divine, and thus between the operations of his uncreated divine nature and his created finite human nature.

In order to properly phrase the relationship between Jesus Christ and the Father, Dupuis utilizes different terms to describe aspects of Christ&#x27;s divine and human nature. Instead of &quot;absolute&quot; and &quot;definitive&quot;, Dupuis speaks in terms of &quot;constitutive&quot; and &quot;universal&quot;. In this way, Dupuis tries to lead the discussion away from dealing in absolutes.
Dupuis emphasizes that Jesus&#x27; constitutive uniqueness as universal Savior rests on his personal identity as the Son of God.

==See also==
*Religious pluralism
*Religious exclusivism
*Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus

== Bibliography ==
* &quot;The Christian Faith&quot;, Alba House New York (1973) .
* &quot;Jesus-Christ at the encounter of World Religions&quot; (1991).
* &quot;Who do you say I am ? Introduction to Christology&quot; (1994).
* &quot;Towards a Christian Theology of Religious Pluralism&quot; (1997).
* &quot;Christianity and the religions&quot; (2002).
* Kendall, Daniel (2003). O&#x27;Collins, Gerald (eds), &quot;In many and diverse ways: In Honor of Jacques Dupuis&quot; (2003). Includes a complete bibliography of Depuis&#x27;s work.
* Gerard O&#x27;Connell, &quot;Do not stifle the Spirit; Conversations with Jacques Dupuis&quot;, New York (Maryknoll), Orbis Books, 2017.

== External links ==
* Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, &quot;Dominus Iesus: On the Unicity and Salvific Universality of the Jesus Christ and the Church&quot; (2000) 
* See Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, &quot;Notification on the book &quot;Toward a Christian Theology of Religious Pluralism&quot; (Orbis Books: Maryknoll, New York 1997) by Father Jacques Dupuis, S.J.&quot;: 
* Jacques Dupuis, SJ, RELIGIOUS PLURALITY AND THE CHRISTOLOGICAL DEBATE, 1990.
* Documentation pertaining to the case of Fr. Jacques Dupuis, S.J. - National Catholic Reporter (US)

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645673" start="0" end="14" title="Jacques Dupuis (Jesuit)" label="Jacques Dupuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="58" end="65" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="66" end="72" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q467025" start="148" end="179" title="Pontifical Gregorian University" label="Pontifical Gregorian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="289" end="296" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="310" end="315" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983685" start="373" end="408" title="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s Collegiate School" label="St. Xavier&amp;#x27;s Collegiate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="410" end="418" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="446" end="454" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="685" end="697" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025634" start="737" end="745" title="Kurseong" label="Kurseong"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="847" end="867" title="Origen of Alexandria" label="Origen of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="903" end="911" title="Theology" label="Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="919" end="925" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928197" start="1001" end="1031" title="Vidyajyoti College of Theology" label="Vidyajyoti College of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1518" end="1529" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="1990" end="2032" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="2054" end="2065" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528119" start="2390" end="2408" title="Gavin D&amp;#x27;Costa" label="Gavin D&amp;#x27;Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3161" end="3166" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="3564" end="3575" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002426" start="4542" end="4561" title="Religious pluralism" label="Religious pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311357" start="4563" end="4584" title="Religious exclusivism" label="Religious exclusivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q971965" start="4586" end="4613" title="Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus" label="Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760870" start="4994" end="5016" title="Gerald O&amp;#x27;Collins" label="O&amp;#x27;Collins, Gerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266813" start="5849" end="5875" title="National Catholic Reporter" label="National Catholic Reporter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16564" wikidata="Q2125" url="?curid=16564" title="Jack Brabham">
<text>Sir John Arthur &quot;Jack&quot; Brabham (2 April 1926 – 19 May 2014) was an Australian racing driver and motorsport executive, who competed in Formula One from to . Brabham won three Formula One World Drivers&#x27; Championship titles, which he won in , and , and won 14 Grands Prix across 16 seasons. He co-founded Brabham in 1960, leading the team to two World Constructors&#x27; Championship titles, and remains the only driver to have won the World Drivers&#x27; Championship in an eponymous car.

Brabham was a Royal Australian Air Force flight mechanic and ran a small engineering workshop before he started racing midget cars in 1948. His successes with midgets in Australian and New Zealand road racing events led to his going to Britain to further his racing career. There he became part of the Cooper Car Company&#x27;s racing team, building as well as racing cars. He contributed to the design of the mid-engined cars that Cooper introduced to Formula One and the Indianapolis 500, and won the Formula One world championship in 1959 and 1960. In 1962 he established his own Brabham marque with fellow Australian Ron Tauranac, which in the 1960s became the largest manufacturer of custom racing cars in the world. In the 1966 Formula One season Brabham became the only man to win the Formula One world championship driving one of his own cars. At the time of his death, he was the last surviving World Champion of the 1950s.

Brabham retired to Australia after the 1970 Formula One season, where he bought a farm and maintained business interests, which included the Engine Developments racing engine manufacturer and several garages.

==Early life==
John Arthur &#x27;Jack&#x27; Brabham was born on 2 April 1926 in Hurstville, New South Wales, then a commuter town outside Sydney. Brabham was involved with cars and mechanics from an early age. At the age of 12, he learned to drive the family car and the trucks of his father&#x27;s grocery business. Brabham attended technical college, studying metalwork, carpentry, and technical drawing.

Brabham&#x27;s early career continued the engineering theme. At the age of 15 he left school to work, combining a job at a local garage with an evening course in mechanical engineering. Brabham soon branched out into his own business selling motorbikes, which he bought and repaired for sale, using his parents&#x27; back veranda as his workshop.

One month after his 18th birthday on 19 May 1944 Brabham enlisted into the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). Although he was keen on becoming a pilot, there was already a surplus of trained aircrew and the Air Force instead put his mechanical skills to use as a flight mechanic, of which there was a wartime shortage. He was based at RAAF Station Williamtown, where he maintained Bristol Beaufighters at No. 5 Operational Training Unit. On his 20th birthday, 2 April 1946, Brabham was discharged from the RAAF with the rank of leading aircraftman. He then started a small service, repair, and machining business in a workshop built by his uncle on a plot of land behind his grandfather&#x27;s house.

==Racing career==

===Australia===

Brabham started racing after an American friend, Johnny Schonberg, persuaded him to watch a midget car race. Midget racing was a category for small open-wheel cars racing on dirt ovals. It was popular in Australia, attracting crowds of up to 40,000. Brabham records that he was not taken with the idea of driving, being convinced that the drivers &quot;were all lunatics&quot; but he agreed to build a car with Schonberg.

At first Schonberg drove the homemade device, powered by a modified JAP motorcycle engine built by Brabham in his workshop. In 1948, Schonberg&#x27;s wife persuaded him to stop racing and on his suggestion Brabham took over. He almost immediately found that he had a knack for the sport, winning on his third night&#x27;s racing. From there he was a regular competitor and winner in Midgets (known as Speedcars in Australia) at tracks such Sydney&#x27;s Cumberland Speedway, the Sydney Showground, and the Sydney Sports Ground, as well as interstate tracks such as Adelaide&#x27;s Kilburn and Rowley Park speedways and the Ekka in Brisbane. Brabham has since said that it was &quot;terrific driver training. You had to have quick reflexes: in effect you lived—or possibly died—on them.&quot; Due to the time required to prepare the car, the sport also became his living. Brabham won the 1948 Australian Speedcar Championship, the 1949 Australian and South Australian Speedcar championships, and the 1950–1951 Australian championship with the car.

After successfully running the midget at some hillclimbing events in 1951, Brabham became interested in road racing. He bought and modified a series of racing cars from the Cooper Car Company, a British constructor, and from 1953 concentrated on this form of racing, in which drivers compete on closed tarmac circuits. He was supported by his father and by the Redex fuel additive company, although his commercially aware approach—including the title &quot;RedeX Special&quot; painted on the side of his Cooper-Bristol—did not go down well with the Confederation of Australian Motor Sport (CAMS), which banned the advertisement. Brabham competed in Australia and New Zealand until early 1955, taking &quot;a long succession of victories&quot;, including the 1953 Queensland Road Racing championship. During this time, he picked up the nickname &quot;Black Jack&quot;, which has been variously attributed to his dark hair and stubble, to his &quot;ruthless&quot; approach on the track, and to his &quot;propensity for maintaining a shadowy silence&quot;. After the 1954 New Zealand Grand Prix, Brabham was persuaded by Dean Delamont, competitions manager of the Royal Automobile Club in the United Kingdom, to try a season of racing in Europe, then the international centre of road racing.

===Europe===

====Cooper====

Upon arriving in Europe on his own in early 1955, Brabham based himself in the UK, where he bought another Cooper to race in national events. His crowd-pleasing driving style initially betrayed his dirt track origins: as he put it, he took corners &quot;by using full [steering] lock and lots of throttle&quot;. Visits to the Cooper factory for parts led to a friendship with Charlie and John Cooper, who told the story that after many requests for a drive with the factory team, Brabham was given the keys to the transporter taking the cars to a race. Brabham soon &quot;seemed to &quot;merge&quot; into Cooper Cars&quot;: he was not an employee, but he started working at Cooper daily from the midpoint of the 1955 season building a Bobtail mid-engined sports car, intended for Formula One, the top category of single seater racing. He made his Grand Prix debut at the age of 29 driving the car at the 1955 British Grand Prix. It had a 2-litre engine, half a litre less than permitted, and ran slowly with a broken clutch before retiring. Later in the year Brabham, again driving the Bobtail, tussled with Stirling Moss for third place in a non-championship Formula One race at Snetterton. Although Moss finished ahead, Brabham saw the race as a turning point, proving that he could compete at this level. He shipped the Bobtail back to Australia, where he used it to win the 1955 Australian Grand Prix before selling it to help fund a permanent move to the UK the following year with his wife Betty and their son Geoff.

Brabham briefly and unsuccessfully campaigned his own second hand Formula One Maserati 250F during 1956, but his season was saved by drives for Cooper in sports cars and Formula Two, the junior category to Formula One. At that time, almost all racing cars had their engines mounted at the front but Coopers were different, having the engine placed behind the driver, which improved their handling. In 1957, Brabham drove another mid-engined Cooper, again only fitted with a 2-litre engine, at the Monaco Grand Prix. He avoided a large crash at the first corner and was running third towards the end of the race when the fuel pump mount failed. After more than three hours of racing, the exhausted Brabham, who &quot;hated to be beaten&quot;, pushed the car to the line to finish sixth. The following year, he was Autocar Formula Two champion in a Cooper, while continuing to score minor points-scoring positions with the small-engined Coopers in the World Drivers&#x27; Championship and driving for Aston Martin in Sportscars. His schedule necessitated a considerable amount of travel on the roads of Europe. Brabham&#x27;s driving on public roads was described as &quot;safe as houses&quot;, unlike many of his contemporaries—on the way back from the 1957 Pescara Grand Prix, passenger Tony Brooks took over driving after Brabham refused to overtake a long line of lorries. In late 1958, Brabham rekindled his interest in flying and began taking lessons. He bought his own plane and on gaining his licence began to make heavy use of it piloting himself, his family, and members of his team around Europe to races.

In 1959, Cooper obtained 2.5-litre engines for the first time and Brabham put the extra power to good use by winning his first world championship race at the season-opening Monaco Grand Prix after Jean Behra&#x27;s Ferrari and Stirling Moss&#x27;s Cooper failed. More podium places were followed by a win in the British Grand Prix at Aintree after Brabham preserved his tyres to the end of the race, enabling him to finish ahead of Moss who had to pit to replace worn tyres. This gave him a 13-point championship lead with four races to go. At the Portuguese Grand Prix at Monsanto Park, Brabham was chasing race leader Moss when a backmarker moved over on him and launched the Cooper into the air. The airborne car hit a telegraph pole, throwing Brabham onto the track, where he narrowly avoided being hit by one of his teammates but escaped with no serious injury. With two wins each, Brabham, Moss, and Ferrari&#x27;s Tony Brooks were all capable of winning the championship at the final event of the season, the United States Grand Prix at Sebring. Brabham was among those up until 1 am the morning before the race working on the Cooper team cars. The next day, after pacing himself behind Moss, who soon retired with a broken gearbox, he led almost to the end of the race before running out of fuel on the last lap. He again pushed the car to the finish line to place fourth, although in the event this was unnecessary as his other title rival, Brooks, finished only third. His championship-winning margin over Brooks was four points. According to Gerald Donaldson, &quot;some thought [his title] owed more to stealth than skill, an opinion at least partly based on Brabham&#x27;s low-key presence.&quot;

Despite his success with Cooper, Brabham was sure he could do better. He considered buying Cooper in partnership with Roy Salvadori and then in late 1959 he asked his friend Ron Tauranac to come to the UK and work with him, producing upgrade kits for Sunbeam Rapier and Triumph Herald road cars at his car dealership, Jack Brabham Motors, but with the long-term aim of designing racing cars. Brabham continued to drive for Cooper, but on the long flight back from the 1960 season-opening Argentine Grand Prix, he had a heart-to-heart with John Cooper. John&#x27;s father Charlie and the designer Owen Maddock had been reluctant to update their car, but although a Cooper had won in Argentina, other cars had been faster before they broke down. Brabham helped design the more advanced Cooper T53, including advice from Tauranac. Brabham spun the new car out of the next championship race, the Monaco Grand Prix, but then embarked on a series of five straight victories. He won from the front at the Dutch, French, and Belgian Grands Prix, where title rival Moss was badly injured in a practice accident that put him out for two months. Two other drivers were killed during the race. At the British Grand Prix, Brabham was closing on Graham Hill&#x27;s BRM before Hill spun off, leaving Brabham the victory. He then came back from eighth place to second at the Portuguese Grand Prix after sliding off on tramlines and won after race leader John Surtees crashed. Brabham&#x27;s points total was put out of reach when the British teams withdrew from the Italian GP on safety grounds. Mike Lawrence writes that Brabham&#x27;s expertise in setting up the cars was a significant factor in Cooper&#x27;s 1960 drivers&#x27; and constructors&#x27; titles.

Coventry Climax were late in producing the smaller 1.5-litre engine required for the 1961 season and the Cooper-Climaxes were outclassed by new mid-engined cars from Porsche, Lotus, and championship-winners Ferrari. Brabham scored only three points and finished 11th in the championship. He had a little more success in the non-championship Formula One races, where he ran his own private Coopers and took three victories at Snetterton (26 March), Brussels (9 April), and Aintree (22 April).

The same year, Brabham entered the famous Indianapolis 500 oval race for the first time in a modified version of the Formula One Cooper. It had a 2.7-litre Climax engine producing compared to the 4.4-litre, Offenhauser engines used by the front-engined roadsters driven by all the other entrants. Jack qualified a respectable 17th at 145.144 mp/h (pole winner Eddie Sachs qualified at 147.481 mp/h), and while the front-engined roadsters were much faster on the long front and back straights, the rear-engined Cooper&#x27;s superior handling through the turns and the shorter north and south sections kept the reigning World Champion competitive. Brabham ran as high as third before finishing ninth, completing all 200 laps. Although most of the doubters in the American Indycar scene claimed that rear-engine cars were for drivers who like to be pushed around, as Brabham put it, it &quot;triggered the rear-engined revolution at Indy&quot; and within five years most of the cars that raced at Indianapolis would be rear-engined.

====Brabham====

Brabham and Tauranac set up a company called Motor Racing Developments (MRD), which produced customer racing cars, while Brabham himself continued to race for Cooper. MRD produced cars for Formula Junior, with the first one appearing in mid-1961. Brabham left Cooper in 1962 to drive for his own team: the Brabham Racing Organisation, using cars built by Motor Racing Developments. A newly introduced engine limit in Formula One of 1500 cc did not suit Brabham and he did not win a single race with a 1500 cc car. His team suffered poor reliability during this period and motorsport authors Mike Lawrence and David Hodges have said that Brabham&#x27;s reluctance to spend money may have cost the team results, a view echoed by Tauranac. During the 1965 season, Brabham started to consider retirement to manage his team. Dan Gurney, who had taken the team&#x27;s first championship race win the previous year, took the lead driver role while Brabham gave up his car to several other drivers towards the end of the season. At the end of the season, Gurney announced his intention to leave and set up his own team and Brabham decided to carry on.

In 1966, a new 3-litre formula was created for Formula One. The new engines under development by other suppliers all had at least 12 cylinders and proved difficult to develop, being heavy and unreliable. Brabham took a different approach to the problem of obtaining a suitable engine: he persuaded Australian engineering company Repco to develop a new 3-litre eight-cylinder engine for him. Repco had no experience in designing complete engines. Brabham had identified a supply of suitable engine blocks obtained from Oldsmobile&#x27;s aluminium alloy 215 engine and persuaded the company that an engine could be designed around the block, largely using existing components. Brabham and Repco were aware that the engine would not compete in terms of outright power, but felt that a lightweight, reliable engine could achieve good championship results while other teams were still making their new designs reliable.

The combination of the Repco engine, designed by Phil Irving, and the Brabham BT19 chassis designed by Tauranac worked. At the French Grand Prix at Reims-Gueux, Jack Brabham took his first Formula One world championship win since 1960 and became the first man to win such a race in a car of his own construction. Only his two former teammates, Bruce McLaren and Dan Gurney, have since matched this achievement. It was the first in a run of four straight wins for the Australian veteran. The 40-year-old Brabham was annoyed by press stories about his age and, in a highly uncharacteristic stunt, at the Dutch Grand Prix he hobbled to his car on the starting grid before the race wearing a long false beard and leaning on a cane before going on to win the race. Brabham confirmed his third championship at the Italian Grand Prix and became the only driver to win the Formula One World Championship in a car that carried his own name.

The season also saw the fruition of Brabham&#x27;s relationship with Japanese engine manufacturer Honda in Formula Two. After a generally unsuccessful season in 1965, Honda revised their 1-litre engine completely. Brabham won ten of the year&#x27;s 16 European Formula Two races in his Brabham-Honda. There was no European Formula Two championship that year, but Brabham won the &quot;Trophées de France&quot;, a championship consisting of six of the French Formula Two races.

In 1967, the Formula One title went to Brabham&#x27;s teammate Denny Hulme. Hulme had better reliability through the year, possibly due to Brabham&#x27;s desire to try new parts first.

Despite taking pole position in the first two rounds, mechanical problems halted his chances of victory. He spun numerous times in South Africa, and at Monaco, his engine blew up at the start, and the win went to his teammate Denny Hulme. At the Dutch Grand Prix, he scored his first podium of the season, with second place, behind Scotsman Jim Clark. He retired in the Belgian Grand Prix with another blown engine. He fixed this by winning the French Grand Prix at the Bugatti Circuit in Le Mans. He came fourth at the British Grand Prix, behind Chris Amon, his teammate Hulme, and Clark. At the German Grand Prix, he had a huge battle with Amon, and Brabham eventually finished ahead of the New Zealander, by only half a second. Hulme was the winner. At the first ever Canadian Grand Prix at Mosport Park, he took a huge win, ahead of Hulme, in cold and rainy conditions. At the Italian Grand Prix at Monza, Brabham had to finish second, only a few car lengths behind John Surtees, who took his last GP win. Hulme retired from the race, cutting the gap to 3 points between the two, as the circus headed for the United States, at Watkins Glen for the United States Grand Prix. Brabham outqualified his teammate, and finished fifth in the race, and with Hulme on the podium, this meant the championship chances were looking slim for Black Jack, as the circus went to Mexico for the championship deciding and final race of the season. Once again, he outqualified his teammate, and needed to win, with Hulme fifth or lower. But Jim Clark was simply too fast during the whole weekend, and dominated the race from pole to win, with Brabham finishing over 1 minute and 25 seconds behind. Hulme finished third, and so the New Zealander won the championship, while Brabham settled for second place. The team secured the Constructors&#x27; Championship, with 67 total points scored, and 23 points ahead of Lotus which scored a total of 44 points.

Brabham raced alongside his teammate Jochen Rindt during the 1968 season. It wasn&#x27;t a good season for him. He retired from the first seven races, before scoring two points for fifth place at the German Grand Prix. He retired from the remaining four races. At the end of the year, he fulfilled a desire to fly from Britain to Australia in a small twin-engined Beechcraft Queen Air. Partway through the 1969 season, Brabham suffered serious injuries to his foot in a testing accident. He returned to racing before the end of the year, but promised his wife that he would retire after the season finished and sold his share of the team to Tauranac.

Finding no top drivers available despite coming close to bringing Rindt back to the team, Brabham decided to race for one more year. He began auspiciously, winning the first race of the season, the South African Grand Prix, and then led the third race, the Monaco Grand Prix until the very last turn of the last lap. Brabham was about to hold off the onrushing Rindt (the eventual 1970 F1 champion) when his front wheels locked in a skid on the sharp right turn only yards from the finish and he ended up second. While leading at the British Grand Prix at Brands Hatch, he ran out of fuel at Clearways and Rindt passed him to take the win while Brabham coasted to the finish in second place. After the 13th and final race of the season, the Mexican Grand Prix, Brabham did retire. He had tied Jackie Stewart for fifth in the points standings in the season he drove at the age of 44. Brabham also drove for the works Matra team during the 1970 World Sportscar Championship season and won the final race of the season and his final top level race at the Paris 1000 km in October that year. He then made a complete break from racing and returned to Australia, to the relief of his wife who had been &quot;scared stiff&quot; each time he drove.

==Retirement==

Following his retirement, Brabham and his family moved to a farm between Sydney and Melbourne. Brabham says that he &quot;never really wanted&quot; the move, but his wife Betty hoped their sons could grow up away from motorsport. As well as running the new venture, he continued his interest in businesses in the UK and Australia, including a small aviation company and garages and car dealerships. He also set up Engine Developments Ltd. in 1971 with John Judd, who had worked for Brabham on the Repco engine project in the mid 1960s. The company builds engines for racing applications. Brabham was also a shareholder in Jack Brabham Engines Pty Ltd., an Australian company marketing Jack Brabham memorabilia.

The Brabham team continued in Formula One, winning two further Drivers&#x27; Championships in the early 1980s under Bernie Ecclestone&#x27;s ownership. Although the original organisation went into administration in 1992, the name was attached to a German company selling cars and accessories in 2008, and an unsuccessful attempt to set up a new Formula One team the following year. On both occasions the Brabham family, which was unconnected to the ventures, announced its intention to take legal advice. In September 2014, Brabham&#x27;s youngest son David announced Project Brabham, a new team planning to use a crowdsourcing business model to enter the 2015 FIA World Endurance Championship in the LMP2 category.

During his own retirement from international motorsport, Brabham continued to be semi-involved as both a driver in Australia, mostly racing touring cars in the famed Bathurst 1000 race, and supporting the racing ambitions of his 3 sons. His last ever international race came in December 1984 at the age of 58 in the last round of the 1984 World Sportscar Championship held at Sandown Park in Melbourne, the 1984 Sandown 1000. Jack drove as a guest driver in a Rothmans sponsored Porsche 956 co-driving with 1984 British Formula 3 champion and Scottish Aristocrat, Johnny Dumfries. The pair, driving a car with an in-car camera showing Jack up close and personal at the wheel for the first time, were not classified as finishers after only completing 108 laps. The race was Australia&#x27;s first ever FISA World Championship road racing event, preceding the 1985 Australian Grand Prix in Adelaide by 11 months.

Despite his three titles, and although John Cooper considered him &quot;the greatest&quot;, Formula One journalist Adam Cooper wrote in 1999 that Brabham is never listed among the Top 10 of all time, noting that &quot;Stirling Moss and Jim Clark dominated the headlines when Jack was racing, and they still do&quot;. Brabham was the first post-war racing driver to be knighted when he received the honour in 1978 for services to motorsport. He has received several other honours and in 2011, the suburb of Brabham in Perth, Western Australia, was named after him. A race circuit and an automotive training school were also named after him in the early 2010s.
In retirement, Brabham continued to be involved in motorsport events, appearing at contemporary and historic motorsport events around the world where he often drove his former Cooper and Brabham cars until the early 2000s. In 1999, after competing at the Goodwood Revival at the age of 73 he commented that driving stopped him getting old. Despite a large accident at the 2000 Revival, the first racing accident to put him in hospital overnight, he continued to drive until at least 2004. By the late 2000s, ill-health was preventing him from driving in competition. In addition to the deafness caused by years of motor racing without adequate ear protection, his eyesight was reduced due to macular degeneration and he had kidney disease for which by 2009 he was receiving dialysis three times a week. Nonetheless, that year he attended a celebration of the 50th anniversary of his first world championship at the Phillip Island Classic festival of motorsport, and in 2010 flew to Bahrain with most of the other Formula One world Drivers&#x27; Champions for a celebration of 60 years of the Formula One world championship. Brabham was the oldest surviving F1 champion.

Brabham and Betty had three sons together: Geoff, Gary, and David. All three became involved in motorsport, with support from Brabham in their early years. Between them, they have won sportscar and single-seater races and championships. Geoff was an Indycar and sportscar racer who won five North American sportscar championships as well as the 24 Hours of Le Mans, while David competed in Formula One for the Brabham team and has also won the Le Mans race as well as three Japanese and North American sportscar titles. Gary also drove briefly in Formula One, although his F1 career consisted of two DNPQ&#x27;s for the Life team. Brabham and Betty divorced in 1994 after 43 years. Brabham married his second wife, Margaret in 1995 and they lived on the Gold Coast, Queensland. Brabham&#x27;s grandson Matthew (son of Geoff) graduated from karts in 2010 and won two ladders of the Road to Indy, eventually racing in the 2016 Indianapolis 500 and winning three Stadium Super Trucks championships. Another grandson, Sam, the son of David and Lisa, whose brother Mike also was an F1 driver, stepped up to car racing from karts in 2013 when he made his debut in the British Formula Ford Championship. The Brabham family have been involved in world-class motorsport for over 60 years.

==Death==
Brabham made his last public appearance on 18 May 2014, appearing with one of the cars he built. He died at his home on the Gold Coast on 19 May 2014, aged 88, following a lengthy battle with liver disease. He was eating breakfast with his wife, Margaret, when he died. In a statement on the family&#x27;s website, Brabham&#x27;s son David confirmed his father&#x27;s death.

&quot;It&#x27;s a very sad day for all of us&quot;, David Brabham stated. &quot;My father passed away peacefully at home at the age of 88 this morning. He lived an incredible life, achieving more than anyone would ever dream of and he will continue to live on through the astounding legacy he leaves behind.&quot;

Brabham was the last surviving world champion from the 1950s era.

At his request, his ashes were scattered at the Tamborine Rainforest Skywalk in the Gold Coast hinterland on 4 September 2014. Brabham was a frequent visitor of the skywalk.

==Honours and awards==
* Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE; for services to international motor-car racing, 1966)
* Australian of the Year (1966)
* Knight Bachelor (for distinguished service to the sport of motor racing, 1979)
* Inductee, Sport Australia Hall of Fame (1985, elevated to Legend status in 2003)
* Inductee, International Motorsports Hall of Fame (1990)
* Australian Sports Medal (2000)
* Centenary Medal (2001)
* Officer of the Order of Australia (AO; for service to motor sport as an ambassador, mentor and promoter of safety, and to the community through support of charitable organisations, 2008)
* Inductee, Australian Speedway Hall of Fame (2011)
* Named a National Living Treasure (2012)

==Racing record==

===Career summary===
===Complete Formula One World Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
:&quot;* Indicates shared drive with Mike MacDowel&quot;
:&quot;† Indicates Formula 2 car&quot;

=== Formula One non-championship results ===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete Tasman Series results===
===Complete World Sportscar Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)
===Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results===
===Indianapolis 500 results===
===Complete British Saloon Car Championship results===
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap.)

† Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.

===Complete Bathurst 1000 results===
==Notes==
==References==

===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* 
* 

* Jack Brabham statistics
* Interactive Jack Brabham Statistics – compare Jack with other F1 drivers
* Official Australian website 
* Official US website
* Clip of Desert Island Discs appearance 19 December 1966 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2125" start="0" end="15" title="Jack Brabham" label="Sir John Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125" start="22" end="26" title="Jack Brabham" label="Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125" start="33" end="40" title="Jack Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="88" end="101" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="106" end="116" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="144" end="155" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172863" start="184" end="235" title="Formula One World Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship titles" label="Formula One World Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q179371" start="272" end="283" title="Formula One Grands Prix" label="Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="317" end="324" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q177410" start="358" end="402" title="World Constructors&amp;#x27; Championship titles" label="World Constructors&amp;#x27; Championship titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="487" end="496" title="eponymous" label="eponymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="517" end="543" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q16816896" start="615" end="633" title="midget car racing" label="racing midget cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="805" end="823" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="956" end="967" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="976" end="992" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q69118" start="1040" end="1044" title="1959 Formula One season" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q69146" start="1049" end="1053" title="1960 Formula One season" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q173614" start="1124" end="1136" title="Ron Tauranac" label="Ron Tauranac"/>
<link wikidata="Q69220" start="1232" end="1255" title="1966 Formula One season" label="1966 Formula One season"/>
<link wikidata="Q47225" start="1476" end="1499" title="1970 Formula One season" label="1970 Formula One season"/>
<link wikidata="Q171982" start="1578" end="1597" title="Judd (engine)" label="Engine Developments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496549" start="1727" end="1754" title="Hurstville, New South Wales" label="Hurstville, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="2478" end="2504" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q955268" start="2738" end="2762" title="RAAF Base Williamtown" label="RAAF Station Williamtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q831463" start="2784" end="2803" title="Bristol Beaufighter" label="Bristol Beaufighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043653" start="2808" end="2839" title="No. 5 Operational Training Unit RAAF" label="No. 5 Operational Training Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508751" start="2931" end="2950" title="leading aircraftman" label="leading aircraftman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16816896" start="3233" end="3243" title="Midget car racing" label="midget car"/>
<link wikidata="Q173712" start="3632" end="3635" title="JA Prestwich Industries Ltd" label="JAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618400" start="4018" end="4037" title="Parramatta Stadium" label="Cumberland Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660142" start="4043" end="4060" title="Sydney Showground Speedway" label="Sydney Showground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373761" start="4070" end="4090" title="Sydney Sports Ground" label="Sydney Sports Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="4129" end="4137" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406612" start="4145" end="4152" title="Kilburn Speedway" label="Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372242" start="4157" end="4168" title="Rowley Park Speedway" label="Rowley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925642" start="4187" end="4191" title="Brisbane Exhibition Ground" label="Ekka"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="4195" end="4203" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824697" start="4451" end="4488" title="Australian Speedcar Championship" label="1948 Australian Speedcar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917552" start="4514" end="4530" title="South Australian Speedcar Championship" label="South Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q820141" start="4658" end="4670" title="hillclimbing" label="hillclimbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404296" start="4716" end="4727" title="road racing" label="road racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="4785" end="4803" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159800" start="5161" end="5200" title="Confederation of Australian Motor Sport" label="Confederation of Australian Motor Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113923" start="5681" end="5703" title="New Zealand Grand Prix" label="New Zealand Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445883" start="5773" end="5794" title="Royal Automobile Club" label="Royal Automobile Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q173814" start="6320" end="6331" title="John Cooper (car maker)" label="John Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="6687" end="6697" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="6712" end="6723" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q306172" start="6836" end="6859" title="1955 British Grand Prix" label="1955 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="7040" end="7053" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585125" start="7112" end="7122" title="Snetterton Motor Racing Circuit" label="Snetterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870" start="7315" end="7336" title="Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009304" start="7448" end="7453" title="Geoff Brabham" label="Geoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q173741" start="7534" end="7547" title="Maserati 250F" label="Maserati 250F"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="7610" end="7621" title="Sports car racing" label="sports cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="7626" end="7637" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q417760" start="7953" end="7970" title="1957 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="8455" end="8467" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424206" start="8708" end="8731" title="1957 Pescara Grand Prix" label="1957 Pescara Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171481" start="8743" end="8754" title="Tony Brooks (racing driver)" label="Tony Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194474" start="8955" end="8962" title="Pilot licensing in the United Kingdom" label="licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q69118" start="9075" end="9079" title="1959 Formula One season" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q417811" start="9245" end="9262" title="1959 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172250" start="9269" end="9279" title="Jean Behra" label="Jean Behra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="9299" end="9312" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q306249" start="9384" end="9402" title="1959 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q513822" start="9620" end="9641" title="1959 Portuguese Grand Prix" label="Portuguese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q595242" start="10088" end="10112" title="1959 United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173614" start="10957" end="10969" title="Ron Tauranac" label="Ron Tauranac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472978" start="11034" end="11048" title="Sunbeam Rapier" label="Sunbeam Rapier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858584" start="11053" end="11067" title="Triumph Herald" label="Triumph Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q69146" start="11251" end="11262" title="1960 Formula One season" label="1960 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q12455" start="11271" end="11291" title="1960 Argentine Grand Prix" label="Argentine Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114556" start="11379" end="11391" title="Owen Maddock" label="Owen Maddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q174103" start="11567" end="11577" title="Cooper T53" label="Cooper T53"/>
<link wikidata="Q417837" start="11675" end="11692" title="1960 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q423570" start="11781" end="11786" title="1960 Dutch Grand Prix" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q221338" start="11788" end="11794" title="1960 French Grand Prix" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q20884" start="11800" end="11819" title="1960 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q306274" start="11972" end="11990" title="1960 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q513942" start="12142" end="12163" title="1960 Portuguese Grand Prix" label="Portuguese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q728943" start="12185" end="12194" title="Tramway track" label="tramlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q69161" start="12615" end="12626" title="1961 Formula One season" label="1961 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q63929540" start="12696" end="12703" title="Porsche in Formula One" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570369" start="12955" end="12965" title="1961 Lombank Trophy" label="Snetterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349283" start="12978" end="12986" title="1961 Brussels Grand Prix" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570264" start="13002" end="13009" title="1961 Aintree 200" label="Aintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q173726" start="13023" end="13036" title="1961 Indianapolis 500" label="The same year"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="13065" end="13081" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q173571" start="13230" end="13241" title="Offenhauser" label="Offenhauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q828170" start="13276" end="13285" title="Roadster (automobile)" label="roadsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q172472" start="13383" end="13394" title="Eddie Sachs" label="Eddie Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172732" start="14018" end="14030" title="Indianapolis Motor Speedway" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437637" start="14261" end="14275" title="Formula Junior" label="Formula Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q69204" start="14820" end="14831" title="1965 Formula One season" label="1965 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="14892" end="14902" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q245656" start="15350" end="15359" title="cylinder (engine)" label="cylinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q173425" start="15546" end="15551" title="Repco" label="Repco"/>
<link wikidata="Q953477" start="15707" end="15719" title="engine block" label="engine block"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="15735" end="15745" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15769" end="15772" title="Buick V8 engine#215" label="215"/>
<link wikidata="Q173757" start="16203" end="16215" title="Brabham BT19" label="Brabham BT19"/>
<link wikidata="Q221405" start="16260" end="16277" title="1966 French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171574" start="16281" end="16292" title="Reims-Gueux" label="Reims-Gueux"/>
<link wikidata="Q173081" start="16477" end="16490" title="Bruce McLaren" label="Bruce McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="16495" end="16505" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q423920" start="16735" end="16751" title="1966 Dutch Grand Prix" label="Dutch Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173344" start="16941" end="16959" title="1966 Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="17164" end="17169" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166" start="17607" end="17618" title="Denny Hulme" label="Denny Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q171895" start="17861" end="17873" title="1967 South African Grand Prix" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171926" start="17882" end="17888" title="1967 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166" start="17956" end="17967" title="Denny Hulme" label="Denny Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q171688" start="17976" end="17992" title="1967 Dutch Grand Prix" label="Dutch Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137" start="18071" end="18080" title="Jim Clark" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20900" start="18100" end="18118" title="1967 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171856" start="18175" end="18192" title="1967 French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q174090" start="18200" end="18215" title="Bugatti Circuit" label="Bugatti Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476" start="18219" end="18226" title="Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q171865" start="18250" end="18268" title="1967 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171469" start="18277" end="18287" title="Chris Amon" label="Chris Amon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171860" start="18327" end="18344" title="1967 German Grand Prix" label="German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284" start="18501" end="18520" title="1967 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canadian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171570" start="18524" end="18536" title="Mosport International Raceway" label="Mosport Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q171763" start="18611" end="18629" title="1967 Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171417" start="18633" end="18638" title="Autodromo Nazionale Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153" start="18700" end="18712" title="John Surtees" label="John Surtees"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="18861" end="18873" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q171863" start="18882" end="18906" title="1967 United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171629" start="19097" end="19103" title="1967 Mexican Grand Prix" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137" start="19256" end="19265" title="Jim Clark" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234" start="19707" end="19719" title="Jochen Rindt" label="Jochen Rindt"/>
<link wikidata="Q69243" start="19731" end="19742" title="1968 Formula One season" label="1968 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q171913" start="19870" end="19887" title="1968 German Grand Prix" label="German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q814005" start="20034" end="20054" title="Beechcraft Queen Air" label="Beechcraft Queen Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q69254" start="20076" end="20087" title="1969 Formula One season" label="1969 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="21115" end="21129" title="Jackie Stewart" label="Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q844092" start="21238" end="21243" title="Equipe Matra Sports" label="Matra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741658" start="21260" end="21293" title="1970 World Sportscar Championship" label="1970 World Sportscar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171982" start="21994" end="22018" title="Engine Developments Ltd." label="Engine Developments Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q173983" start="22032" end="22041" title="John Judd" label="John Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q172724" start="22408" end="22425" title="Bernie Ecclestone" label="Bernie Ecclestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q173001" start="22844" end="22849" title="David Brabham" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344846" start="22860" end="22875" title="Project Brabham" label="Project Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="22906" end="22919" title="crowdsourcing" label="crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q945048" start="22953" end="22985" title="FIA World Endurance Championship" label="FIA World Endurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245261" start="23149" end="23161" title="Touring car racing" label="touring cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983921" start="23175" end="23188" title="Bathurst 1000" label="Bathurst 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954093" start="23343" end="23347" title="1984 World Sportscar Championship" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684565" start="23348" end="23376" title="World Sportscar Championship" label="World Sportscar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765667" start="23385" end="23397" title="Sandown Park" label="Sandown Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="23401" end="23410" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581854" start="23416" end="23433" title="1984 Sandown 1000" label="1984 Sandown 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q666606" start="23488" end="23499" title="Porsche 956" label="Porsche 956"/>
<link wikidata="Q10435680" start="23516" end="23520" title="1984 British Formula Three Championship" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q918187" start="23521" end="23538" title="British Formula 3 International Series" label="British Formula 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q66004929" start="23552" end="23571" title="Peerage of Scotland" label="Scottish Aristocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q171722" start="23573" end="23588" title="Johnny Dumfries" label="Johnny Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="23810" end="23814" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="FISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15038" start="23867" end="23871" title="1985 Australian Grand Prix" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870" start="23872" end="23893" title="Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="23897" end="23905" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="24289" end="24295" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953179" start="24427" end="24434" title="Brabham, Western Australia" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="24438" end="24443" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583720" start="24835" end="24851" title="Goodwood Revival" label="Goodwood Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429789" start="25272" end="25292" title="macular degeneration" label="macular degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="25304" end="25318" title="kidney disease" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="25354" end="25362" title="Kidney dialysis" label="dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009304" start="25794" end="25799" title="Geoff Brabham" label="Geoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q439288" start="25801" end="25805" title="Gary Brabham" label="Gary"/>
<link wikidata="Q173001" start="25811" end="25816" title="David Brabham" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="26096" end="26115" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q171972" start="26371" end="26375" title="Life Racing Engines" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="26505" end="26527" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold Coast, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790198" start="26553" end="26560" title="Matthew Brabham" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339542" start="26632" end="26644" title="Road to Indy" label="Road to Indy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20015859" start="26671" end="26692" title="2016 Indianapolis 500" label="2016 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984865" start="26711" end="26731" title="Stadium Super Trucks" label="Stadium Super Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204996" start="26765" end="26768" title="Sam Brabham" label="Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q173001" start="26791" end="26795" title="Lisa Thackwell" label="Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171752" start="26811" end="26815" title="Mike Thackwell" label="Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095798" start="26913" end="26946" title="British Formula Ford Championship" label="British Formula Ford Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="27166" end="27176" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q173001" start="27376" end="27381" title="David Brabham" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322131" start="27848" end="27876" title="Tamborine Rainforest Skywalk" label="Tamborine Rainforest Skywalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578673" start="27884" end="27905" title="Gold Coast hinterland" label="Gold Coast hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="28000" end="28042" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949384" start="28097" end="28101" title="1966 Birthday Honours" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q782788" start="28105" end="28127" title="Australian of the Year" label="Australian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="28137" end="28152" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009703" start="28210" end="28214" title="1979 New Year Honours" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271575" start="28228" end="28256" title="Sport Australia Hall of Fame" label="Sport Australia Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638644" start="28311" end="28349" title="International Motorsports Hall of Fame" label="International Motorsports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649458" start="28359" end="28382" title="Australian Sports Medal" label="Australian Sports Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393205" start="28392" end="28407" title="Centenary Medal" label="Centenary Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="28417" end="28450" title="Officer of the Order of Australia" label="Officer of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55601821" start="28598" end="28602" title="2008 Australia Day Honours" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969743" start="28616" end="28648" title="Australian Speedway Hall of Fame" label="Australian Speedway Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824396" start="28666" end="28690" title="Australian Living Treasures" label="National Living Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28794" end="28797" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q173599" start="28926" end="28939" title="Mike MacDowel" label="Mike MacDowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="28965" end="28974" title="Formula 2" label="Formula 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29032" end="29035" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29218" end="29221" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29444" end="29447" title=":Template:Motorsport driver results legend" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16565" wikidata="Q1323967" url="?curid=16565" title="Jones calculus">
<text>In optics, polarized light can be described using the Jones calculus, invented by R. C. Jones in 1941. Polarized light is represented by a Jones vector, and linear optical elements are represented by &quot;Jones matrices&quot;. When light crosses an optical element the resulting polarization of the emerging light is found by taking the product of the Jones matrix of the optical element and the Jones vector of the incident light.
Note that Jones calculus is only applicable to light that is already fully polarized. Light which is randomly polarized, partially polarized, or incoherent must be treated using Mueller calculus.

== Jones vector ==
The Jones vector describes the polarization of light in free space or another homogeneous isotropic non-attenuating medium, where the light can be properly described as transverse waves. Suppose that a monochromatic plane wave of light is travelling in the positive &quot;z&quot;-direction, with angular frequency &quot;ω&quot; and wave vector k = (0,0,&quot;k&quot;), where the wavenumber &quot;k&quot; = &quot;ω&quot;/&quot;c&quot;. Then the electric and magnetic fields E and H are orthogonal to k at each point; they both lie in the plane &quot;transverse&quot; to the direction of motion. Furthermore, H is determined from E by 90-degree rotation and a fixed multiplier depending on the wave impedance of the medium. So the polarization of the light can be determined by studying E. The complex amplitude of E is written: 
:formula_1
Note that the physical E field is the real part of this vector; the complex multiplier serves up the phase information. Here formula_2 is the imaginary unit with formula_3.

The Jones vector is

:formula_4

Thus, the Jones vector represents the amplitude and phase of the electric field in the &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; directions.

The sum of the squares of the absolute values of the two components of Jones vectors is proportional to the intensity of light. It is common to normalize it to 1 at the starting point of calculation for simplification. It is also common to constrain the first component of the Jones vectors to be a real number. This discards the overall phase information that would be needed for calculation of interference with other beams.

Note that all Jones vectors and matrices in this article employ the convention that the phase of the light wave is given by formula_5, a convention used by Eugene Hecht. Under this convention, increase in formula_6 (or formula_7) indicates retardation (delay) in phase, while decrease indicates advance in phase. For example, a Jones vectors component of formula_8 (formula_9) indicates retardation by formula_10 (or 90 degrees) compared to 1 (formula_11). Collett uses the opposite definition for the phase (formula_12). Also, Collet and Jones follow different conventions for the definitions of handedness of circular polarization. Jones&#x27; convention is called: &quot;From the point of view of the receiver&quot;, while Collett&#x27;s convention is called: &quot;From the point of view of the source.&quot; The reader should be wary of the choice of convention when consulting references on the Jones calculus.

The following table gives the 6 common examples of normalized Jones vectors.

A general vector that points to any place on the surface is written as a ket formula_13. When employing the Poincaré sphere (also known as the Bloch sphere), the basis kets (formula_14 and formula_15) must be assigned to opposing (antipodal) pairs of the kets listed above. For example, one might assign formula_14 = formula_17 and formula_15 = formula_19. These assignments are arbitrary. Opposing pairs are

* formula_17 and formula_19
* formula_22 and formula_23
* formula_24 and formula_25

The polarization of any point not equal to formula_24 or formula_25 and not on the circle that passes through formula_28 is known as elliptical polarization.

== Jones matrices ==
Jones calculus is a matrix calculus developed in 1941 by Henry Hurwitz Jr. and R. Clark Jones and published in the &quot;Journal of the Optical Society of America&quot;.

The Jones matrices are operators that act on the Jones vectors defined above. These matrices are implemented by various optical elements such as lenses, beam splitters, mirrors, etc. Each matrix represents projection onto a one-dimensional complex subspace of the Jones vectors. The following table gives examples of Jones matrices for polarizers:
== Phase retarders ==
A phase retarder is an optical element that produces a phase difference between two orthogonal polarization components of a monochromatic polarized beam of light. Mathematically, using kets to represent Jones vectors, this means that the action of a phase retarder is to transform light with polarization 
:formula_29 
to 
:formula_30 
where formula_31 are orthogonal polarization components (i.e. formula_32) that are determined by the physical nature of the phase retarder. In general, the orthogonal components could be any two basis vectors. For example, the action of the circular phase retarder is such that
:formula_33
However, linear phase retarders, for which formula_31 are linear polarizations, are more commonly encountered in discussion and in practice. In fact, sometimes the term &quot;phase retarder&quot; is used to refer specifically to linear phase retarders.

Linear phase retarders are usually made out of birefringent uniaxial crystals such as calcite, MgF2 or quartz. Plates made of these materials for this purpose are referred to as waveplates. Uniaxial crystals have one crystal axis that is different from the other two crystal axes (i.e., &quot;ni&quot; ≠ &quot;nj&quot; = &quot;nk&quot;). This unique axis is called the extraordinary axis and is also referred to as the optic axis. An optic axis can be the fast or the slow axis for the crystal depending on the crystal at hand. Light travels with a higher phase velocity along an axis that has the smallest refractive index and this axis is called the fast axis. Similarly, an axis which has the largest refractive index is called a slow axis since the phase velocity of light is the lowest along this axis. &quot;Negative&quot; uniaxial crystals (e.g., calcite CaCO3, sapphire Al2O3) have &quot;ne&quot; &lt; &quot;no&quot; so for these crystals, the extraordinary axis (optic axis) is the fast axis, whereas for &quot;positive&quot; uniaxial crystals (e.g., quartz SiO2, magnesium fluoride MgF2, rutile TiO2), &quot;ne&quot; &gt; &quot;no&quot; and thus the extraordinary axis (optic axis) is the slow axis. Other commercially available linear phase retarders exist and are used in more specialized applications. The Fresnel rhombs is one such alternative.

Any linear phase retarder with its fast axis defined as the x- or y-axis has zero off-diagonal terms and thus can be conveniently expressed as 
:formula_35

where formula_6 and formula_7 are the phase offsets of the electric fields in formula_38 and formula_39 directions respectively. In the phase convention formula_5, define the relative phase between the two waves as formula_41. Then a positive formula_42 (i.e. formula_7 &gt; formula_6) means that formula_45 doesn&#x27;t attain the same value as formula_46 until a later time, i.e. formula_46 leads formula_45. Similarly, if formula_49, then formula_45 leads formula_46.

For example, if the fast axis of a quarter waveplate is horizontal, then the phase velocity along the horizontal direction is ahead of the vertical direction i.e., formula_46 leads formula_45. Thus, formula_54 which for a quarter waveplate yields formula_55.

In the opposite convention formula_12, define the relative phase as formula_57. Then formula_58 means that formula_45 doesn&#x27;t attain the same value as formula_46 until a later time, i.e. formula_61 leads formula_45.

The Jones matrix for an arbitrary birefringent material is the most general form of a polarization transformation in the Jones calculus; it can represent any polarization transformation. To see this, one can show
:formula_63

The above matrix is a general parametrization for the elements of SU(2), using the convention 
:formula_64
where the overline denotes complex conjugation.

Finally, recognizing that the set of unitary transformations on formula_65 can be expressed as
:formula_66
it becomes clear that the Jones matrix for an arbitrary birefringent material represents any unitary transformation, up to a phase factor formula_67. Therefore, for appropriate choice of formula_68, formula_69, and formula_70, a transformation between any two Jones vectors can be found, up to a phase factor formula_67. However, in the Jones calculus, such phase factors do not change the represented polarization of a Jones vector, so are either considered arbitrary or imposed ad hoc to conform to a set convention.

The special expressions for the phase retarders can be obtained by taking suitable parameter values in the general expression for a birefringent material. In the general expression:
*The relative phase retardation induced between the fast axis and the slow axis is given by formula_72
*formula_69 is the orientation of the fast axis with respect to the x-axis.
*formula_70 is the circularity.

Note that for linear retarders, formula_70 = 0 and for circular retarders, formula_70 = ± formula_77/2, formula_69 = formula_77/4. In general for elliptical retarders, formula_70 takes on values between - formula_77/2 and formula_77/2.

== Axially rotated elements ==
Assume an optical element has its optic axis perpendicular to the surface vector for the plane of incidence and is rotated about this surface vector by angle &quot;θ/2&quot; (i.e., the principal plane through which the optic axis passes, makes angle &quot;θ/2&quot; with respect to the plane of polarization of the electric field of the incident TE wave). Recall that a half-wave plate rotates polarization as &quot;twice&quot; the angle between incident polarization and optic axis (principal plane). Therefore, the Jones matrix for the rotated polarization state, M(&quot;θ&quot;), is 
:formula_83
: where formula_84
This agrees with the expression for a half-wave plate in the table above. These rotations are identical to beam unitary splitter transformation in optical physics given by
:formula_85
where the primed and unprimed coefficients represent beams incident from opposite sides of the beam splitter. The reflected and transmitted components acquire a phase &quot;θr&quot; and &quot;θt&quot;, respectively. The requirements for a valid representation of the element are 
:formula_86
and
formula_87
:Both of these representations are unitary matrices fitting these requirements; and as such, are both valid.

== Arbitrarily rotated elements ==

Finding the Jones matrix, J(&quot;α&quot;, &quot;β&quot;, &quot;γ&quot;), for an arbitrary rotation involves a three-dimensional rotation matrix. In the following notation &quot;α&quot;, &quot;β&quot; and &quot;γ&quot; are the yaw, pitch, and roll angles (rotation about the z-, y-, and x-axes, with x being the direction of propagation), respectively. The full combination of the 3-dimensional rotation matrices is the following:

formula_88

Using the above, for any base Jones matrix J, you can find the rotated state J(&quot;α&quot;, &quot;β&quot;, &quot;γ&quot;) using:

formula_89

The simplest case, where the Jones matrix is for an ideal linear horizontal polarizer, reduces then to:

formula_90

where ci and si represent the cosine or sine of a given angle &quot;i&quot;, respectively.
See Russell A. Chipman and Garam Yun for further work done based on this.

==See also==
* Polarization
* Scattering parameters
* Stokes parameters
* Mueller calculus
* Photon polarization

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* &quot;Jones Calculus written by E. Collett on Optipedia&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="3" end="9" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="11" end="26" title="polarized light" label="polarized light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323967" start="54" end="68" title="Jones calculus" label="Jones calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q705965" start="82" end="93" title="Robert Clark Jones" label="R. C. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323967" start="139" end="151" title="Jones calculus" label="Jones vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="212" end="220" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064220" start="611" end="627" title="Mueller calculus" label="Mueller calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q904929" start="727" end="738" title="homogeneity (physics)" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="739" end="748" title="isotropic" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="749" end="764" title="attenuation" label="non-attenuating"/>
<link wikidata="Q691978" start="818" end="834" title="transverse waves" label="transverse waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="865" end="875" title="plane wave" label="plane wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="981" end="992" title="wave vector" label="wave vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="1028" end="1038" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496406" start="1341" end="1355" title="wave impedance" label="wave impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="1630" end="1644" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2126" end="2137" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="2223" end="2235" title="Interference (wave propagation)" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906339" start="2411" end="2423" title="Eugene Hecht" label="Eugene Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q59090" start="3324" end="3327" title="Bra–ket notation" label="ket"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449470" start="3359" end="3374" title="Poincaré sphere (optics)" label="Poincaré sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q884593" start="3394" end="3406" title="Bloch sphere" label="Bloch sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q505356" start="3482" end="3491" title="Antipodal points" label="antipodal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953420" start="3879" end="3902" title="elliptical polarization" label="elliptical polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11169649" start="3983" end="4000" title="Henry Hurwitz Jr." label="Henry Hurwitz Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q705965" start="4005" end="4019" title="R. Clark Jones" label="R. Clark Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296174" start="4047" end="4088" title="Journal of the Optical Society of America" label="Journal of the Optical Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q59090" start="4652" end="4656" title="Bra–ket notation" label="kets"/>
<link wikidata="Q108779" start="5394" end="5406" title="birefringent" label="birefringent"/>
<link wikidata="Q108779" start="5407" end="5423" title="uniaxial crystal" label="uniaxial crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="5433" end="5440" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="5450" end="5456" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192014" start="5525" end="5534" title="waveplate" label="waveplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q904054" start="5766" end="5776" title="optic axis of a crystal" label="optic axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="5954" end="5970" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q13824" start="6100" end="6114" title="phase velocity" label="phase velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="6201" end="6208" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="6216" end="6224" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="6407" end="6413" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q411752" start="6420" end="6438" title="magnesium fluoride" label="magnesium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q320603" start="6445" end="6451" title="rutile" label="rutile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389082" start="6666" end="6679" title="Fresnel rhomb" label="Fresnel rhomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q684363" start="8110" end="8115" title="Special unitary group" label="SU(2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="8178" end="8197" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495534" start="8237" end="8259" title="unitary transformation" label="unitary transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307244" start="9578" end="9596" title="plane of incidence" label="plane of incidence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9674" end="9689" title="Cardinal point (optics)#Principal planes and points" label="principal plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256564" start="10874" end="10889" title="rotation matrix" label="rotation matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q751290" start="10972" end="10992" title="Yaw pitch roll" label="yaw, pitch, and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="11631" end="11643" title="Polarization (waves)" label="Polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165620" start="11646" end="11667" title="Scattering parameters" label="Scattering parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192058" start="11670" end="11687" title="Stokes parameters" label="Stokes parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064220" start="11690" end="11706" title="Mueller calculus" label="Mueller calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187858" start="11709" end="11728" title="Photon polarization" label="Photon polarization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16567" wikidata="Q9161" url="?curid=16567" title="Josip Broz Tito">
<text>Josip Broz (, ; 7 May 1892 – 4 May 1980), commonly known as Tito (; , ), was a Yugoslav communist revolutionary and politician who served in various positions of national leadership from 1943 until his death in 1980. During World War II, he led the Yugoslav Partisans, often regarded as the most effective resistance movement in German-occupied Europe. Following Yugoslavia&#x27;s liberation in 1945, he served as its prime minister from 1945 to 1963, and president from 1953 until his death in 1980. The political ideology and policies promulgated by Tito are known as Titoism.

Tito was born to a Croat father and a Slovene mother in Kumrovec in what was then Austria-Hungary. Drafted into military service, he distinguished himself, becoming the youngest sergeant major in the Austro-Hungarian Army of that time. After being seriously wounded and captured by the Russians during World War I, he was sent to a work camp in the Ural Mountains. Tito participated in some events of the Russian Revolution in 1917 and the subsequent Russian Civil War. Upon his return to the Balkans in 1920, he entered the newly established Kingdom of Yugoslavia, where he joined the Communist Party of Yugoslavia. Having assumed de facto control over the party by 1937, Tito was formally elected its general secretary in 1939 and later its president, the title he held until his death. During World War II, after the Nazi invasion of the area, he led the Yugoslav guerrilla movement, the Partisans (1941–1945). By the end of the war, the Partisans, with the Allies&#x27; backing since mid-1943, took power in Yugoslavia.

After the war, Tito served as the prime minister (1945–1963), president (1953–1980; from 1974 president for life), and marshal of Yugoslavia, the highest rank of the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (JNA). In 1945, under his leadership, Yugoslavia became a communist state, which was eventually renamed the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Despite being one of the founders of the Cominform, he became the first Cominform member and the only leader in Joseph Stalin&#x27;s lifetime to defy Soviet hegemony in the Eastern Bloc, leading to Yugoslavia&#x27;s expulsion from the organisation in 1948 in what was known as the Tito–Stalin split. In the following years, alongside other political leaders and Marxist theorists such as Edvard Kardelj and Milovan Đilas, he initiated the idiosyncratic model of socialist self-management in which firms were managed by workers&#x27; councils and all workers were entitled to workplace democracy and equal share of profits. Tito wavered between supporting a centralised or more decentralised federation and ended up favouring the latter to keep ethnic tensions under control; thus, the constitution was gradually developed to delegate as much power as possible to each republic in keeping with the Marxist theory of withering away of the state. He envisaged the SFR of Yugoslavia as a &quot;federal republic of equal nations and nationalities, freely united on the principle of brotherhood and unity in achieving specific and common interest.&quot; A very powerful cult of personality arose around him, which the League of Communists of Yugoslavia maintained even after his death. After Tito&#x27;s death, Yugoslavia&#x27;s leadership was transformed into an annually rotating presidency to give representation to all of its nationalities and prevent the emergence of an authoritarian leader. Twelve years later, as communism collapsed in Eastern Europe and ethnic tensions escalated, Yugoslavia dissolved and descended into a series of interethnic wars.

Historians critical of Tito view his presidency as authoritarian and see him as a dictator, while others characterise him as a benevolent dictator. He was a popular public figure both in Yugoslavia and abroad, and remains popular in the former countries of Yugoslavia. Tito was viewed as a unifying symbol, with his internal policies maintaining the peaceful coexistence of the nations of the Yugoslav federation. He gained further international attention as a co-founder of the Non-Aligned Movement, alongside Jawaharlal Nehru of India, Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, and Sukarno of Indonesia. With a highly favourable reputation abroad in both Cold War blocs, he received a total of 98 foreign decorations, including the Legion of Honour and the Order of the Bath.

==Early life==
===Pre-World War I===

Josip Broz was born on 7 May 1892 in Kumrovec, a village in the northern Croatian region of Zagorje. At the time it was part of the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia within the Austro-Hungarian Empire. He was the seventh or eighth child of Franjo Broz (1860–1936) and Marija née Javeršek (1864–1918). His parents had already had a number of children die in early infancy. Broz was christened and raised as a Roman Catholic. His father, Franjo, was a Croat whose family had lived in the village for three centuries, while his mother, Marija, was a Slovene from the village of Podsreda. The villages were apart, and his parents had married on 21 January 1881. Franjo Broz had inherited a estate and a good house, but he was unable to make a success of farming. Josip spent a significant proportion of his pre-school years living with his maternal grandparents at Podsreda, where he became a favourite of his grandfather Martin Javeršek. By the time he returned to Kumrovec to begin school, he spoke Slovene better than Croatian, and had learned to play the piano. Despite his mixed parentage, Broz identified as a Croat like his father and neighbours.

In July 1900, at age eight, Broz entered primary school at Kumrovec. He completed four years of school, failing 2nd grade and graduating in 1905. As a result of his limited schooling, throughout his life, Tito was poor at spelling. After leaving school, he initially worked for a maternal uncle and then on his parents&#x27; family farm. In 1907, his father wanted him to emigrate to the United States but could not raise the money for the voyage.

Instead, aged 15 years, Broz left Kumrovec and travelled about south to Sisak, where his cousin Jurica Broz was doing army service. Jurica helped him get a job in a restaurant, but Broz soon got tired of that work. He approached a Czech locksmith, Nikola Karas, for a three-year apprenticeship, which included training, food, and room and board. As his father could not afford to pay for his work clothing, Broz paid for it himself. Soon after, his younger brother Stjepan also became apprenticed to Karas.

During his apprenticeship, Broz was encouraged to mark May Day in 1909, and he read and sold &quot;Slobodna Reč&quot; (), a socialist newspaper. After completing his apprenticeship in September 1910, Broz used his contacts to gain employment in Zagreb. At age 18, he joined the Metal Workers&#x27; Union and participated in his first labour protest. He also joined the Social Democratic Party of Croatia and Slavonia.

He returned home in December 1910. In early 1911, he began a series of moves in search of work, first in Ljubljana, then Trieste, Kumrovec and Zagreb, where he worked repairing bicycles. He joined his first strike action on May Day 1911. After a brief period of work in Ljubljana, between May 1911 and May 1912, he worked in a factory in Kamnik in the Kamnik–Savinja Alps. After it closed, he was offered redeployment to Čenkov in Bohemia. On arriving at his new workplace, he discovered that the employer was trying to bring in cheaper labour to replace the local Czech workers, and he and others joined successful strike action to force the employer to back down.

Driven by curiosity, Broz moved to Plzeň, where he was briefly employed at the Škoda Works. He next travelled to Munich in Bavaria. He also worked at the Benz car factory in Mannheim and visited the Ruhr industrial region. By October 1912, he had reached Vienna. He stayed with his older brother Martin and his family and worked at the Griedl Works before getting a job at Wiener Neustadt. There he worked for Austro-Daimler and was often asked to drive and test the cars. During this time, he spent considerable time fencing and dancing, and during his training and early work life, he also learned German and passable Czech.

===World War I===
In May 1913, Broz was conscripted into the Austro-Hungarian Army for his compulsory two years of service. He successfully requested to serve with the 25th Croatian Home Guard Regiment garrisoned in Zagreb. After learning to ski during the winter of 1913 and 1914, Broz was sent to a school for non-commissioned officers (NCO) in Budapest, after which he was promoted to sergeant major. At age 22, he was the youngest of that rank in his regiment. At least one source states that he was the youngest sergeant major in the Austro-Hungarian Army. After winning the regimental fencing competition, Broz came in second in the army fencing championships in Budapest in May 1914.

Soon after the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the 25th Croatian Home Guard Regiment marched toward the Serbian border. Broz was arrested for sedition and imprisoned in the Petrovaradin fortress in present-day Novi Sad. He later gave conflicting accounts of this arrest, telling one biographer that he had threatened to desert to the Russian side but also claiming that the whole matter arose from a clerical error. A third version was that he had been overheard saying that he hoped the Austro-Hungarian Empire would be defeated. After his acquittal and release, his regiment served briefly on the Serbian Front before being deployed to the Eastern Front in Galicia in early 1915 to fight against Russia. In his account of his military service, Broz did not mention that he participated in the failed Austrian invasion of Serbia, instead giving the misleading impression that he fought only in Galicia, as it would have offended Serbian opinion to know that he fought in 1914 for the Habsburgs against them. On one occasion, the scout platoon he commanded went behind the enemy lines and captured 80 Russian soldiers, bringing them back to their own lines alive. In 1980 it was discovered that Broz had been recommended for an award for gallantry and initiative in reconnaissance and capturing prisoners. Tito&#x27;s biographer Richard West wrote that Tito actually downplayed his military record as the Austrian Army records showed that he was a brave soldier, which contradicted his later claim to have opposed the Habsburg monarchy and his self-portrait of himself as an unwilling conscript fighting in a war he opposed. Broz&#x27;s fellow soldiers regarded him as &quot;kaisertreu&quot; (&quot;true to the Emperor&quot;).

On 25 March 1915, Broz was wounded in the back by a Circassian cavalryman&#x27;s lance and captured during a Russian attack near Bukovina. In his account of his capture, Broz wrote: &quot;suddenly the right flank yielded and through the gap poured cavalry of the Circassians, from Asiatic Russia. Before we knew it they were thundering through our positions, leaping from their horses and throwing themselves into our trenches with lances lowered. One of them rammed his two-yard, iron-tipped, double-pronged lance into my back just below the left arm. I fainted. Then, as I learned, the Circassians began to butcher the wounded, even slashing them with their knives. Fortunately, Russian infantry reached the positions and put an end to the orgy&quot;. Now a prisoner of war (POW), Broz was transported east to a hospital established in an old monastery in the town of Sviyazhsk on the Volga river near Kazan. During his 13 months in hospital, he had bouts of pneumonia and typhus, and learned Russian with the help of two schoolgirls who brought him Russian classics by such authors as Tolstoy and Turgenev.

After recuperating, in mid-1916, Broz was transferred to the Ardatov POW camp in the Samara Governorate, where he used his skills to maintain the nearby village grain mill. At the end of the year, he was transferred to the Kungur POW camp near Perm where the POWs were used as labour to maintain the newly completed Trans-Siberian Railway. Broz was appointed to be in charge of all the POWs in the camp. During this time, he became aware that camp staff were stealing the Red Cross parcels sent to the POWs. When he complained, he was beaten and imprisoned. During the February Revolution, a crowd broke into the prison and returned Broz to the POW camp. A Bolshevik he had met while working on the railway told Broz that his son was working in engineering works in Petrograd, so, in June 1917, Broz walked out of the unguarded POW camp and hid aboard a goods train bound for that city, where he stayed with his friend&#x27;s son. The journalist Richard West has suggested that because Broz chose to remain in an unguarded POW camp rather than volunteer to serve with the Yugoslav legions of the Serbian Army, he was still loyal to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, undermining his later claim that he and other Croat POWs were excited by the prospect of revolution and looked forward to the overthrow of the empire that ruled them.

Less than a month after Broz arrived in Petrograd, the July Days demonstrations broke out, and Broz joined in, coming under fire from government troops. In the aftermath, he tried to flee to Finland in order to make his way to the United States but was stopped at the border. He was arrested along with other suspected Bolsheviks during the subsequent crackdown by the Russian Provisional Government led by Alexander Kerensky. He was imprisoned in the Peter and Paul Fortress for three weeks, during which he claimed to be an innocent citizen of Perm. When he finally admitted to being an escaped POW, he was to be returned by train to Kungur, but escaped at Yekaterinburg, then caught another train that reached Omsk in Siberia on 8 November after a journey. At one point, police searched the train looking for an escaped POW, but were deceived by Broz&#x27;s fluent Russian.

In Omsk, local Bolsheviks stopped the train and told Broz that Vladimir Lenin had seized control of Petrograd. They recruited him into an International Red Guard that guarded the Trans-Siberian Railway during the winter of 1917 and 1918. In May 1918, the anti-Bolshevik Czechoslovak Legion wrested control of parts of Siberia from Bolshevik forces, the Provisional Siberian Government established itself in Omsk, and Broz and his comrades went into hiding. At this time, Broz met a 14-year-old local girl, , who hid him and then helped him escape to a Kazakh village from Omsk. Broz again worked maintaining the local mill until November 1919, when the Red Army recaptured Omsk from White forces loyal to the Provisional All-Russian Government of Alexander Kolchak. He moved back to Omsk and married Belousova in January 1920. At the time of their marriage, Broz was 27 years old and Pelagia Belousova was 14. They divorced in the 1930s in Moscow. Broz later wrote that during his time in Russia, he heard much talk of Lenin, a little of Trotsky, and &quot;as for Stalin, during the time I stayed in Russia, I never once heard his name&quot;. Tito joined the Communist Party in 1920 in Omsk. In the autumn of 1920, he and his pregnant wife returned to his homeland, by train to Narva, by ship to Stettin, then by train to Vienna, where they arrived on 20 September. In early October, Broz returned to Kumrovec in what was then the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to find that his mother had died and his father had moved to Jastrebarsko, near Zagreb. Sources differ over whether Broz joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union while in Russia, but he said that the first time he joined the Communist Party of Yugoslavia (CPY) was in Zagreb after he returned to his homeland.

==Interwar communist activity==
===Communist agitator===

Upon his return home, Broz was unable to gain employment as a metalworker in Kumrovec, so he and his wife moved briefly to Zagreb, where he worked as a waiter and took part in a waiter&#x27;s strike. He also joined the CPY. The CPY&#x27;s influence on the political life of Yugoslavia was growing rapidly. In the 1920 elections, it won 59 seats and became the third-strongest party. In light of difficult economic and social circumstances, the regime viewed the CPY as the main threat to the system of government. On 30 December, the government issued a Proclamation () outlawing communist activities, which included bans on propaganda, assembly halls, stripping of civil service for servants and scholarships for students found to be communist. Its author, Milorad Drašković, the Yugoslav Minister of the Interior, was assassinated by a young communist, Alija Alijagić, on 2 August 1921. The CPY was then declared illegal under the Yugoslav State Security Act of 1921, and the regime proceeded to prosecute party members and sympathisers as political prisoners.

Due to his overt communist links, Broz was fired from his employment. He and his wife then moved to the village of Veliko Trojstvo where he worked as a mill mechanic. After the arrest of the CPY leadership in January 1922, Stevo Sabić took over control of its operations. Sabić contacted Broz, who agreed to work illegally for the party, distributing leaflets and agitating among factory workers. In the contest of ideas between those that wanted to pursue moderate policies and those that advocated violent revolution, Broz sided with the latter. In 1924, Broz was elected to the CPY district committee, but after he gave a speech at a comrade&#x27;s Catholic funeral, he was arrested when the priest complained. Paraded through the streets in chains, he was held for eight days and was eventually charged with creating a public disturbance. With the help of a Serbian Orthodox prosecutor who hated Catholics, Broz and his co-accused were acquitted. His brush with the law had marked him as a communist agitator, and his home was searched on an almost weekly basis. Since their arrival in Yugoslavia, Pelagija had lost three babies soon after their births and one daughter, Zlatica, at the age of two. Broz felt the loss of Zlatica deeply. In 1924, Pelagija gave birth to a boy, Žarko, who survived. In mid-1925, Broz&#x27;s employer died, and the new mill owner gave him an ultimatum: give up his communist activities or lose his job. So, at age 33, Broz became a professional revolutionary.

===Professional revolutionary===
The CPY concentrated its revolutionary efforts on factory workers in the more industrialised areas of Croatia and Slovenia, encouraging strikes and similar action. In 1925, the now unemployed Broz moved to Kraljevica on the Adriatic coast, where he started working at a shipyard to further the aims of the CPY. During his time in Kraljevica, he acquired a love of the warm, sunny Adriatic coastline that lasted for the rest of his life, and throughout his later time as leader, he spent as much time as possible living on his yacht while cruising the Adriatic.

While at Kraljevica, he worked on Yugoslav torpedo boats and a pleasure yacht for the People&#x27;s Radical Party politician, Milan Stojadinović. Broz built up the trade union organisation in the shipyards and was elected as a union representative. A year later, he led a shipyard strike and soon after was fired. In October 1926, he obtained work in a railway works in Smederevska Palanka near Belgrade. In March 1927, he wrote an article complaining about the exploitation of workers in the factory, and after speaking up for a worker, he was promptly sacked. Identified by the CPY as worthy of promotion, he was appointed secretary of the Zagreb branch of the Metal Workers&#x27; Union and, soon thereafter, the union&#x27;s whole Croatian branch. In July 1927, Broz was arrested along with six other workers, and imprisoned at nearby Ogulin. After being held without trial for some time, he went on a hunger strike until a date was set. The trial was held in secret, and he was found guilty of being a member of the CPY. Sentenced to four months&#x27; imprisonment, he was released from prison pending an appeal. On the CPY&#x27;s orders, Broz did not report to court for the hearing of the appeal, instead going into hiding in Zagreb. Wearing dark spectacles and carrying forged papers, Broz posed as a middle-class technician in the engineering industry, working undercover to contact other CPY members and coordinate their infiltration of trade unions.

In February 1928, Broz was one of 32 delegates to the conference of the Croatian branch of the CPY. During the conference, he condemned factions within the party, including those that advocated a Greater Serbia agenda within Yugoslavia, like the long-term CPY leader Sima Marković. Broz proposed that the executive committee of the Communist International purge the branch of factionalism and was supported by a delegate sent from Moscow. After it was proposed that the Croatian branch&#x27;s entire central committee be dismissed, a new central committee was elected, with Broz as its secretary. Marković was subsequently expelled from the CPY at the Fourth Congress of the Comintern, and the CPY adopted a policy of working for the breakup of Yugoslavia. Broz arranged to disrupt a meeting of the Social-Democratic Party on May Day that year; in a melee outside the venue, police arrested him. They failed to identify him, charging him under his false name for a breach of the peace. He was imprisoned for 14 days and then released, returning to his previous activities. The police eventually tracked him down with the help of a police informer. He was ill-treated and held for three months before being tried in court in November 1928 for his illegal communist activities, which included allegations that police had planted the bombs found at his address. He was convicted and sentenced to five years&#x27; imprisonment.

===Prison===
After Broz&#x27;s sentencing, his wife and son returned to Kumrovec, where sympathetic locals looked after them, but then one day, they suddenly left without explanation and returned to the Soviet Union. She fell in love with another man, and Žarko grew up in institutions. After arriving at Lepoglava prison, Broz was employed in maintaining the electrical system and chose as his assistant a middle-class Belgrade Jew, Moša Pijade, who had been given a 20-year sentence for his communist activities. Their work allowed Broz and Pijade to move around the prison, contacting and organising other communist prisoners. During their time together in Lepoglava, Pijade became Broz&#x27;s ideological mentor. After two and a half years at Lepoglava, Broz was accused of attempting to escape and was transferred to Maribor prison, where he was held in solitary confinement for several months. After completing the full term of his sentence, he was released, only to be arrested outside the prison gates and taken to Ogulin to serve the four-month sentence he had avoided in 1927. He was finally released from prison on 16 March 1934, but even then, he was subject to orders that required him to live in Kumrovec and report to the police daily. During his imprisonment, the political situation in Europe had changed significantly, with the rise of Adolf Hitler in Germany and the emergence of right-wing parties in France and neighbouring Austria. He returned to a warm welcome in Kumrovec but did not stay long. In early May, he received word from the CPY to return to his revolutionary activities and left his hometown for Zagreb, where he rejoined the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Croatia.

The Croatian branch of the CPY was in disarray, a situation exacerbated by the escape of the executive committee of the CPY to Vienna in Austria, from which they were directing activities. Over the next six months, Broz travelled several times between Zagreb, Ljubljana and Vienna, using false passports. In July 1934, he was blackmailed by a smuggler but pressed on across the border and was detained by the local &quot;Heimwehr&quot;, a paramilitary Home Guard. He used the Austrian accent he had developed during his war service to convince them that he was a wayward Austrian mountaineer, and they allowed him to proceed to Vienna. Once there, he contacted the General Secretary of the CPY, Milan Gorkić, who sent him to Ljubljana to arrange a secret conference of the CPY in Slovenia. The conference was held at the summer palace of the Roman Catholic bishop of Ljubljana, whose brother was a communist sympathiser. It was at this conference that Broz first met Edvard Kardelj, a young Slovene communist who had recently been released from prison. Broz and Kardelj subsequently became good friends, with Tito later regarding him as his most reliable deputy. As he was wanted by the police for failing to report to them in Kumrovec, Broz adopted various pseudonyms, including &quot;Rudi&quot; and &quot;Tito&quot;. He used the latter as a pen name when he wrote articles for party journals in 1934, and it stuck. He gave no reason for choosing the name &quot;Tito&quot; except that it was a common nickname for men from the district where he grew up. Within the Comintern network, his nickname was &quot;Walter&quot;.

===Flight from Yugoslavia===
During this time, Tito wrote articles on the duties of imprisoned communists and on trade unions. He was in Ljubljana when Vlado Chernozemski, an assassin for the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO) and instructor for the Croatian ultranationalist organisation Ustaše, assassinated King Alexander in Marseilles on 9 October 1934. In the crackdown on dissidents that followed his death, it was decided that Tito should leave Yugoslavia. He travelled to Vienna on a forged Czechoslovak passport, where he joined Gorkić and the rest of the Politburo of the CPY. It was decided that the Austrian government was too hostile to communism, so the Politburo travelled to Brno in Czechoslovakia, and Tito accompanied them. On Christmas Day 1934, a secret meeting of the Central Committee of the CPY was held in Ljubljana, and Tito was elected as a member of the Politburo for the first time. The Politburo decided to send him to Moscow to report on the situation in Yugoslavia, and in early February 1935, he arrived there as a full-time official of the Comintern. He lodged at the main Comintern residence, the Hotel Lux on Tverskaya Street and was quickly in contact with Vladimir Ćopić, one of the leading Yugoslavs with the Comintern. He was soon introduced to the main personalities in the organisation. Tito was appointed to the secretariat of the Balkan section, responsible for Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Romania and Greece. Kardelj was also in Moscow, as was the Bulgarian communist leader Georgi Dimitrov. Tito lectured on trade unions to foreign communists and attended a course on military tactics run by the Red Army, and occasionally attended the Bolshoi Theatre. He attended as one of 510 delegates to the Seventh World Congress of the Comintern in July and August 1935, where he briefly saw Joseph Stalin for the first time. After the congress, he toured the Soviet Union and then returned to Moscow to continue his work. He contacted Polka and Žarko, but soon fell in love with an Austrian woman who worked at the Hotel Lux, Johanna Koenig, known within communist ranks as Lucia Bauer. When she became aware of this liaison, Polka divorced Tito in April 1936. Tito married Bauer on 13 October of that year.

After the World Congress, Tito worked to promote the new Comintern line on Yugoslavia, which was that it would no longer work to break up the country and would instead defend the integrity of Yugoslavia against Nazism and Fascism. From a distance, Tito also worked to organise strikes at the shipyards at Kraljevica and the coal mines at Trbovlje near Ljubljana. He tried to convince the Comintern that it would be better if the party leadership were located inside Yugoslavia. A compromise was arrived at, where Tito and others would work inside the country, and Gorkić and the Politburo would continue to work from abroad. Gorkić and the Politburo relocated to Paris, while Tito began to travel between Moscow, Paris and Zagreb in 1936 and 1937, using false passports. In 1936, his father died.

Tito returned to Moscow in August 1936, soon after the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War. At the time, the Great Purge was underway, and foreign communists like Tito and his Yugoslav compatriots were particularly vulnerable. Despite a laudatory report written by Tito about the veteran Yugoslav communist Filip Filipović, Filipović was arrested and shot by the Soviet secret police, the NKVD. However, before the Purge really began to erode the ranks of the Yugoslav communists in Moscow, Tito was sent back to Yugoslavia with a new mission, to recruit volunteers for the International Brigades being raised to fight on the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War. Travelling via Vienna, he reached the coastal port city of Split in December 1936. According to the Croatian historian Ivo Banac, the reason the Comintern sent Tito back to Yugoslavia was to purge the CPY. An initial attempt to send 500 volunteers to Spain by ship failed, with nearly all the volunteers arrested and imprisoned. Tito then travelled to Paris, where he arranged the volunteers&#x27; travel to France under the cover of attending the Paris Exhibition. Once in France, the volunteers crossed the Pyrenees to Spain. In all, he sent 1,192 men to fight in the war, but only 330 came from Yugoslavia; the rest were expatriates in France, Belgium, the U.S. and Canada. Fewer than half were communists, and the rest were social-democrats and anti-fascists of various hues. Of the total, 671 were killed in the fighting, and 300 were wounded. Tito himself never went to Spain, despite speculation that he had. Between May and August 1937, he travelled several times between Paris and Zagreb, organising the movement of volunteers and creating a separate Communist Party of Croatia. The new party was inaugurated at a conference at Samobor on the outskirts of Zagreb on 1–2 August 1937. Tito played a crucial role in organizing the return of the Yugoslav volunteers from German concentration camps to Yugoslavia when the decision was made to mount an armed resistance in Yugoslavia, the 1941 Uprising in Serbia.

===General Secretary of the CPY===
In June 1937, Gorkić was summoned to Moscow, where he was arrested, and after months of NKVD interrogation, he was shot. According to Banac, Gorkić was killed on Stalin&#x27;s orders. West concludes that despite being in competition with men like Gorkić for the leadership of the CPY, it was not in Tito&#x27;s character to have innocent people sent to their deaths. Tito then received a message from the Politburo of the CPY to join them in Paris. In August 1937, he became acting General Secretary of the CPY. He later explained that he survived the Purge by staying out of Spain, where the NKVD was active, and also by avoiding visiting the Soviet Union as much as possible. When first appointed as general secretary, he avoided travelling to Moscow by insisting that he needed to deal with some disciplinary issues in the CPY in Paris. He also promoted the idea that the upper echelons of the CPY should be sharing the dangers of underground resistance within the country. He developed a new, younger leadership team that was loyal to him, including the Slovene Edvard Kardelj, the Serb, Aleksandar Ranković, and the Montenegrin, Milovan Đilas. In December 1937, Tito arranged for a demonstration to greet the French foreign minister when he visited Belgrade, expressing solidarity with the French against Nazi Germany. The protest march numbered 30,000 and turned into a protest against the neutrality policy of the Stojadinović government. It was eventually broken up by the police. In March 1938, Tito returned to Yugoslavia from Paris. Hearing a rumour that his opponents within the CPY had tipped off the police, he travelled to Belgrade rather than Zagreb and used a different passport. While in Belgrade, he stayed with a young intellectual, Vladimir Dedijer, who was a friend of Đilas. Arriving in Yugoslavia a few days ahead of the &quot;Anschluss&quot; between Nazi Germany and Austria, he made an appeal condemning it, in which the CPY was joined by the Social Democrats and trade unions. In June, Tito wrote to the Comintern, suggesting that he should visit Moscow. He waited in Paris for two months for his Soviet visa before travelling to Moscow via Copenhagen. He arrived in Moscow on 24 August.

On his arrival in Moscow, Tito found that all Yugoslav communists were under suspicion. The NKVD arrested and executed nearly all of the CPY&#x27;s most prominent leaders, including over 20 members of the Central Committee. Both Tito&#x27;s ex-wife Polka and his wife Koenig/Bauer were arrested as &quot;imperialist spies&quot;. Both were eventually released, Polka after 27 months in prison. Tito therefore needed to make arrangements for the care of Žarko, who was 14. He placed him in a boarding school outside Kharkov, then at a school at Penza, but he ran away twice and was eventually taken in by a friend&#x27;s mother. In 1941, Žarko joined the Red Army to fight the invading Germans. Some of Tito&#x27;s critics argue that his survival indicates he must have denounced his comrades as Trotskyists. He was asked for information on a number of his fellow Yugoslav communists, but according to his own statements and published documents, he never denounced anyone, usually saying he did not know them. In one case, he was asked about the Croatian communist leader Kamilo Horvatin, but wrote ambiguously, saying that he did not know whether he was a Trotskyist. Nevertheless, Horvatin was not heard of again. While in Moscow, he was given the task of assisting Ćopić to translate the &quot;History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)&quot; into Serbo-Croatian, but they had only got to the second chapter when Ćopić too was arrested and executed. He worked on with a fellow surviving Yugoslav communist, but a Yugoslav communist of German ethnicity reported an inaccurate translation of a passage and claimed it showed Tito was a Trotskyist. Other influential communists vouched for him, and he was exonerated. A second Yugoslav communist denounced him, but the action backfired, and his accuser was arrested. Several factors were at play in his survival: his working-class origins, lack of interest in intellectual arguments about socialism, attractive personality, and capacity to make influential friends.

While Tito was avoiding arrest in Moscow, Germany was placing pressure on Czechoslovakia to cede the Sudetenland. In response to this threat, Tito organised a call for Yugoslav volunteers to fight for Czechoslovakia, and thousands of volunteers came to the Czechoslovak embassy in Belgrade to offer their services. Despite the eventual Munich Agreement and Czechoslovak acceptance of the annexation and the fact that the volunteers were turned away, Tito claimed credit for the Yugoslav response, which worked in his favour. By this stage, Tito was well aware of the realities in the Soviet Union, later saying he &quot;witnessed a great many injustices&quot; but was too heavily invested in communism and too loyal to the Soviet Union to step back. After restoring the image of a decisive, coherent and non-fractional CPY to the Comintern executives, Tito was by October 1938 reassured that the party would not be disestablished; he was then tasked to compile two resolutions on plans of future CPY activities. Hoping to return to Yugoslavia before the 1938 Yugoslavian parliamentary election in December, Tito requested permission to do so from Comintern&#x27;s Georgi Dimitrov several times, saying that his stay in Moscow was greatly prolonged, but to no avail. The Comintern formally ratified his resolutions on 5 January 1939, and he was appointed General Secretary of the CPY. After his appointment to the party&#x27;s highest position of leadership, the newly formed Politburo of the Central Committee retained the old leadership team of Tito, Kardelj, Đilas, Aleksandar Ranković, and Ivo Lola Ribar (the representative of SKOJ) and expanded it with Franc Leskošek, Miha Marinko and Josip Kraš, and by the end of 1939 and start of 1940, Rade Končar and Ivan Milutinović.

==World War II==
===Resistance in Yugoslavia===
On 6 April 1941, Axis forces invaded Yugoslavia. On 10 April 1941, Slavko Kvaternik proclaimed the Independent State of Croatia, and Tito responded by forming a Military Committee within the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia (CPY). Attacked from all sides, the armed forces of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia quickly crumbled. On 17 April 1941, after King Peter II and other members of the government fled the country, the remaining representatives of the government and military met with German officials in Belgrade. They quickly agreed to end military resistance. Prominent communist leaders, including Tito, held the May consultations to discuss the course of action to take in the face of the invasion. On 1 May 1941, Tito issued a pamphlet calling on the people to unite in a battle against the occupation. On 27 June 1941, the Central Committee appointed Tito commander-in-chief of all national liberation military forces. On 1 July 1941, the Comintern sent precise instructions calling for immediate action.
Tito stayed in Belgrade until 16 September 1941, when he, together with all members of the CPY, left Belgrade to travel to rebel-controlled territory. To leave Belgrade Tito used documents given to him by Dragoljub Milutinović, who was a &quot;voivode&quot; with the collaborationist Pećanac Chetniks. Since Pećanac was already fully co-operating with Germans by that time, this fact caused some to speculate that Tito left Belgrade with the blessing of the Germans because his task was to divide rebel forces, similar to Lenin&#x27;s arrival in Russia. Tito travelled by train through Stalać and Čačak and arrived to the village of Robaje on 18 September 1941.

Despite conflicts with the rival monarchic Chetnik movement, Tito&#x27;s Partisans succeeded in liberating territory, notably the &quot;Republic of Užice&quot;. During this period, Tito held talks with Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović on 19 September and 27 October 1941. It is said that Tito ordered his forces to assist escaping Jews, and that more than 2,000 Jews fought directly for Tito.

On 21 December 1941, the Partisans created the First Proletarian Brigade (commanded by Koča Popović) and on 1 March 1942, Tito created the Second Proletarian Brigade. In liberated territories, the Partisans organised People&#x27;s Committees to act as a civilian government. The Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia (AVNOJ) convened in Bihać on 26–27 November 1942 and in Jajce on 29 November 1943. In the two sessions, the resistance representatives established the basis for the post-war organisation of the country, deciding on a federation of the Yugoslav nations. In Jajce, a 67-member &quot;presidency&quot; was elected and established a nine-member National Committee of Liberation (NKOJ; five communist members) as a de facto provisional government. Tito was named President of NKOJ.

With the growing possibility of an Allied invasion in the Balkans, the Axis began to divert more resources to the destruction of the Partisans main force and its high command. This meant, among other things, a concerted German effort to capture Josip Broz Tito personally. On 25 May 1944, he managed to evade the Germans after the Raid on Drvar (&quot;Operation Rösselsprung&quot;), an airborne assault outside his Drvar headquarters in Bosnia.

After the Partisans managed to endure and avoid these intense Axis attacks between January and June 1943, and the extent of Chetnik collaboration became evident, Allied leaders switched their support from Draža Mihailović to Tito. King Peter II, American President Franklin Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill joined Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin in officially recognising Tito and the Partisans at the Tehran Conference. This resulted in Allied aid being parachuted behind Axis lines to assist the Partisans. On 17 June 1944 on the Dalmatian island of Vis, the Treaty of Vis () was signed in an attempt to merge Tito&#x27;s government (the AVNOJ) with the government in exile of King Peter II. The Balkan Air Force was formed in June 1944 to control operations that were mainly aimed at aiding his forces.

On 12 August 1944, Winston Churchill met Tito in Naples for a deal. On 12 September 1944, King Peter II called on all Yugoslavs to come together under Tito&#x27;s leadership and stated that those who did not were &quot;traitors&quot;, by which time Tito was recognised by all Allied authorities (including the government-in-exile) as the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, in addition to the commander-in-chief of the Yugoslav forces. On 28 September 1944, the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union (TASS) reported that Tito signed an agreement with the Soviet Union allowing &quot;temporary entry&quot; of Soviet troops into Yugoslav territory, which allowed the Red Army to assist in operations in the northeastern areas of Yugoslavia. With their strategic right flank secured by the Allied advance, the Partisans prepared and executed a massive general offensive that succeeded in breaking through German lines and forcing a retreat beyond Yugoslav borders. After the Partisan victory and the end of hostilities in Europe, all external forces were ordered off Yugoslav territory.

In the autumn of 1944, the communist leadership adopted a political decision on the expulsion of ethnic Germans from Yugoslavia. On 21 November, a special decree was issued on the confiscation and nationalisation of ethnic German property. To implement the decision, 70 camps were established in Yugoslav territory. In the final days of World War II in Yugoslavia, units of the Partisans were responsible for atrocities during Bleiburg repatriations, and accusations of culpability were later raised at the Yugoslav leadership under Tito. At the time, according to some scholars, Josip Broz Tito repeatedly issued calls for surrender to the retreating column, offering amnesty and attempting to avoid a disorderly surrender. On 14 May he dispatched a telegram to the supreme headquarters of the Slovene Partisan Army prohibiting the execution of prisoners of war and commanding the transfer of the possible suspects to a military court.

===Aftermath===
On 7 March 1945, the provisional government of the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia (DFY) was assembled in Belgrade by Josip Broz Tito, while the provisional name allowed for either a republic or monarchy. This government was headed by Tito as provisional Yugoslav Prime Minister and included representatives from the royalist government-in-exile, among others Ivan Šubašić. In accordance with the agreement between resistance leaders and the government-in-exile, post-war elections were held to determine the form of government. In November 1945, Tito&#x27;s pro-republican People&#x27;s Front, led by the Communist Party of Yugoslavia, won the elections with an overwhelming majority, the vote having been boycotted by monarchists. During the period, Tito evidently enjoyed massive popular support due to being generally viewed by the populace as the liberator of Yugoslavia. The Yugoslav administration in the immediate post-war period managed to unite a country that had been severely affected by ultra-nationalist upheavals and war devastation, while successfully suppressing the nationalist sentiments of the various nations in favour of tolerance, and the common Yugoslav goal. After the overwhelming electoral victory, Tito was confirmed as the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the DFY. The country was soon renamed the Federal People&#x27;s Republic of Yugoslavia (FPRY) (later finally renamed into Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, SFRY). On 29 November 1945, King Peter II was formally deposed by the Yugoslav Constituent Assembly. The Assembly drafted a new republican constitution soon afterwards.

Yugoslavia organised the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (, JNA) from the Partisan movement and became the fourth strongest army in Europe at the time, according to various estimates. The State Security Administration (, UDBA) was also formed as the new secret police, along with a security agency, the Department of People&#x27;s Security (, OZNA). Yugoslav intelligence was charged with imprisoning and bringing to trial large numbers of Nazi collaborators; controversially, this included Catholic clergymen due to the widespread involvement of Croatian Catholic clergy with the Ustaša regime. Draža Mihailović was found guilty of collaboration, high treason and war crimes and was subsequently executed by firing squad in July 1946.

Prime Minister Josip Broz Tito met with the president of the Bishops&#x27; Conference of Yugoslavia, Aloysius Stepinac on 4 June 1945, two days after his release from imprisonment. The two could not reach an agreement on the state of the Catholic Church. Under Stepinac&#x27;s leadership, the bishops&#x27; conference released a letter condemning alleged Partisan war crimes in September 1945. The next year, Stepinac was arrested and put on trial, which some saw as a show trial. In October 1946, in its first special session for 75 years, the Vatican excommunicated Tito and the Yugoslav government for sentencing Stepinac to 16 years in prison on charges of assisting Ustaše terror and of supporting forced conversions of Serbs to Catholicism. Stepinac received preferential treatment in recognition of his status and the sentence was soon shortened and reduced to house arrest, with the option of emigration open to the archbishop. At the conclusion of the &quot;Informbiro period&quot;, reforms rendered Yugoslavia considerably more religiously liberal than the Eastern Bloc states.

In the first post-war years, Tito was widely considered a communist leader very loyal to Moscow; indeed, he was often viewed as second only to Stalin in the Eastern Bloc. In fact, Stalin and Tito had an uneasy alliance from the start, with Stalin considering Tito too independent.

From 1946 to 1948, Tito actively engaged in building an alliance with neighbouring communist Albania, with the intent of incorporating Albania into Yugoslavia. According to Enver Hoxha, the then communist ruler of Albania, in the summer of 1946 Tito promised Hoxha that the Yugoslav province of Kosovo would be ceded to Albania. Despite the decision of unification being agreed upon by Yugoslav communists during the Bujan Conference, the plan never materialised. In the first post-war years in Kosovo, Tito enacted the policy of banning the return of Serb colonists to Kosovo, in addition to enacting the first large-scale primary education program of the Albanian language.

During the immediate post-war period, Tito&#x27;s Yugoslavia had a strong commitment to orthodox Marxist ideas. Harsh repressive measures against dissidents and &quot;enemies of the state&quot; were common from government agents, although not known to be under Tito&#x27;s orders, including &quot;arrests, show trials, forced collectivisation, suppression of churches and religion&quot;. As the leader of Yugoslavia, Tito displayed a fondness for luxury, taking over the royal palaces that had belonged to the House of Karađorđević together with the former palaces used by the House of Habsburg in Yugoslavia. His tours across Yugoslavia in his luxury Blue Train closely resembled the royal tours of the Karađorđević kings and Habsburg emperors and in Serbia. He also adopted the traditional royal custom of being a godfather to every 9th son, although he modified it to include daughters as well after criticism was made that the practice was sexist. Just like a Serbian king, Tito would appear wherever a 9th child was born to a family to congratulate the parents and give them cash. Tito always spoke very harshly of the Karađorđević kings in both public and private (through in private, he sometimes had a kind word for the Habsburgs), but in many ways, he appeared to his people as sort of a king.

==Presidency==
===Tito–Stalin split===
Unlike other states in east-central Europe liberated by allied forces, Yugoslavia liberated itself from Axis domination with limited direct support from the Red Army. Tito&#x27;s leading role in liberating Yugoslavia not only greatly strengthened his position in his party and among the Yugoslav people but also caused him to be more insistent that Yugoslavia had more room to follow its own interests than other Bloc leaders who had more reasons to recognise Soviet efforts in helping them liberate their own countries from Axis control. Although Tito was formally an ally of Stalin after World War II, the Soviets had set up a spy ring in the Yugoslav party as early as 1945, giving way to an uneasy alliance.

In the immediate aftermath of World War II, several armed incidents occurred between Yugoslavia and the Western Allies. Following the war, Yugoslavia acquired the Italian territory of Istria as well as the cities of Zadar and Rijeka. Yugoslav leadership was looking to incorporate Trieste into the country as well, which was opposed by the Western Allies. This led to several armed incidents, notably attacks by Yugoslav fighter planes on U.S. transport aircraft, causing bitter criticism from the West. In 1946 alone, Yugoslav air-force shot down two U.S. transport aircraft. The passengers and crew of the first plane were secretly interned by the Yugoslav government. The second plane and its crew were a total loss. The U.S. was outraged and sent an ultimatum to the Yugoslav government, demanding the release of the Americans in custody, U.S. access to the downed planes, and full investigation of the incidents. Stalin was opposed to what he felt were such provocations, as he believed the USSR unready to face the West in open war so soon after the losses of World War II and at the time when U.S. had operational nuclear weapons whereas the USSR had yet to conduct its first test. In addition, Tito was openly supportive of the Communist side in the Greek Civil War, while Stalin kept his distance, having agreed with Churchill not to pursue Soviet interests there, although he did support the Greek communist struggle politically, as demonstrated in several assemblies of the UN Security Council. In 1948, motivated by the desire to create a strong independent economy, Tito modelled his economic development plan independently from Moscow, which resulted in a diplomatic escalation followed by a bitter exchange of letters in which Tito wrote that &quot;We study and take as an example the Soviet system, but we are developing socialism in our country in somewhat different forms&quot;.

The Soviet answer on 4 May admonished Tito and the Communist Party of Yugoslavia (CPY) for failing to admit and correct its mistakes and went on to accuse them of being too proud of their successes against the Germans, maintaining that the Red Army had saved them from destruction. Tito&#x27;s response on 17 May suggested that the matter be settled at the meeting of the Cominform to be held that June. However, Tito did not attend the second meeting of the Cominform, fearing that Yugoslavia was to be openly attacked. In 1949 the crisis nearly escalated into an armed conflict, as Hungarian and Soviet forces were massing on the northern Yugoslav frontier. An invasion of Yugoslavia was planned to be carried out in 1949 via the combined forces of neighbouring Soviet satellite states of Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Albania, followed by the subsequent removal of Tito&#x27;s government. On 28 June, the other member countries of the Cominform expelled Yugoslavia, citing &quot;nationalist elements&quot; that had &quot;managed in the course of the past five or six months to reach a dominant position in the leadership&quot; of the CPY. The Hungarian and Romanian armies were expanded in size and, together with Soviet ones, massed on the Yugoslav border. The assumption in Moscow was that once it was known that he had lost Soviet approval, Tito would collapse; &quot;I will shake my little finger, and there will be no more Tito,&quot; Stalin remarked. The expulsion effectively banished Yugoslavia from the international association of socialist states, while other socialist states of Eastern Europe subsequently underwent purges of alleged &quot;Titoists&quot;. Stalin took the matter personally and arranged several assassination attempts on Tito&#x27;s life, none of which succeeded. In one correspondence between them, Tito openly wrote:

One significant consequence of the tension arising between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union was Tito&#x27;s decision to begin large-scale repression against enemies of the government. This repression was not limited to known and alleged Stalinists but also included members of the Communist Party or anyone exhibiting sympathy towards the Soviet Union. Prominent partisans, such as Vlado Dapčević and Dragoljub Mićunović, were victims of this period of strong repression, which lasted until 1956 and was marked by significant violations of human rights. Tens of thousands of political opponents served in forced labour camps, such as Goli Otok (meaning Barren Island), and hundreds died. An often disputed but relatively feasible number that was put forth by the Yugoslav government itself in 1964 places the number of Goli Otok inmates incarcerated between 1948 and 1956 to be 16,554, with less than 600 having died during detention. The facilities at Goli Otok were abandoned in 1956, and jurisdiction of the now-defunct political prison was handed over to the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia.

Tito&#x27;s estrangement from the USSR enabled Yugoslavia to obtain U.S. aid via the Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA), the same U.S. aid institution that administered the Marshall Plan. Still, Tito did not agree to align with the West, which was a common consequence of accepting American aid at the time. After Stalin&#x27;s death in 1953, relations with the USSR were relaxed, and Tito began to receive aid from the Comecon as well. In this way, Tito played East–West antagonism to his advantage. Instead of choosing sides, he was instrumental in kick-starting the Non-Aligned Movement, which would function as a &quot;third way&quot; for countries interested in staying outside of the East–West divide.

The event was significant not only for Yugoslavia and Tito, but also for the global development of socialism, since it was the first major split between Communist states, casting doubt on Comintern&#x27;s claims for socialism to be a unified force that would eventually control the whole world, as Tito became the first (and the only successful) socialist leader to defy Stalin&#x27;s leadership in the Cominform. This rift with the Soviet Union brought Tito much international recognition, but also triggered a period of instability often referred to as the Informbiro period. Tito&#x27;s form of communism was labelled &quot;Titoism&quot; by Moscow, which encouraged purges and repression against suspected and accused &quot;Titoites&#x27;&quot; throughout the Eastern Bloc. Some Trotskyists considered Tito to be an &#x27;unconscious Trotskyist&#x27; because of the split. However, this was rejected by Ted Grant in 1949 who asserted there were no fundamental principled differences between Stalin and Tito. He said they were both &#x27;proletarian Bonapartists&#x27; ruling deformed workers&#x27; statesTito modelling his regime on that of Stalin&#x27;s.

On 26 June 1950, the National Assembly supported a crucial bill written by Milovan Đilas and Tito regarding &quot;socialist self-management&quot;, a type of cooperative independent socialist experiment that introduced profit sharing and workplace democracy in previously state-run enterprises, which then came under direct social ownership of the employees. On 13 January 1953, they established that the law on self-management was the basis of the entire social order in Yugoslavia. Tito also succeeded Ivan Ribar as the President of Yugoslavia on 14 January 1953, becoming the official head of state. After Stalin&#x27;s death, Tito rejected the USSR&#x27;s invitation for a visit to discuss the normalisation of relations between the two nations. Nikita Khrushchev and Nikolai Bulganin visited Tito in Belgrade in 1955 and apologised for wrongdoings by Stalin&#x27;s administration, signing the Belgrade declaration. Tito visited the USSR in 1956, which signalled to the world that animosity between Yugoslavia and USSR was easing. Rapprochement between the two countries would not last long, as Yugoslav leadership took an increasingly explicit posture of non-alignment in the aftermath of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. Relations further deteriorated in the late 1960s because of Yugoslav economic reforms which consciously linked Yugoslavia to the international system, as well as Tito&#x27;s support for the Prague Spring, which itself found much of its inspiration in Yugoslav market socialism, and opposition to the subsequent Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia.

The Tito–Stalin split had large ramifications for countries outside the USSR and Yugoslavia. It has, for example, been given as one of the reasons for the Slánský trial in Czechoslovakia, in which 14 high-level Communist officials were purged, with 11 of them being executed. Stalin put pressure on Czechoslovakia to conduct purges in order to discourage the spread of the idea of a &quot;national path to socialism&quot;, which Tito espoused.

===Non-Alignment===

Under Tito&#x27;s leadership, Yugoslavia became a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement. In 1961, Tito co-founded the movement with Egypt&#x27;s Gamal Abdel Nasser, India&#x27;s Jawaharlal Nehru, Indonesia&#x27;s Sukarno and Ghana&#x27;s Kwame Nkrumah, in an action called The Initiative of Five (Tito, Nehru, Nasser, Sukarno, Nkrumah), thus establishing strong ties with third world countries. This move did much to improve Yugoslavia&#x27;s diplomatic position. Tito saw the Non-Aligned Movement as a way of presenting himself as a world leader of an important bloc of nations that would improve his bargaining power with both the eastern and western blocs. On 1 September 1961, Josip Broz Tito became the first Secretary-General of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Tito&#x27;s foreign policy led to relationships with a variety of governments, such as exchanging visits (1954 and 1956) with Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, where a street was named in his honour. In 1953, Tito visited Ethiopia, and in 1954, the Emperor visited Yugoslavia. Tito&#x27;s motives in befriending Ethiopia were somewhat self-interested as he wanted to send recent graduates of Yugoslav universities (whose standards were not up to those of Western universities, thus making them unemployable in the West) to work in Ethiopia, which was one of the few countries that was willing to accept them. As Ethiopia did not have much of a health care system or a university system, Haile Selassie, from 1953 onward, encouraged the graduates of Yugoslav universities, especially with medical degrees, to come work in his empire. Reflecting his tendency to pursue closer ties with Third World nations, from 1950 onward, Tito permitted Mexican films to be shown in Yugoslavia, where they became very popular, especially the 1950 film &quot;Un día de vida&quot;, which become a huge hit when it premiered in Yugoslavia in 1952. The success of Mexican films led to the &quot;Yu-Mex&quot; craze of the 1950s–1960s as Mexican music became popular, and it was fashionable for many Yugoslav musicians to don sombreros and sing Mexican songs in Serbo-Croatian.

Tito was notable for pursuing a foreign policy of neutrality during the Cold War and for establishing close ties with developing countries. Tito&#x27;s strong belief in self-determination caused the 1948 rift with Stalin and, consequently, the Eastern Bloc. His public speeches often reiterated that policy of neutrality and co-operation with all countries would be natural as long as these countries did not use their influence to pressure Yugoslavia to take sides. Relations with the United States and Western European nations were generally cordial. 

In the early 1950s, Yugoslav-Hungarian relations were strained as Tito made little secret of his distaste for the Stalinist Mátyás Rákosi and his preference for the &quot;national communist&quot; Imre Nagy instead. Tito&#x27;s decision to create a &quot;Balkan Pact&quot; by signing a treaty of alliance with NATO members Turkey and Greece in 1954 was regarded as tantamount to joining NATO in Soviet eyes, and his vague talk of a neutralist Communist federation of Eastern European states was seen as a major threat in Moscow. The Yugoslav embassy in Budapest was seen by the Soviets as a centre of subversion in Hungary as they accused Yugoslav diplomats and journalists, sometimes with justification, of supporting Nagy. However, when the revolt broke out in Hungary in October 1956, Tito accused Nagy of losing control of the situation, as he wanted a Communist Hungary independent of the Soviet Union, not the overthrow of Hungarian communism. On 31 October 1956, Tito ordered the Yugoslav media to stop praising Nagy and he quietly supported the Soviet intervention on 4 November to end the revolt in Hungary, as he believed that a Hungary ruled by anti-communists would pursue irredentist claims against Yugoslavia, as had just been the case during the interwar period. To escape from the Soviets, Nagy fled to the Yugoslav embassy, where Tito granted him asylum. On 5 November 1956, Soviet tanks shelled the Yugoslav embassy in Budapest, killing the Yugoslav cultural attache and several other diplomats. Tito&#x27;s refusal to turn over Nagy, despite increasingly shrill Soviet demands that he do so, served his purposes well with relations with the Western states, as he was presented in the Western media as the &quot;good communist&quot; who stood up to Moscow by sheltering Nagy and the other Hungarian leaders. On 22 November, Nagy and his cabinet left the embassy on a bus that took them into exile in Yugoslavia after the new Hungarian leader, János Kádár had promised Tito in writing that they would not be harmed. Much to Tito&#x27;s fury, when the bus left the Yugoslav embassy, it was promptly boarded by KGB agents who arrested the Hungarian leaders and roughly handled the Yugoslav diplomats who tried to protect them. Nagy&#x27;s kidnapping, followed by his execution, almost led Yugoslavia to break off diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, and in 1957 Tito boycotted the ceremonials in Moscow for the 40th anniversary of the October Revolution, the only communist leader who did not attend.

Yugoslavia had a liberal travel policy permitting foreigners to freely travel through the country and its citizens to travel worldwide, whereas it was limited by most Communist countries. A number of Yugoslav citizens worked throughout Western Europe. Tito met many world leaders during his rule, such as Soviet rulers Joseph Stalin, Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev; Egypt&#x27;s Gamal Abdel Nasser, Indian politicians Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi; British Prime Ministers Winston Churchill, James Callaghan and Margaret Thatcher; U.S. Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower, John F. Kennedy, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter; other political leaders, dignitaries and heads of state that Tito met at least once in his lifetime included Che Guevara, Fidel Castro, Yasser Arafat, Willy Brandt, Helmut Schmidt, Georges Pompidou, Kwame Nkrumah, Queen Elizabeth II, Hua Guofeng, Kim Il Sung, Sukarno, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Suharto, Idi Amin, Emperor Haile Selassie I, Kenneth Kaunda, Gaddafi, Erich Honecker, Nicolae Ceaușescu, János Kádár, Saddam Hussein and Urho Kekkonen. He also met numerous celebrities.

Yugoslavia provided major assistance to anti-colonialist movements in the Third World. The Yugoslav delegation was the first to bring the demands of the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN) to the United Nations. In January 1958, the French Navy boarded the &quot;Slovenija&quot; cargo ship off Oran, whose holds were filled with weapons for the insurgents. Diplomat Danilo Milić explained that &quot;Tito and the leading nucleus of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia really saw in the Third World&#x27;s liberation struggles a replica of their own struggle against the fascist occupants. They vibrated to the rhythm of the advances or setbacks of the FLN or Viet Cong.

Thousands of Yugoslav military advisors travelled to Guinea after its decolonisation and as the French government tried to destabilise the country. Tito also covertly helped left-wing liberation movements to destabilise the Portuguese colonial empire. He saw the murder of Patrice Lumumba in 1961 as the &quot;greatest crime in contemporary history&quot;. The country&#x27;s military academies hosted left-wing activists from SWAPO (Namibia) and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (South Africa) as part of Tito&#x27;s efforts to undermine apartheid in South Africa. In 1980, the intelligence services of South Africa and Argentina plotted to return the &#x27;favour&#x27; by covertly bringing 1,500 anti-urban communist guerrillas to Yugoslavia. The operation was aimed at overthrowing Tito and was planned during the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow so that the Soviets would be too busy to react. The operation was finally abandoned due to Tito&#x27;s death.

In 1953, Tito travelled to Britain for a state visit and met with Winston Churchill. He also toured Cambridge and visited the University Library.

Tito visited India from 22 December 1954 to 8 January 1955. After his return, he removed many restrictions on Yugoslavia&#x27;s churches and spiritual institutions.

Tito also developed warm relations with Burma under U Nu, travelling to the country in 1955 and again in 1959, though he did not receive the same treatment in 1959 from the new leader, Ne Win. Tito had an especially close friendship with Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, who preached an eccentric mixture of monarchism, Buddhism and socialism, and, like Tito, wanted his country to be neutral in the Cold War. Tito saw Sihanouk as something of a kindred soul who, like him, had to struggle to maintain his backward country&#x27;s neutrality in the face of rival power blocs. By contrast, Tito strongly disliked President Idi Amin of Uganda, whom he saw as thuggish and possibly insane.

Because of its neutrality, Yugoslavia was often rare among Communist countries in having diplomatic relations with right-wing, anti-communist governments. For example, Yugoslavia was the only communist country that had diplomatic relations with Alfredo Stroessner&#x27;s Paraguay. Yugoslavia went on to sell arms to the staunchly anti-communist regime of Guatemala under Kjell Eugenio Laugerud García during the Guatemalan Civil War. Notable exceptions to Yugoslavia&#x27;s neutral stance toward anti-communist countries include Spain under Franco, Greece under Greek junta, and Chile under Pinochet; Yugoslavia was one of many countries that severed diplomatic relations with Chile after Salvador Allende was overthrown.

===Reforms===

Starting in the 1950s, Tito&#x27;s government permitted Yugoslav workers to go to western Europe, especially West Germany, as &quot;Gastarbeiter&quot; (&quot;guest workers&quot;). The exposure of many Yugoslavs to the West and its culture led many Yugoslavians to view themselves as culturally closer to Western Europe than Eastern Europe. In the autumn of 1960, Tito met President Dwight D. Eisenhower at the United Nations General Assembly meeting. They discussed a range of issues from arms control to economic development. When Eisenhower remarked that Yugoslavia&#x27;s neutrality was &quot;neutral on his side&quot;, Tito replied that neutrality did not imply passivity but meant &quot;not taking sides&quot;. On 7 April 1963, the country changed its official name from &quot;Federal People&#x27;s Republic&quot; to &quot;Socialist Federal Republic&quot; of Yugoslavia. Economic reforms encouraged smallscale private enterprise (up to five full-time workers; most of these were family businesses and largest in agriculture) and greatly relaxed restrictions on religious expression. Tito subsequently toured the Americas. In Chile, two government ministers resigned over his visit to that country.

In 1966, an agreement with the Holy See, fostered in part by the death in 1960 of the anti-communist archbishop of Zagreb Aloysius Stepinac and shifts in the church&#x27;s approach to resisting communism originating in the Second Vatican Council, accorded new freedom to the Yugoslav Roman Catholic Church, particularly to catechise and open seminaries. The agreement also eased tensions, which had prevented the naming of new bishops in Yugoslavia since 1945. Holy See and Yugoslavia reconciled their relations and worked together on achieving peace in Vietnam. Tito&#x27;s new socialism met opposition from traditional communists culminating in a conspiracy headed by Aleksandar Ranković. Allegedly, the charge on which he was removed from power and expelled from the LCY was that he bugged Tito&#x27;s working and sleeping quarters as well as those of many other high government officials. For almost 20 years, Ranković was at the head of the State Security Administration (UDBA), as well as Federal Secretary of Internal Affairs. His position as a party whip and Tito&#x27;s way of controlling and monitoring the government and, to a certain extent, the people bothered many, especially the younger generation of government officials who were working toward a more liberal Yugoslav society. In the same year, Tito declared that communists must henceforth chart Yugoslavia&#x27;s course by the force of their arguments (implying an abandonment of Leninist orthodoxy and development of liberal socialism). 

On 1 January 1967, Yugoslavia became the first communist country to open its borders to all foreign visitors and abolish visa requirements. In the same year Tito became active in promoting a peaceful resolution of the Arab–Israeli conflict. His plan called for Arabs to recognise the state of Israel in exchange for territories Israel newly occupied.

In 1968, Tito offered to fly to Prague on three hours&#x27; notice if Czechoslovak leader Alexander Dubček needed help in facing down the Soviets. In April 1969, Tito removed generals Ivan Gošnjak and Rade Hamović in the aftermath of the invasion of Czechoslovakia due to the unpreparedness of the Yugoslav army to respond to a similar invasion of Yugoslavia.

In 1971, the Federal Assembly reelected Tito as president of Yugoslavia for the sixth time. In his speech before the Federal Assembly, he introduced 20 sweeping constitutional amendments to provide an updated framework on which the country would be based. The amendments provided for a collective presidency, a 22-member body consisting of elected representatives from six republics and two autonomous provinces. The body would have a single chairman of the presidency, and chairmanship would rotate among six republics. When the Federal Assembly failed to agree on legislation, the collective presidency would have the power to rule by decree. Amendments also provided for a stronger cabinet with considerable power to initiate and pursue legislation independently from the Communist Party. Džemal Bijedić was chosen as the Premier. The new amendments aimed to decentralise the country by granting greater autonomy to republics and provinces. The federal government would retain authority only over foreign affairs, defence, internal security, monetary affairs, free trade within Yugoslavia, and development loans to poorer regions. Control of education, healthcare, and housing would be exercised entirely by the governments of the republics and the autonomous provinces.

Tito&#x27;s greatest strength, in the eyes of the western communists, had been in suppressing nationalist insurrections and maintaining unity throughout the country. It was Tito&#x27;s call for brotherhood and unity, and related methods, that held together the people of Yugoslavia. This ability was put to a test several times during his reign, notably during the Croatian Spring (also referred as the or Maspok for short, meaning &quot;Mass Movement&quot;) when the government suppressed both public demonstrations and dissenting opinions within the Communist Party. Despite this suppression, much of Maspok&#x27;s demands, including for decentralisation, were later realised with the new constitution, heavily backed by Tito himself against opposition from the Serbian branch of the party, who favoured centralisation. On 16 May 1974, the new Constitution was passed, and the 82-year-old Tito was named president for life. But the 1974 constitution caused issues for the Yugoslavian economy and distorted its market mechanism, leading to escalation of ethnic tensions.

Tito&#x27;s visits to the U.S. avoided most of the Northeast due to large minorities of Yugoslav emigrants bitter about communism in Yugoslavia. Security for the state visits was usually high to keep him away from protesters, who frequently burned the Yugoslav flag. During a visit to the United Nations in the late 1970s, emigrants shouted &quot;Tito murderer&quot; outside his New York hotel, which he protested to United States authorities.

==Final years and death==
After the constitutional changes of 1974, Tito began reducing his role in the day-to-day running of the state, transferring much of it to the prime minister who was the head of government, but retained the final word on all major policy decisions as president and head of state and as the head of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia. The 40th anniversary of his communist party leadership was observed on the Youth Day of 1977 throughout Yugoslavia. He continued to travel abroad and receive foreign visitors, going to Beijing in 1977 and reconciling with the Chinese leadership that had once branded him a revisionist. In turn, Chairman Hua Guofeng visited Yugoslavia in 1979. In 1978, Tito travelled to the U.S. During the visit, strict security was imposed in Washington, D.C., owing to protests by anti-communist Croat, Serb and Albanian groups.

Tito became increasingly ill over the course of 1979. During this time, &quot;Vila Srna&quot; was built for his use near Morović in the event of his recovery. On 7 January and again on 12 January 1980, Tito was admitted to the Medical Centre in Ljubljana, the capital city of the SR Slovenia, with circulation problems in his legs. Tito&#x27;s stubbornness and refusal to allow doctors to follow through with the necessary amputation of his left leg played a part in his eventual death of gangrene-induced infection. His adjutant later testified that Tito threatened to take his own life if his leg was ever amputated and that he had to hide Tito&#x27;s pistol in fear that he would follow through on his threat. After a private conversation with his sons Žarko and Mišo Broz, he finally agreed, and his left leg was amputated due to arterial blockages. The amputation proved to be too late, and Tito died at the Medical Centre of Ljubljana on 4 May 1980, three days short of his 88th birthday.

The state funeral of Josip Broz Tito drew many world statesmen. It attracted government leaders from 129 states. Based on the number of attending politicians and state delegations, at the time it was the largest state funeral in history; this concentration of dignitaries would be unmatched until the funeral of Pope John Paul II in 2005 and the memorial service of Nelson Mandela in 2013. Those who attended included four kings, 31 presidents, six princes, 22 prime ministers, and 47 ministers of foreign affairs. They came from both sides of the Cold War, from 128 countries out of 154 UN members at the time.

Reporting on his death, &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote:

Tito was interred in the House of Flowers, a mausoleum in Belgrade which forms part of a memorial complex in the grounds of the Museum of Yugoslav History (formerly called &quot;Museum 25 May&quot; and &quot;Museum of the Revolution&quot;). The museum keeps the gifts Tito received during his presidency. The collection includes original prints of &quot;Los Caprichos&quot; by Francisco Goya, and many others.

==Evaluation==
Dominic McGoldrick writes that as the head of a &quot;highly centralised and oppressive&quot; regime, Tito wielded tremendous power in Yugoslavia, with his authoritarian rule administered through an elaborate bureaucracy that routinely suppressed human rights. The main victims of this repression during the first years were known and alleged Stalinists, such as Dragoslav Mihailović and Dragoljub Mićunović, but in later years, even some of the most prominent of Tito&#x27;s collaborators were arrested. On 19 November 1956, Milovan Đilas, perhaps the closest of Tito&#x27;s collaborators, widely regarded as his possible successor, was arrested because of his criticism of Tito&#x27;s regime. Victor Sebestyen writes that Tito &quot;was as brutal as&quot; Stalin. The repression did not exclude intellectuals and writers, such as Venko Markovski, who was arrested and sent to jail in January 1956 for writing poems considered anti-Titoist.

Even if, after the reforms of 1961, Tito&#x27;s presidency had become comparatively more liberal than other communist regimes, the Communist Party continued to alternate between liberalism and repression. Yugoslavia managed to remain independent from the Soviet Union, and its brand of socialism was in many ways the envy of Eastern Europe, but Tito&#x27;s Yugoslavia remained a tightly controlled police state. According to David Matas, outside the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia had more political prisoners than all of the rest of Eastern Europe combined. Tito&#x27;s secret police were modelled on the Soviet KGB. Its members were ever-present and often acted extrajudicially, with victims including middle-class intellectuals, liberals and democrats. Yugoslavia was a signatory to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, but scant regard was paid to its provisions. 

Tito&#x27;s Yugoslavia was based on respect for nationality, though Tito ruthlessly purged any flowerings of nationalism that threatened the Yugoslav federation. But the contrast between the deference given to some ethnic groups and the severe repression of others was sharp. Yugoslav law guaranteed nationalities to use their language, but for ethnic Albanians, the assertion of ethnic identity was severely limited. Almost half of Yugoslavia&#x27;s political prisoners were ethnic Albanians imprisoned for asserting their ethnic identity.

Yugoslavia&#x27;s post-war development was impressive, but the country ran into economic snags around 1970 and experienced significant unemployment and inflation.

Declassified documents from the CIA state in 1967, it was already clear that although Tito&#x27;s economic model had achieved growth of the gross national product around 7%, it also created frequently unwise industrial investment and a chronic deficit in the nation&#x27;s balance of payment. In the 1970s, uncontrolled growth often created chronic inflation, which Tito and the Party could not fully stabilise or moderate. Yugoslavia also paid high interest on loans compared to the LIBOR rate, but Tito&#x27;s presence eased investors&#x27; fears since he had proven willing and able to implement unpopular reforms. By 1979 with Tito&#x27;s passing on the horizon, a global downturn in the economy, consistently increasing unemployment and growth slowing to 5.9% throughout the 1970s, it had become likely that &quot;the rapid economic growth to which the Yugoslavs [had] become accustomed&quot; would aggressively decline.

With the passing of the 1974 Yugoslav Constitution, Tito initiated what, according to A. Ross Johnson of the United States Department of State, &quot;constituted the first effort in postwar Yugoslavia (and the first attempt in any Communist system) to establish depersonalised and institutionalised &#x27;rules of the game&#x27; in Party decision-making bodies intended to apply to the period of succession.&quot; This system created a state and party presidency that was governed collectively, each limited to one year term of office. But this system might have contributed to the collapse of Yugoslavia, according to professor Robert M. Hayden: &quot;While perhaps no federal structure could have contained the political pressures of Yugoslavia in 1989/91, the flaws of the 1974 constitution served to ensure that they became unmanageable, thus making civil war virtually inevitable. Responsibility for the war must thus be shared, between the Slovenes, whose actions destroyed the federal structure, [Slobodan] Milošević, whose aggressive politics goaded the Slovenes into doing so, and the drafters of the constitution, who made the chimaera of a &quot;confederation&quot; seem a reasonable constitutional structure.&quot;

==Legacy==



Tito is credited with transforming Yugoslavia from a poor nation to a middle-income one that saw vast improvements in women&#x27;s rights, health, education, urbanisation, industrialisation, and many other areas of human and economic development. A 2010 poll found that as many as 81% of Serbians believe that life was better under Tito. Tito also ranked first in the &quot;Greatest Croatian&quot; poll which was conducted in 2003 by the Croatian weekly news magazine &quot;Nacional&quot;.

During his life and especially in the first year after his death, several places were named after Tito; several of these have since returned to their original names.

For example, Podgorica, formerly Titograd (though Podgorica&#x27;s international airport is still identified by the code TGD), and Užice, formerly known as Titovo Užice, which reverted to its original name in 1992. Streets in Belgrade, the capital, have all reverted to their original pre-World War II and pre-communist names as well. In 2004, Antun Augustinčić&#x27;s statue of Broz in his birthplace of Kumrovec was decapitated in an explosion. It was subsequently repaired. Twice in 2008, protests took place in what was then Zagreb&#x27;s Marshal Tito Square (since 2017 the Republic of Croatia Square), organised by a group called Circle for the Square (), with an aim to force the city government to rename it to its previous name, while a counter-protest by Citizens&#x27; Initiative Against Ustašism () accused the &quot;Circle for the Square&quot; of historical revisionism and neo-fascism. Croatian president Stjepan Mesić criticised the demonstration to change the name.

In the Croatian coastal city of Opatija the main street (also its longest street) still bears the name of Marshal Tito. Rijeka, third largest city in Croatia, also refuses to change the name of one of the squares in the city centre named after Tito. There are streets named after Tito in numerous towns in Serbia, mostly in the country&#x27;s north (Vojvodina). One of the main streets in downtown Sarajevo is called Marshal Tito Street, and Tito&#x27;s statue in a park in front of the university campus (ex. JNA barrack &quot;Maršal Tito&quot;) in Marijin Dvor is a place where Bosnians and Sarajevans still today commemorate and pay tribute to Tito. The largest Tito monument in the world, about high, is in Tito Square (), the central square in Velenje, Slovenia. One of the main bridges in Slovenia&#x27;s second largest city of Maribor is Tito Bridge (). The central square in Koper, the largest Slovenian port city, is named Tito Square. The main-belt asteroid 1550 Tito, discovered by Serbian astronomer Milorad B. Protić at Belgrade Observatory in 1937, was named in his honour.

The Croat historian Marijana Belaj wrote that for some people in Croatia and other parts of the former Yugoslavia, Tito is remembered as a sort of secular saint, mentioning how some Croats keep portraits of Catholic saints together with a portrait of Tito on their walls as a way to bring hope. The practice of writing letters to Tito has continued well after his death with several websites in former Yugoslavia devoted entirely as forums for people to send him posthumous letters, in which they often write about personal problems. Every year on 25 May, several thousand people from the former Yugoslavia gather in Tito&#x27;s hometown of Kumrovec and his resting place, House of Flowers, to pay tribute to his memory and celebrate the former country&#x27;s Youth Day, which in the Yugoslav era was one of the biggest annual celebrations and was marked by the Relay of Youth with a birthday pledge to Tito. Belaj wrote that much of the Tito cult&#x27;s posthumous appeal centres around Tito&#x27;s everyman persona and his image as a &quot;friend&quot; to ordinary people, in contrast to the way in which Stalin was depicted in his cult of personality as a cold, aloof, godlike figure whose extraordinary qualities set him apart from ordinary people. Most of those who come to Kumrovec on 25 May to kiss Tito&#x27;s statue are women. Belaji wrote that the Tito cult&#x27;s appeal today owes less to communism, observing that most people who come to Kumrovec do not believe in communism, than to nostalgia for Tito&#x27;s Yugoslavia and affection for an &quot;ordinary man&quot; who became great. Tito was not a Croat nationalist, but the fact that Tito became the world&#x27;s most famous Croat, serving as the leader of the Non-Aligned Movement and being seen as an important world leader, inspires pride in certain quarters of Croatia.

Every year a &quot;Brotherhood and Unity&quot; relay race is organised in Montenegro, North Macedonia, and Serbia that ends on 25 May at the &quot;House of Flowers&quot;, Tito&#x27;s final resting place. At the same time, runners in Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina set off for Kumrovec. The relay is a leftover from the Relay of Youth from Yugoslav times, when young people made a similar yearly trek on foot through Yugoslavia that ended in Belgrade with a massive celebration.

&quot;Tito and Me&quot; (), a Yugoslav comedy film by Serbian director Goran Marković, was released in 1992.

In the years following Yugoslavia&#x27;s dissolution, historians started highlighting that human rights were suppressed in Yugoslavia under Tito, particularly in the first decade before the Tito–Stalin split. On 4 October 2011, the Slovenian Constitutional Court found a 2009 naming of a street in Ljubljana after Tito to be unconstitutional. While several public areas in Slovenia (named during the Yugoslav period) already bear Tito&#x27;s name, on the issue of renaming an additional street the court ruled that:
But the court made clear that the purpose of the review was &quot;not a verdict on Tito as a figure or on his concrete actions, as well as not a historical weighing of facts and circumstances&quot;. Slovenia has several streets and squares named after Tito, notably &quot;Tito Square&quot; in Velenje, incorporating a 10-meter statue.

Some scholars have named Tito as responsible for the systematic eradication of the ethnic German (Danube Swabian) population in Vojvodina by expulsions and mass executions following the collapse of the German occupation of Yugoslavia at the end of World War II, in contrast to his inclusive attitude towards other Yugoslav nationalities.

==Family and personal life==
Tito was married several times and had numerous affairs. In 1918 he was brought to Omsk, Russia, as a prisoner of war. There he met , who was then 14; he married her a year later, and she moved with him to Yugoslavia. They had five children, but only their son (born 4 February 1924) survived. When Tito was jailed in 1928, Belousova returned to Russia. After the divorce in 1936, she remarried.

In 1936, when Tito stayed at the Hotel Lux in Moscow, he met the Austrian . They married in October 1936, but the records of this marriage were later deliberately erased.

His next relationship was with Herta Haas, whom he married in 1940. Tito left for Belgrade after the April War, leaving Haas pregnant. In May 1941, she gave birth to their son, Aleksandar &quot;Mišo&quot; Broz. Throughout his relationship with Haas, Tito maintained a promiscuous life and had a parallel relationship with , who, under the codename &quot;Zdenka Horvat&quot;, served as a courier in the resistance and became his personal secretary. Haas and Tito suddenly parted company in 1943 in Jajce during the second meeting of AVNOJ after she reportedly walked in on him and Davorjanka. The last time Haas saw Broz was in 1946. Davorjanka died of tuberculosis in 1946, and Tito insisted that she be buried in the backyard of the Beli Dvor, his Belgrade residence.

His best-known wife was Jovanka Broz. Tito was just shy of his 60th birthday and she was 27 when they married in April 1952, with state security chief Aleksandar Ranković as the best man. Their marriage came about somewhat unexpectedly since Tito actually rejected her some years earlier when his confidante originally presented her to him. At that time, she was in her early 20s, and Tito objected to her upbeat personality. Not one to be easily discouraged, Jovanka continued working at Beli Dvor, where she managed the staff and eventually got another chance. But their relationship was not happy. It had gone through many, often public, ups and downs, with episodes of infidelity and even allegations of preparation for a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; by the latter pair. Certain unofficial reports suggest Tito and Jovanka formally divorced in the late 1970s, shortly before his death, but during Tito&#x27;s funeral, she was present in an official capacity as his wife and later claimed inheritance rights. The couple had no children.

Tito&#x27;s grandchildren include Saša Broz, a theatre director in Croatia; Svetlana Broz, a cardiologist and writer in Bosnia and Herzegovina; Josip Broz (better-known as Joška Broz), a politician in Serbia; Edvard Broz and Natali Klasevski, an artisan of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As president, Tito had access to extensive (state-owned) property associated with the office and maintained a lavish lifestyle. In Belgrade, he resided in the official residence, the Beli Dvor, and maintained a separate private home at 10 Užička Street. The Brijuni Islands were the site of the State Summer Residence from 1949 on. The pavilion was designed by Jože Plečnik and included a zoo. Close to 100 foreign heads of state visited Tito at the island residence, along with film stars such as Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton, Sophia Loren, Carlo Ponti, and Gina Lollobrigida. On the island of Brijuni, a museum displays photos of the many visitors that Tito received over more than three decades.


Another residence was maintained at Lake Bled, while the grounds at Karađorđevo were the site of &quot;diplomatic hunts&quot;. By 1974 Tito had at his disposal 32 official residences, large and small, the yacht &quot;Galeb&quot; (&quot;seagull&quot;), a Boeing 727 as the presidential aeroplane, and the Blue Train. After his death, the presidential Boeing 727 was sold to Aviogenex, the &quot;Galeb&quot; remained docked in Montenegro, and the Blue Train was stored in a Serbian train shed for over two decades. While Tito was the person who held the office of president for by far the longest period, the associated property was not private, and much of it continues to be used by national governments, as public property or for use by high-ranking officials.

Tito claimed to speak Serbo-Croatian, German, Russian, and some English. His official biographer and then fellow Central Committee-member Vladimir Dedijer said in 1953 that he spoke &quot;Serbo-Croatian ... Russian, Czech, Slovenian ... German (with a Viennese accent) ... understands and reads French and Italian ... [and] also speaks Kazakh.&quot; At the 38th World Esperanto Congress held in Zagreb in 1953, Tito revealed his knowledge of Esperanto, which he had learned during his time in prison.

In his youth, Tito attended Catholic Sunday school and was later an altar boy. After an incident where he was slapped and shouted at by a priest when he had difficulty helping the priest remove his vestments, Tito did not cross another church&#x27;s threshold. As an adult, he identified as an atheist.

Every federal unit had a town or city with historical significance to World War II renamed to include Tito&#x27;s name. The largest of these was Titograd, now Podgorica, the capital city of Montenegro. With the exception of Titograd, the cities were renamed simply by the addition of the adjective &quot;Titov&quot; &#x27;Tito&#x27;s&#x27;. The names reverted to their original names after the Fall of Communism. The cities were:

===Language and identity dispute===
In the years after Tito&#x27;s death and up to the present, many conspiracy theories have been put forward suggesting the existence of several people who were actually Tito, none with any serious evidence to support them. Serbian journalist Vladan Dinić argued in &quot;Tito Is Not Tito&quot; that three separate people had identified as Tito. Tito&#x27;s personal physician, Aleksandar Matunović, wrote a book about Tito in which he questioned his true origins, noting that Tito&#x27;s habits and lifestyle could mean only that he was from an aristocratic family.

In 2013, media coverage was given to a declassified NSA study in &quot;Cryptologic Spectrum&quot; that concluded Tito had not spoken Serbo-Croatian like a native speaker. The report noted that his speech had features of other Slavic languages (Russian and Polish). The hypothesis that &quot;a non-Yugoslav, perhaps a Russian or a Pole&quot; assumed Tito&#x27;s identity was included with a note that this had happened during or before the Second World War. The report notes Draža Mihailović&#x27;s impressions of Tito&#x27;s Russian origins after he had personally spoken with Tito.

However, the NSA&#x27;s report was disputed by Croatian experts. The report failed to recognise that Tito was a native speaker of the very distinctive local Kajkavian dialect of Zagorje. His strong accent, present only in Croatian dialects, which Tito was able to pronounce perfectly, is the strongest evidence for his Zagorje origins.

===Origin of the name &quot;Tito&quot;===
As the Communist Party was outlawed in Yugoslavia starting on 30 December 1920, Josip Broz took on many assumed names during his activity within the Party, including &quot;Rudi&quot;, &quot;Walter&quot;, and &quot;Tito&quot;. Broz himself explains:

==Awards and decorations==

Josip Broz Tito received a total of 119 awards and decorations from 60 countries around the world (59 countries and Yugoslavia). 21 decorations were from Yugoslavia itself, 18 having been awarded once, and the Order of the National Hero on three occasions. Of the 98 international awards and decorations, 92 were received once, and three on two occasions (Order of the White Lion, Polonia Restituta, and Karl Marx). The most notable awards included the French Legion of Honour and National Order of Merit, the British Order of the Bath, the Soviet Order of Victory, the Japanese Order of the Chrysanthemum, the West German Federal Cross of Merit, and the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic.

The decorations were seldom displayed, however. After the Tito–Stalin split of 1948 and his inauguration as president in 1953, Tito rarely wore his uniform except when present in a military function, and then (with rare exception) only wore his Yugoslav ribbons for obvious practical reasons. The awards were displayed in full number only at his funeral in 1980. Tito&#x27;s reputation as one of the Allied leaders of World War II, along with his diplomatic position as the founder of the Non-Aligned Movement, was primarily the cause of the favourable international recognition.

===Domestic awards===

==Notes and references==
===Explanatory footnotes===
===Citations===

===Works cited===
====Books====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


====Journals and papers====
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* , also Published as 
* 
* 

===Historiography and memory===
* online
* Cicic, Ana. &quot;Yugoslavia Revisited: Contested Histories through Public Memories of President Tito.&quot; (2020). online
* Cosovschi, Agustin. &quot;Seeing and Imagining the Land of Tito: Oscar Waiss and the Geography of Socialist Yugoslavia.&quot; &quot;Balkanologie. Revue d&#x27;études pluridisciplinaires&quot; 17.1 (2022). online
* Foster, Samuel. &quot;Yugoslavia in the British imagination: Peace, war and peasants before Tito&quot; (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2021) online. See also online book review
* Trošt, Tamara P. &quot;The image of Josip Broz Tito in post-Yugoslavia: Between national and local memory.&quot; in &quot;Ruler Personality Cults from Empires to Nation-States and Beyond&quot; (Routledge, 2020) pp. 143–162. online

==External links==
* Josip Broz Tito Archive at marxists.org
* Josip Broz Tito, &quot;The Yugoslav peoples fight to live&quot;, 1944.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="0" end="10" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="60" end="64" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="224" end="236" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="249" end="267" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="306" end="325" title="Resistance during World War II" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="329" end="351" title="German-occupied Europe" label="German-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419999" start="418" end="432" title="Prime Minister of Yugoslavia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944203" start="456" end="465" title="President of Yugoslavia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q663333" start="570" end="577" title="Titoism" label="Titoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q696051" start="636" end="644" title="Kumrovec" label="Kumrovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="662" end="677" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="758" end="772" title="sergeant major" label="sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="780" end="801" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="882" end="893" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="929" end="943" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="985" end="1003" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="1031" end="1048" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="1073" end="1080" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1123" end="1144" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="1166" end="1195" title="Communist Party of Yugoslavia" label="Communist Party of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1376" end="1388" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="1400" end="1425" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="Nazi invasion of the area"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="1471" end="1480" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060388" start="1537" end="1561" title="Yugoslavia and the Allies" label="the Allies&amp;#x27; backing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419999" start="1639" end="1653" title="Prime Minister of Yugoslavia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944203" start="1667" end="1676" title="President of Yugoslavia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="1699" end="1717" title="president for life" label="president for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393225" start="1724" end="1745" title="marshal of Yugoslavia" label="marshal of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="1771" end="1798" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="1857" end="1872" title="communist state" label="communist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1907" end="1947" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183533" start="1990" end="1999" title="Cominform" label="Cominform"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="2061" end="2074" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090550" start="2099" end="2114" title="Soviet hegemony" label="Soviet hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="2122" end="2134" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="2230" end="2247" title="Tito–Stalin split" label="Tito–Stalin split"/>
<link wikidata="Q268003" start="2337" end="2351" title="Edvard Kardelj" label="Edvard Kardelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q153909" start="2356" end="2369" title="Milovan Đilas" label="Milovan Đilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q627232" start="2411" end="2436" title="socialist self-management" label="socialist self-management"/>
<link wikidata="Q627093" start="2468" end="2489" title="workers&amp;#x27; council" label="workers&amp;#x27; council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035059" start="2524" end="2543" title="workplace democracy" label="workplace democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419726" start="2554" end="2570" title="share of profits" label="share of profits"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="2693" end="2707" title="ethnic tension" label="ethnic tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028151" start="2864" end="2891" title="withering away of the state" label="withering away of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q531855" start="3026" end="3047" title="brotherhood and unity" label="brotherhood and unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="3113" end="3132" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="3464" end="3501" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="communism collapsed in Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="3544" end="3553" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="3573" end="3601" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="a series of interethnic wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="3655" end="3668" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="3686" end="3694" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q446840" start="3731" end="3750" title="benevolent dictator" label="benevolent dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="4083" end="4103" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="4115" end="4131" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="4142" end="4160" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="4171" end="4184" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="4199" end="4206" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4272" end="4280" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q725165" start="4311" end="4333" title="Awards and decorations received by Josip Broz Tito" label="98 foreign decorations"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="4349" end="4365" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="4374" end="4391" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q696051" start="4469" end="4477" title="Kumrovec" label="Kumrovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q743502" start="4524" end="4531" title="Zagorje" label="Zagorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="4564" end="4591" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="4603" end="4626" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4834" end="4848" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="4876" end="4881" title="Croat" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="4973" end="4980" title="Slovenes" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q598910" start="5001" end="5009" title="Podsreda" label="Podsreda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="5423" end="5430" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="5443" end="5451" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5965" end="5978" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="6098" end="6103" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="6257" end="6262" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304418" start="6263" end="6272" title="locksmith" label="locksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399402" start="6356" end="6370" title="room and board" label="room and board"/>
<link wikidata="Q47499" start="6589" end="6596" title="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day" label="May Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="6779" end="6785" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563596" start="6903" end="6950" title="Social Democratic Party of Croatia and Slavonia" label="Social Democratic Party of Croatia and Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="7058" end="7067" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="7074" end="7081" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q15883" start="7291" end="7297" title="Kamnik" label="Kamnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q210436" start="7305" end="7324" title="Kamnik–Savinja Alps" label="Kamnik–Savinja Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698068" start="7374" end="7380" title="Čenkov" label="Čenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869895" start="7384" end="7391" title="History of the Lands of the Bohemian Crown (1867–1918)" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="7655" end="7660" title="Plzeň" label="Plzeň"/>
<link wikidata="Q391795" start="7699" end="7710" title="Škoda Works" label="Škoda Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="7733" end="7739" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="7743" end="7750" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="7774" end="7778" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119" start="7794" end="7802" title="Mannheim" label="Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="7819" end="7823" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="7875" end="7881" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131612" start="7993" end="8008" title="Wiener Neustadt" label="Wiener Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27091" start="8030" end="8044" title="Austro-Daimler" label="Austro-Daimler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="8138" end="8145" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="8240" end="8245" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="8288" end="8297" title="conscript" label="conscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="8309" end="8330" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374089" start="8416" end="8449" title="Royal Croatian Home Guard" label="25th Croatian Home Guard Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="8560" end="8584" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="8595" end="8603" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="8636" end="8650" title="sergeant major" label="sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8967" end="8978" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="9045" end="9052" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="9083" end="9091" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586088" start="9114" end="9135" title="Petrovaradin fortress" label="Petrovaradin fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="9151" end="9159" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q841559" start="9540" end="9553" title="Serbian Campaign of World War I" label="Serbian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="9583" end="9596" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="9600" end="9607" title="Galicia (Central Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="9639" end="9645" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="9971" end="9976" title="Reconnaissance" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="9977" end="9984" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408764" start="10721" end="10730" title="Circassia" label="Circassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="10798" end="10806" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="11429" end="11444" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717770" start="11539" end="11548" title="Sviyazhsk" label="Sviyazhsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="11556" end="11561" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="11573" end="11578" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="11757" end="11764" title="Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="11769" end="11777" title="Turgenev" label="Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746" start="11865" end="11883" title="Samara Governorate" label="Samara Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q155974" start="12003" end="12009" title="Kungur" label="Kungur"/>
<link wikidata="Q915" start="12024" end="12028" title="Perm, Russia" label="Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="12096" end="12118" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303970" start="12252" end="12268" title="Red Cross parcel" label="Red Cross parcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="12349" end="12368" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="12437" end="12446" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="12546" end="12555" title="Petrograd" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329902" start="12726" end="12738" title="Richard West (journalist)" label="Richard West"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513021" start="12876" end="12888" title="Royal Serbian Army" label="Serbian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="12916" end="12939" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322251" start="13164" end="13173" title="July Days" label="July Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="13300" end="13307" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="13478" end="13508" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="Russian Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48211" start="13516" end="13534" title="Alexander Kerensky" label="Alexander Kerensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q38646" start="13561" end="13584" title="Peter and Paul Fortress" label="Peter and Paul Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="13768" end="13781" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Yekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q898" start="13822" end="13826" title="Omsk" label="Omsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="13830" end="13837" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="14050" end="14064" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418376" start="14125" end="14148" title="Red Guards (Russia)" label="International Red Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q605324" start="14257" end="14276" title="Czechoslovak Legion" label="Czechoslovak Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330800" start="14340" end="14371" title="Provisional Siberian Government (Omsk)" label="Provisional Siberian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="14539" end="14545" title="Kazakh people" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="14640" end="14648" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="14670" end="14682" title="White forces" label="White forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325327" start="14696" end="14730" title="Provisional All-Russian Government" label="Provisional All-Russian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q185718" start="14734" end="14751" title="Alexander Kolchak" label="Alexander Kolchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q102158" start="15265" end="15270" title="Narva" label="Narva"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="15283" end="15290" title="Stettin" label="Stettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="15418" end="15455" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q396491" start="15517" end="15529" title="Jastrebarsko" label="Jastrebarsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="15588" end="15623" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="15687" end="15716" title="Communist Party of Yugoslavia" label="Communist Party of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755418" start="16589" end="16606" title="Milorad Drašković" label="Milorad Drašković"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748272" start="16686" end="16700" title="Alija Alijagić" label="Alija Alijagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640012" start="16873" end="16892" title="political prisoners in Yugoslavia" label="political prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q283356" start="17010" end="17025" title="Veliko Trojstvo" label="Veliko Trojstvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17547" end="17555" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="17757" end="17773" title="Serbian Orthodox" label="Serbian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q396555" start="18629" end="18639" title="Kraljevica" label="Kraljevica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="18647" end="18655" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293962" start="18945" end="18954" title="Yugoslav training ship Galeb" label="his yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q396555" start="18994" end="19004" title="Kraljevica" label="Kraljevica"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="19028" end="19040" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282536" start="19071" end="19098" title="People&amp;#x27;s Radical Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q648570" start="19111" end="19129" title="Milan Stojadinović" label="Milan Stojadinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518641" start="19212" end="19232" title="union representative" label="union representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q715716" start="19355" end="19374" title="Smederevska Palanka" label="Smederevska Palanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="19380" end="19388" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853443" start="19447" end="19470" title="exploitation of workers" label="exploitation of workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q397372" start="19823" end="19829" title="Ogulin" label="Ogulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="20642" end="20656" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267207" start="20713" end="20726" title="Sima Marković" label="Sima Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="20778" end="20801" title="Communist International" label="Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="21121" end="21130" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560945" start="21245" end="21268" title="Yugoslav Social-Democratic Party" label="Social-Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527775" start="22176" end="22192" title="Lepoglava prison" label="Lepoglava prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q453472" start="22305" end="22316" title="Moša Pijade" label="Moša Pijade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010" start="22693" end="22700" title="Maribor" label="Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="23225" end="23237" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q695513" start="24007" end="24015" title="Heimwehr" label="Heimwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288779" start="24281" end="24293" title="Milan Gorkić" label="Milan Gorkić"/>
<link wikidata="Q253485" start="24428" end="24462" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Ljubljana" label="Roman Catholic bishop of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q268003" start="24553" end="24567" title="Edvard Kardelj" label="Edvard Kardelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q371355" start="25361" end="25379" title="Vlado Chernozemski" label="Vlado Chernozemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="25401" end="25447" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="25517" end="25523" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="25538" end="25552" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="King Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="25793" end="25802" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="25919" end="25923" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="25927" end="25941" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676676" start="26359" end="26368" title="Hotel Lux" label="Hotel Lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644209" start="26372" end="26388" title="Tverskaya Street" label="Tverskaya Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q795616" start="26421" end="26435" title="Vladimir Ćopić" label="Vladimir Ćopić"/>
<link wikidata="Q155074" start="26741" end="26756" title="Georgi Dimitrov" label="Georgi Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q138908" start="26903" end="26918" title="Bolshoi Theatre" label="Bolshoi Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413000" start="26963" end="27002" title="Seventh World Congress of the Comintern" label="Seventh World Congress of the Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="27049" end="27062" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27117" end="27129" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="27151" end="27157" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011202" start="27805" end="27813" title="Trbovlje" label="Trbovlje"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="28336" end="28353" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="28372" end="28383" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q782381" start="28570" end="28585" title="Filip Filipović (politician)" label="Filip Filipović"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="28652" end="28656" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987146" start="28818" end="28828" title="Yugoslav volunteers in the Spanish Civil War" label="volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132518" start="28837" end="28859" title="International Brigades" label="International Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="28990" end="28995" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393117" start="29050" end="29059" title="Ivo Banac" label="Ivo Banac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165755" start="29379" end="29395" title="Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne" label="Paris Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="29440" end="29448" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268048" start="29991" end="30017" title="Communist Party of Croatia" label="Communist Party of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q390587" start="30068" end="30075" title="Samobor" label="Samobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10459578" start="30328" end="30346" title="Uprising in Serbia" label="Uprising in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892587" start="30866" end="30894" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia" label="General Secretary of the CPY"/>
<link wikidata="Q164756" start="31476" end="31495" title="Aleksandar Ranković" label="Aleksandar Ranković"/>
<link wikidata="Q153909" start="31518" end="31531" title="Milovan Đilas" label="Milovan Đilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q636637" start="32137" end="32153" title="Vladimir Dedijer" label="Vladimir Dedijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="32235" end="32244" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="33114" end="33121" title="Kharkov" label="Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540" start="33143" end="33148" title="Penza" label="Penza"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="33394" end="33405" title="Trotskyists" label="Trotskyists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657367" start="33895" end="33958" title="History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)" label="History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="33970" end="33984" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="34736" end="34747" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="34971" end="34987" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497902" start="35465" end="35485" title="Executive Committee of the Communist International" label="Comintern executives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502539" start="35689" end="35728" title="1938 Yugoslavian parliamentary election" label="1938 Yugoslavian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q155074" start="35799" end="35814" title="Georgi Dimitrov" label="Georgi Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="36110" end="36119" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265884" start="36228" end="36242" title="Ivo Lola Ribar" label="Ivo Lola Ribar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442161" start="36266" end="36270" title="SKOJ" label="SKOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264453" start="36293" end="36307" title="Franc Leskošek" label="Franc Leskošek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503904" start="36309" end="36321" title="Miha Marinko" label="Miha Marinko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253890" start="36326" end="36336" title="Josip Kraš" label="Josip Kraš"/>
<link wikidata="Q640602" start="36380" end="36391" title="Rade Končar" label="Rade Končar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280534" start="36396" end="36412" title="Ivan Milutinović" label="Ivan Milutinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="36480" end="36484" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="36492" end="36510" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invaded Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q532975" start="36530" end="36546" title="Slavko Kvaternik" label="Slavko Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="36562" end="36590" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308846" start="36745" end="36786" title="Royal Yugoslav Army" label="armed forces of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223183" start="36829" end="36842" title="Peter II of Yugoslavia" label="King Peter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882050" start="36879" end="36895" title="Yugoslav government-in-exile" label="fled the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="36987" end="36995" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755085" start="37099" end="37116" title="May consultations" label="May consultations"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="37345" end="37363" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="37738" end="37745" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="37761" end="37777" title="collaborationism" label="collaborationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263700" start="37778" end="37794" title="Pećanac Chetniks" label="Pećanac Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178911" start="38080" end="38086" title="Stalać" label="Stalać"/>
<link wikidata="Q208038" start="38091" end="38096" title="Čačak" label="Čačak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734446" start="38127" end="38133" title="Robaje" label="Robaje"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="38200" end="38216" title="Chetnik movement" label="Chetnik movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="38230" end="38239" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046443" start="38293" end="38310" title="Republic of Užice" label="Republic of Užice"/>
<link wikidata="Q156122" start="38374" end="38390" title="Draža Mihailović" label="Draža Mihailović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277476" start="38637" end="38649" title="Koča Popović" label="Koča Popović"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="38829" end="38886" title="Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia" label="Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456389" start="38907" end="38912" title="Bihać Republic" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q258429" start="38943" end="38948" title="Jajce" label="Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q258429" start="39143" end="39148" title="Jajce" label="Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273313" start="39227" end="39259" title="National Committee for the Liberation of Yugoslavia" label="National Committee of Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567232" start="39305" end="39327" title="Provisional Government of the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="39422" end="39429" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="39435" end="39439" title="Axis powers of World War II" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q931125" start="39695" end="39708" title="Raid on Drvar" label="Raid on Drvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="39750" end="39766" title="airborne assault" label="airborne assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q762884" start="39779" end="39784" title="Drvar" label="Drvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="39801" end="39807" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="39872" end="39876" title="Axis powers of World War II" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="39934" end="39941" title="Chetnik" label="Chetnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q156122" start="40015" end="40031" title="Draža Mihailović" label="Draža Mihailović"/>
<link wikidata="Q223183" start="40041" end="40054" title="Peter II of Yugoslavia" label="King Peter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="40075" end="40093" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="40121" end="40138" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="40161" end="40174" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="40231" end="40248" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="40361" end="40369" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203767" start="40381" end="40384" title="Vis (island)" label="Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12959951" start="40390" end="40403" title="Treaty of Vis" label="Treaty of Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="40469" end="40474" title="AVNOJ" label="AVNOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q608386" start="40527" end="40543" title="Balkan Air Force" label="Balkan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="40685" end="40691" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q223183" start="40726" end="40739" title="Peter II of Yugoslavia" label="King Peter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419999" start="40974" end="41002" title="Prime Minister of Yugoslavia" label="Prime Minister of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223799" start="41092" end="41128" title="Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union" label="Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="41184" end="41196" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="41294" end="41302" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41798" end="41841" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–50)#Yugoslavia" label="expulsion of ethnic Germans from Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="42141" end="42163" title="Bleiburg repatriations" label="Bleiburg repatriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q174777" start="42509" end="42530" title="Slovene Partisans" label="Slovene Partisan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567232" start="42689" end="42711" title="Provisional Government of the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277557" start="42719" end="42748" title="Democratic Federal Yugoslavia" label="Democratic Federal Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="42772" end="42780" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q570629" start="43026" end="43038" title="Ivan Šubašić" label="Ivan Šubašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863685" start="43240" end="43259" title="People&amp;#x27;s Front of Yugoslavia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="43272" end="43301" title="Communist Party of Yugoslavia" label="Communist Party of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="43386" end="43396" title="monarchist" label="monarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="44014" end="44058" title="Federal People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Federal People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223183" start="44169" end="44177" title="Peter II of Yugoslavia" label="Peter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261894" start="44258" end="44287" title="1946 Yugoslav Constitution" label="a new republican constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="44331" end="44358" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="44376" end="44393" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Partisan movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q124454477" start="44490" end="44519" title="State Security Administration" label="State Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238445" start="44584" end="44599" title="security agency" label="security agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271759" start="44605" end="44641" title="OZNA" label="Department of People&amp;#x27;s Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q722675" start="44834" end="44896" title="involvement of Croatian Catholic clergy with the Ustaša regime" label="involvement of Croatian Catholic clergy with the Ustaša regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q156122" start="44898" end="44914" title="Draža Mihailović" label="Draža Mihailović"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="44935" end="44948" title="Collaborationism" label="collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="44950" end="44962" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918051" start="45100" end="45138" title="Bishops&amp;#x27; Conference of Yugoslavia" label="Bishops&amp;#x27; Conference of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310505" start="45140" end="45157" title="Aloysius Stepinac" label="Aloysius Stepinac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45481" end="45486" title="Aloysius Stepinac#Trial" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="45592" end="45606" title="excommunicated" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="45710" end="45716" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847581" start="46006" end="46023" title="Informbiro period" label="Informbiro period"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="46106" end="46118" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q467864" start="46503" end="46510" title="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Republic of Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q53783" start="46583" end="46594" title="Enver Hoxha" label="Enver Hoxha"/>
<link wikidata="Q646035" start="46705" end="46711" title="Socialist Autonomous Province of Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q861723" start="46827" end="46843" title="Bujan Conference" label="Bujan Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290190" start="46962" end="46976" title="Yugoslav colonization of Kosovo" label="Serb colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="47067" end="47084" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q937465" start="47175" end="47191" title="orthodox Marxist" label="orthodox Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222206" start="47254" end="47274" title="enemies of the state" label="enemies of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q220641" start="47597" end="47618" title="House of Karađorđević" label="House of Karađorđević"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="47664" end="47681" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573430" start="47739" end="47749" title="Tito&amp;#x27;s Blue Train" label="Blue Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="48587" end="48595" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="49247" end="49261" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="49327" end="49333" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="49359" end="49364" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="49369" end="49375" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="49424" end="49431" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="50401" end="50416" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="51092" end="51121" title="Communist Party of Yugoslavia" label="Communist Party of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183533" start="51500" end="51509" title="Cominform" label="Cominform"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="53130" end="53140" title="Stalinists" label="Stalinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748394" start="53275" end="53289" title="Vlado Dapčević" label="Vlado Dapčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254775" start="53294" end="53313" title="Dragoljub Mićunović" label="Dragoljub Mićunović"/>
<link wikidata="Q541157" start="53527" end="53536" title="Goli Otok" label="Goli Otok"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="53974" end="54003" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Socialist Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918528" start="54091" end="54126" title="Economic Cooperation Administration" label="Economic Cooperation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="54186" end="54199" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="54433" end="54440" title="Comecon" label="Comecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="54582" end="54602" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="55155" end="55167" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847581" start="55281" end="55298" title="Informbiro period" label="Informbiro period"/>
<link wikidata="Q663333" start="55349" end="55356" title="Titoism" label="Titoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="55485" end="55497" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q526770" start="55628" end="55637" title="Ted Grant" label="Ted Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q672087" start="55774" end="55786" title="Bonapartists" label="Bonapartists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968647" start="55800" end="55828" title="deformed workers&amp;#x27; state" label="deformed workers&amp;#x27; state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969543" start="55903" end="55920" title="Parliament of Yugoslavia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q153909" start="55957" end="55970" title="Milovan Đilas" label="Milovan Đilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q627232" start="55996" end="56021" title="socialist self-management" label="socialist self-management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419726" start="56100" end="56114" title="profit sharing" label="profit sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035059" start="56119" end="56138" title="workplace democracy" label="workplace democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q149090" start="56385" end="56395" title="Ivan Ribar" label="Ivan Ribar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="56469" end="56482" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="56631" end="56648" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q48093" start="56653" end="56669" title="Nikolai Bulganin" label="Nikolai Bulganin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882658" start="56779" end="56799" title="Belgrade declaration" label="Belgrade declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q987363" start="56916" end="56929" title="Rapprochement" label="Rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="57079" end="57107" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="57299" end="57312" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="57420" end="57458" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637407" start="57616" end="57629" title="Slánský trial" label="Slánský trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="58000" end="58020" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="58078" end="58096" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="58111" end="58127" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="58146" end="58153" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="58171" end="58184" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="58305" end="58316" title="third world" label="third world"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="58647" end="58692" title="Secretary-General of the Non-Aligned Movement" label="Secretary-General of the Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="58821" end="58843" title="Emperor Haile Selassie" label="Emperor Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059887" start="59872" end="59878" title="Yu-Mex" label="Yu-Mex"/>
<link wikidata="Q326735" start="60001" end="60009" title="sombrero" label="sombrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="60126" end="60134" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="60223" end="60241" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="60298" end="60310" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q207631" start="60733" end="60746" title="Mátyás Rákosi" label="Mátyás Rákosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q177917" start="60805" end="60814" title="Imre Nagy" label="Imre Nagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q805061" start="60863" end="60874" title="Balkan Pact (1953)" label="Balkan Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369855" start="61141" end="61169" title="Embassy of Serbia, Budapest" label="Yugoslav embassy in Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="61351" end="61394" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="revolt broke out in Hungary in October 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q200850" start="62569" end="62580" title="János Kádár" label="János Kádár"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158109" start="63046" end="63083" title="October Revolution Day" label="anniversary of the October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="63451" end="63464" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="63466" end="63483" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="63488" end="63503" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="63505" end="63510" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="63518" end="63536" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="63557" end="63573" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="63578" end="63591" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="63617" end="63634" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="63636" end="63651" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="63656" end="63673" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="63691" end="63711" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="63713" end="63728" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="63730" end="63743" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="63745" end="63756" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="63761" end="63773" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="63884" end="63895" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="63897" end="63909" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="63911" end="63924" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="63926" end="63938" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516" start="63940" end="63954" title="Helmut Schmidt" label="Helmut Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="63956" end="63972" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="63974" end="63987" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="63989" end="64007" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="64009" end="64020" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="64022" end="64033" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="64035" end="64042" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="64044" end="64065" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="64067" end="64074" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="64076" end="64084" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="64086" end="64110" title="Emperor Haile Selassie I" label="Emperor Haile Selassie I"/>
<link wikidata="Q105480" start="64112" end="64126" title="Kenneth Kaunda" label="Kenneth Kaunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="64128" end="64135" title="Gaddafi" label="Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="64137" end="64151" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="64153" end="64170" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q200850" start="64172" end="64183" title="János Kádár" label="János Kádár"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="64185" end="64199" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q179858" start="64204" end="64217" title="Urho Kekkonen" label="Urho Kekkonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="64407" end="64441" title="Algerian National Liberation Front" label="Algerian National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="64492" end="64503" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="64553" end="64557" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="64695" end="64729" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="League of Communists of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="64921" end="64930" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934938" start="64955" end="64971" title="military advisor" label="military advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="64986" end="64992" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="65157" end="65183" title="Portuguese colonial empire" label="Portuguese colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161672" start="65206" end="65221" title="Patrice Lumumba" label="Patrice Lumumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="65359" end="65364" title="SWAPO" label="SWAPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q775460" start="65383" end="65416" title="Pan Africanist Congress of Azania" label="Pan Africanist Congress of Azania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="65476" end="65501" title="apartheid in South Africa" label="apartheid in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="65516" end="65536" title="intelligence service" label="intelligence service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="65755" end="65775" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="65963" end="65980" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="65997" end="66006" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="66250" end="66255" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q316384" start="66262" end="66266" title="U Nu" label="U Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q315522" start="66395" end="66401" title="Ne Win" label="Ne Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="66455" end="66471" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="66475" end="66483" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="66534" end="66542" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="66835" end="66843" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="66847" end="66853" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="67028" end="67042" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152534" start="67146" end="67164" title="Alfredo Stroessner" label="Alfredo Stroessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="67172" end="67180" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="67256" end="67265" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q887011" start="67272" end="67301" title="Kjell Eugenio Laugerud García" label="Kjell Eugenio Laugerud García"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282732" start="67313" end="67333" title="Guatemalan Civil War" label="Guatemalan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="67430" end="67448" title="Spain under Franco" label="Spain under Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="67450" end="67474" title="Greek junta" label="Greece under Greek junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="67480" end="67500" title="Chile under Pinochet" label="Chile under Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q856670" start="67590" end="67621" title="1973 Chilean coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Salvador Allende was overthrown"/>
<link wikidata="Q644903" start="67771" end="67783" title="Gastarbeiter" label="Gastarbeiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="68021" end="68041" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="68049" end="68080" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862248" start="68515" end="68523" title="Economy of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109680" start="68543" end="68553" title="Small business" label="smallscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="68554" end="68572" title="private enterprise" label="private enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395324" start="68623" end="68638" title="family business" label="family business"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="68656" end="68667" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="68874" end="68882" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q310505" start="68965" end="68982" title="Aloysius Stepinac" label="Aloysius Stepinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="69066" end="69088" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q105440713" start="69339" end="69354" title="Holy See–Yugoslavia relations" label="their relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="69397" end="69404" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q164756" start="69513" end="69532" title="Aleksandar Ranković" label="Aleksandar Ranković"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="69629" end="69635" title="Covert listening device" label="bugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q124454477" start="69789" end="69818" title="State Security Administration" label="State Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822939" start="70331" end="70348" title="liberal socialism" label="liberal socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="70571" end="70592" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q575187" start="70669" end="70702" title="Israeli-occupied territories" label="territories Israel newly occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="70737" end="70743" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q150543" start="70795" end="70811" title="Alexander Dubček" label="Alexander Dubček"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282930" start="70889" end="70901" title="Ivan Gošnjak" label="Ivan Gošnjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564131" start="70906" end="70918" title="Rade Hamović" label="Rade Hamović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="70943" end="70969" title="invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q965595" start="71858" end="71872" title="Džemal Bijedić" label="Džemal Bijedić"/>
<link wikidata="Q531855" start="72535" end="72556" title="brotherhood and unity" label="brotherhood and unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q616146" start="72706" end="72721" title="Croatian Spring" label="Croatian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424039" start="73105" end="73132" title="League of Communists of Serbia" label="Serbian branch of the party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285081" start="73187" end="73199" title="1974 Yugoslav Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="73247" end="73265" title="president for life" label="president for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q381988" start="73666" end="73679" title="Flag of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892587" start="74250" end="74276" title="Leader of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="communist party leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q16082844" start="74354" end="74367" title="List of international trips made by Josip Broz Tito" label="travel abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="74448" end="74466" title="China" label="Chinese leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="74526" end="74537" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071930" start="74860" end="74867" title="Morović" label="Morović"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470942" start="74966" end="74993" title="Ljubljana University Medical Centre" label="Medical Centre in Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q211092" start="75019" end="75030" title="SR Slovenia" label="SR Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q378681" start="75037" end="75069" title="peripheral vascular disease" label="circulation problems in his legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="75228" end="75236" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342513" start="75505" end="75514" title="Mišo Broz" label="Mišo Broz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565426" start="75739" end="75771" title="Death and state funeral of Josip Broz Tito" label="state funeral of Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621420" start="75939" end="75960" title="List of largest funerals" label="largest state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630819" start="76036" end="76064" title="List of dignitaries at the funeral of Pope John Paul II" label="funeral of Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15295775" start="76081" end="76115" title="List of dignitaries at the memorial service of Nelson Mandela" label="memorial service of Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="76378" end="76396" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q734539" start="76436" end="76452" title="House of Flowers (mausoleum)" label="House of Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338290" start="76539" end="76565" title="Museum of Yugoslav History" label="Museum of Yugoslav History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163663" start="76765" end="76778" title="Los Caprichos" label="Los Caprichos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432" start="76788" end="76802" title="Francisco Goya" label="Francisco Goya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266420" start="77200" end="77220" title="Dragoslav Mihailović" label="Dragoslav Mihailović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254775" start="77225" end="77244" title="Dragoljub Mićunović" label="Dragoljub Mićunović"/>
<link wikidata="Q153909" start="77363" end="77376" title="Milovan Đilas" label="Milovan Đilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171321" start="77532" end="77548" title="Victor Sebestyen" label="Victor Sebestyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280960" start="77669" end="77684" title="Venko Markovski" label="Venko Markovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="78178" end="78190" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q346720" start="78205" end="78216" title="David Matas" label="David Matas"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="78264" end="78283" title="political prisoners" label="political prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="78387" end="78390" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352817" start="78432" end="78453" title="Extrajudicial punishment" label="acted extrajudicially"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="78564" end="78616" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640012" start="79098" end="79135" title="political prisoners in Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia&amp;#x27;s political prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="79511" end="79533" title="gross national product" label="gross national product"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="79644" end="79662" title="balance of payment" label="balance of payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q207351" start="79855" end="79860" title="LIBOR" label="LIBOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285081" start="80322" end="80348" title="1974 Yugoslav Constitution" label="1974 Yugoslav Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="80407" end="80440" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757948" start="80560" end="80574" title="Formality" label="depersonalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070165" start="80579" end="80596" title="institutionalised" label="institutionalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144384" start="80684" end="80704" title="Succession planning" label="period of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q16761225" start="80734" end="80739" title="President of the Presidency of Yugoslavia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892587" start="80744" end="80760" title="President of the Presidency of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="party presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146169" start="80770" end="80791" title="Collective leadership" label="governed collectively"/>
<link wikidata="Q524572" start="80818" end="80832" title="term of office" label="term of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="81301" end="81321" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="[Slobodan] Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284613" start="81914" end="81931" title="Greatest Croatian" label="Greatest Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458516" start="82014" end="82022" title="Nacional (weekly)" label="Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487668" start="82117" end="82133" title="List of places named after Tito" label="named after Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="82211" end="82220" title="Podgorica" label="Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q844825" start="82248" end="82286" title="Podgorica&amp;#x27;s international airport" label="Podgorica&amp;#x27;s international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q59473" start="82329" end="82334" title="Užice" label="Užice"/>
<link wikidata="Q594440" start="82542" end="82559" title="Antun Augustinčić" label="Antun Augustinčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q696051" start="82603" end="82611" title="Kumrovec" label="Kumrovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557929" start="82777" end="82803" title="Republic of Croatia Square" label="Republic of Croatia Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="82997" end="83005" title="Neo-Nazism in Croatia" label="Ustašism"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="83058" end="83080" title="historical revisionism" label="historical revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="83085" end="83096" title="neo-fascism" label="neo-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q146496" start="83117" end="83130" title="Stjepan Mesić" label="Stjepan Mesić"/>
<link wikidata="Q223353" start="83213" end="83220" title="Opatija" label="Opatija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="83301" end="83307" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="83331" end="83338" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="83531" end="83540" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="83579" end="83587" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12035970" start="83598" end="83617" title="Marshal Tito street (Sarajevo)" label="Marshal Tito Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q572286" start="83668" end="83678" title="University of Sarajevo" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="83691" end="83694" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="JNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568607" start="83731" end="83743" title="Marijin Dvor" label="Marijin Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15928" start="83930" end="83937" title="Velenje" label="Velenje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010" start="84015" end="84022" title="Maribor" label="Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015" start="84064" end="84069" title="Koper" label="Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q140708" start="84149" end="84158" title="1550 Tito" label="1550 Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q668764" start="84193" end="84210" title="Milorad B. Protić" label="Milorad B. Protić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346025" start="84214" end="84234" title="Belgrade Observatory" label="Belgrade Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85030" end="85039" title="Youth Day#Yugoslavia" label="Youth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820162" start="85132" end="85146" title="Relay of Youth" label="Relay of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="85377" end="85383" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180510" start="85400" end="85423" title="Joseph Stalin&amp;#x27;s cult of personality" label="his cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820162" start="86445" end="86459" title="Relay of Youth" label="Relay of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q432810" start="86611" end="86622" title="Tito and Me" label="Tito and Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378699" start="86676" end="86690" title="Goran Marković" label="Goran Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585377" start="86947" end="86977" title="Slovenian Constitutional Court" label="Slovenian Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="87088" end="87096" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810211" start="87209" end="87224" title="Tito street decision in Slovenia" label="the court ruled"/>
<link wikidata="Q15928" start="87524" end="87531" title="Velenje" label="Velenje"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87620" end="87642" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)#Yugoslavia" label="systematic eradication"/>
<link wikidata="Q699958" start="87665" end="87679" title="Danube Swabian" label="Danube Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="87695" end="87704" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q898" start="88018" end="88022" title="Omsk" label="Omsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676676" start="88365" end="88374" title="Hotel Lux" label="Hotel Lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441042" start="88535" end="88545" title="Herta Haas" label="Herta Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="88605" end="88614" title="April War" label="April War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342513" start="88681" end="88713" title="Mišo Broz" label="Aleksandar &amp;quot;Mišo&amp;quot; Broz"/>
<link wikidata="Q258429" start="89001" end="89006" title="Jajce" label="Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="89036" end="89041" title="AVNOJ" label="AVNOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="89156" end="89168" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q815579" start="89238" end="89247" title="Beli Dvor" label="Beli Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484636" start="89298" end="89310" title="Jovanka Broz" label="Jovanka Broz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164756" start="89425" end="89444" title="Aleksandar Ranković" label="Aleksandar Ranković"/>
<link wikidata="Q815579" start="89763" end="89772" title="Beli Dvor" label="Beli Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16117325" start="90349" end="90358" title="Saša Broz" label="Saša Broz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978500" start="90391" end="90404" title="Svetlana Broz" label="Svetlana Broz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747811" start="90459" end="90469" title="Joška Broz" label="Josip Broz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747811" start="90487" end="90497" title="Joška Broz" label="Joška Broz"/>
<link wikidata="Q849748" start="90855" end="90870" title="Brijuni Islands" label="Brijuni Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q314886" start="90958" end="90970" title="Jože Plečnik" label="Jože Plečnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="91095" end="91111" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="91113" end="91127" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252" start="91129" end="91141" title="Sophia Loren" label="Sophia Loren"/>
<link wikidata="Q299419" start="91143" end="91154" title="Carlo Ponti" label="Carlo Ponti"/>
<link wikidata="Q56009" start="91160" end="91177" title="Gina Lollobrigida" label="Gina Lollobrigida"/>
<link wikidata="Q648902" start="91338" end="91347" title="Lake Bled" label="Lake Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q370438" start="91370" end="91381" title="Karađorđevo (Bačka Palanka)" label="Karađorđevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293962" start="91519" end="91524" title="Yugoslav yacht Galeb" label="Galeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="91556" end="91566" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573430" start="91606" end="91616" title="Tito&amp;#x27;s Blue Train" label="Blue Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q791086" start="91675" end="91684" title="Aviogenex" label="Aviogenex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="92087" end="92101" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q636637" start="92203" end="92219" title="Vladimir Dedijer" label="Vladimir Dedijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="92401" end="92407" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12561" start="92427" end="92451" title="World Esperanto Congress" label="World Esperanto Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="92507" end="92516" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="92941" end="92953" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="93016" end="93024" title="Titograd" label="Titograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="93030" end="93039" title="Podgorica" label="Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q838291" start="93061" end="93071" title="Socialist Republic of Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="93265" end="93282" title="Fall of Communism" label="Fall of Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="93403" end="93422" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938175" start="93579" end="93591" title="Vladan Dinić" label="Vladan Dinić"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="93956" end="93959" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q156122" start="94378" end="94394" title="Draža Mihailović" label="Draža Mihailović"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="94645" end="94654" title="Kajkavian" label="Kajkavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="95299" end="95309" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262166" start="95355" end="95381" title="Order of the National Hero" label="Order of the National Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q93728" start="95501" end="95524" title="Order of the White Lion" label="Order of the White Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q579688" start="95526" end="95543" title="Polonia Restituta" label="Polonia Restituta"/>
<link wikidata="Q694401" start="95549" end="95558" title="Order of Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="95605" end="95621" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q652962" start="95626" end="95649" title="National Order of Merit (France)" label="National Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="95663" end="95680" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q465316" start="95693" end="95709" title="Order of Victory" label="Order of Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q696246" start="95724" end="95750" title="Order of the Chrysanthemum" label="Order of the Chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="95768" end="95790" title="Federal Cross of Merit" label="Federal Cross of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059569" start="95800" end="95838" title="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic" label="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="95899" end="95916" title="Tito–Stalin split" label="Tito–Stalin split"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="96241" end="96247" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="96259" end="96271" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="96330" end="96350" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906210" start="97541" end="97553" title="marxists.org" label="marxists.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16568" wikidata="Q1235774" url="?curid=16568" title="John Stauber">
<text>John Stauber is an American writer. Stauber has co-authored five books about government propaganda, private interests and the public relations industry. His work includes one book about how industry manipulates science (&quot;Trust Us, We&#x27;re Experts&quot;), one about the history and current scope of the public relations industry (&quot;Toxic Sludge is Good for You&quot;), and one about mad cow disease (&quot;Mad Cow USA&quot;), which predicted the surfacing of the disease within the United States.

In July 2003, Stauber and Sheldon Rampton wrote &quot;Weapons of Mass Deception: The Uses of Propaganda in Bush&#x27;s War on Iraq&quot;, which argued that the Bush administration deceived the American public into supporting the war. In 2004, the two co-authored &quot;Banana Republicans,&quot; which argued that the Republican Party is turning the U.S. into a one-party state. The book argues that the far-right and its functionaries in the media, lobbying establishment and electoral system are undermining dissent and squelching pluralistic politics in the United States. In 2006 the two wrote &quot;The Best War Ever: Lies, Damned Lies, and the Mess in Iraq,&quot; which builds upon the arguments they posited in &quot;Weapons of Mass Deception&quot;.

Stauber is the founder and former executive director of the Center for Media and Democracy, which sponsors PR Watch and SourceWatch. Since the 1960s, he has worked with public interest, consumer, family farm, environmental and community organizations at the local, state and national level. He edits and writes for the Center&#x27;s quarterly newsmagazine, &quot;PR Watch&quot;. He is also a member of the Liberty Tree Board of Advisers.

Stauber grew up in a conservative Republican household in Marshfield, Wisconsin, but the war in Vietnam turned him into an anti-war and environmental activist while still in high school.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1235774" start="0" end="12" title="John Stauber" label="John Stauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="126" end="142" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848140" start="226" end="254" title="Trust Us, We&amp;#x27;re Experts" label="Trust Us, We&amp;#x27;re Experts"/>
<link wikidata="Q154666" start="394" end="409" title="mad cow disease" label="mad cow disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493541" start="535" end="550" title="Sheldon Rampton" label="Sheldon Rampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978096" start="563" end="588" title="Weapons of Mass Deception" label="Weapons of Mass Deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853840" start="778" end="796" title="Banana Republicans" label="Banana Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="826" end="842" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="870" end="885" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059762" start="1326" end="1356" title="Center for Media and Democracy" label="Center for Media and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059762" start="1373" end="1381" title="PR Watch" label="PR Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059762" start="1386" end="1397" title="SourceWatch" label="SourceWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569760" start="1763" end="1784" title="Marshfield, Wisconsin" label="Marshfield, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1794" end="1808" title="Vietnam War" label="war in Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="1828" end="1836" title="anti-war" label="anti-war"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16569" wikidata="Q1061225" url="?curid=16569" title="James P. Hogan (writer)">
<text>James Patrick Hogan (27 June 1941 – 12 July 2010) was a British science fiction author. His major works include the &quot;Giants&quot; series of five novels published between 1977 and 2005.

==Biography==
Hogan was born in London, England. He was raised in the Portobello Road area on the west side of London. After leaving school at the age of sixteen, he worked various odd jobs until, after receiving a scholarship, he began a five-year program at the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough studying the practice and theory of electrical, electronic, and mechanical engineering. He was married four times and fathered six children.

Hogan worked as a design engineer for several companies and eventually began working with sales during the 1960s, traveling around Europe as a sales engineer for Honeywell. During the 1970s he joined the Digital Equipment Corporation&#x27;s Laboratory Data Processing Group and during 1977 relocated to Boston, Massachusetts to manage its sales training program. He published his first novel, &quot;Inherit The Stars&quot;, during the same year to win an office bet.

He quit DEC during 1979 and began writing full-time, relocating to Orlando, Florida, for a year where he met his third wife Jackie. They later relocated to Sonora, California. 

During his later years, Hogan adopted a number of contrarian opinions. He was a proponent of Immanuel Velikovsky&#x27;s version of catastrophism, arguing Velikovsky&#x27;s critics were part of &quot;an entrenched priesthood&quot; who refused to seriously examine Velikovsky even when some of his predictions were validated (such as Venus&#x27;s extremely high surface temperature which was contrary to prevailing scientific opinion in the 1950s); and as of 1999 Hogan accepted the Peter Duesberg hypothesis that AIDS is caused by pharmaceutical use rather than HIV (see AIDS denialism). He criticized the idea of the gradualism of evolution, though he did not propose theistic creationism as an alternative. Hogan was skeptical of scientific consensus about climate change and ozone depletion.

Hogan believed that the Holocaust did not happen in the manner described by mainstream historians, writing that he found the work of Arthur Butz and Mark Weber to be &quot;more scholarly, scientific, and convincing than what the history written by the victors says&quot;. In March 2010, in an essay defending Holocaust denier Ernst Zündel, Hogan stated that the mainstream history of the Holocaust includes &quot;claims that are wildly fantastic, mutually contradictory, and defy common sense and often physical possibility&quot;.

Hogan died of heart failure at his home in Ireland on Monday, 12 July 2010, aged 69.

==Bibliography==

===Novels===
*&quot;The Genesis Machine&quot; () – April 1978.
*&quot;The Two Faces of Tomorrow&quot; () – June 1979.
*&quot;Thrice Upon a Time&quot; () – March 1980.
*&quot;Voyage from Yesteryear&quot; () – July 1982 (also ( or ) (Paperbacks)).
*&quot;Code of the Lifemaker&quot; () – June 1983 (exploring ideas of a Clanking replicator robotic system).
*&quot;The Proteus Operation&quot; () – October 1985.
*&quot;Endgame Enigma&quot; () – August 1987.
*&quot;The Mirror Maze&quot; () – March 1989.
*&quot;The Infinity Gambit&quot; () – March 1991.
*&quot;The Multiplex Man&quot; () – December 1992.
*&quot;The Immortality Option&quot; () – February 1995 (sequel to &quot;Code of the Lifemaker&quot;).
*&quot;Realtime Interrupt&quot; () – March 1995.
*&quot;Paths To Otherwhere&quot; () – February 1996.
*&quot;Bug Park&quot; () – April 1997.
*&quot;Outward Bound&quot; () – March 1999 (A Jupiter Novel).
*&quot;Cradle of Saturn&quot; () – June 1999.
*&quot;The Legend That Was Earth&quot; () – October 2000.
*&quot;The Anguished Dawn&quot; () – June 2003 (sequel to &quot;Cradle of Saturn&quot;).
*&quot;Echoes of an Alien Sky&quot; () – February 2007.
*&quot;Moon Flower&quot; () – April 2008.
*&quot;Migration&quot; () – 18 May 2010.

====Giants series====
#&quot;Inherit the Stars&quot; () – May 1977.
#&quot;The Gentle Giants of Ganymede&quot; () – May 1978.
#&quot;Giants&#x27; Star&quot; () – July 1981.
#&quot;Entoverse&quot; () – October 1991.
#&quot;Mission to Minerva&quot; () – May 2005.

===Short stories===
*&quot;Assassin&quot; (May 1978, &quot;Stellar #4&quot;, recollected in &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Silver Shoes for a Princess&quot; (October 1979, &quot;Destinies, October-December 1979&quot;, collected in &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot; and reworked as the first section of &quot;Star Child&quot;).
*&quot;The Sword of Damocles&quot; (May 1980, &quot;Stellar #5&quot;, an adapted version appears in &quot;Catastrophes, Chaos &amp; Convolutions&quot;).
*&quot;Neander-Tale&quot; (December 1980, &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;, collected in &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Till Death Us Do Part&quot; (January 1981, &quot;Stellar #6&quot;, collected in &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Making Light&quot; (August 1981, &quot;Stellar #7&quot;, collected in &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Identity Crisis&quot; (August 1981, &quot;Stellar #7&quot;, collected in &quot;Rockets, Redheads &amp; Revolution&quot;).
*&quot;The Pacifist&quot; (June 1988, &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Code of the Lifemaker: Prologue&quot; (June 1988, &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot; (the first segment of the novel of the same name)).
*&quot;Merry Gravmas&quot; (June 1988, &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Generation Gap&quot; (June 1988, &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Rules Within Rules&quot; (June 1988, &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;The Absolutely Foolproof Alibi&quot; (June 1988, &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Down To Earth&quot; (June 1988, &quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot;).
*&quot;Leapfrog&quot; (August 1989, &quot;Alternate Empires&quot;, collected in &quot;Rockets, Redheads &amp; Revolution&quot;).
*&quot;Last Ditch&quot; (December 1992, &quot;Analog Science Fiction and Fact&quot;, collected in &quot;Rockets, Redheads &amp; Revolution&quot;).
*&quot;Out of Time&quot; (December 1993, chapbook (), collected in &quot;Rockets, Redheads &amp; Revolution&quot;).
*&quot;Zap Thy Neighbor&quot; (September 1995, &quot;How to Save the World&quot;, collected in &quot;Rockets, Redheads &amp; Revolution&quot;).
*&quot;Madam Butterfly&quot; (July 1997, &quot;Free Space&quot;, collected in &quot;Rockets, Redheads &amp; Revolution&quot;).
*&quot;Silver Gods from the Sky&quot; (June 1998, &quot;Star Child&quot; (second part)).
*&quot;Three Domes and a Tower&quot; (June 1998, &quot;Star Child&quot; (third part)).
*&quot;The Stillness Among the Stars&quot; (June 1998, &quot;Star Child&quot; (fourth part)).
*&quot;His Own Worst Enemy&quot; (October 2001, &quot;Martian Knightlife&quot; (a Kieran Thane story)).
*&quot;The Kahl of Tadzhikstan&quot; (October 2001, &quot;Martian Knightlife&quot; (a Kieran Thane story)).
*&quot;Convolution&quot; (October 2001, &quot;Past Imperfect&quot;, collected in &quot;Catastrophes, Chaos &amp; Convolutions&quot;).
*&quot;Take Two&quot; (December 2001, &quot;Silicon Dreams&quot;, collected in &quot;Catastrophes, Chaos &amp; Convolutions&quot;).
*&quot;Jailhouse Rock&quot; (June 2004, &quot;Cosmic Tales: Adventures in Sol System&quot; (a Kieran Thane story)).
*&quot;The Colonizing of Tharle&quot; (July 2004, &quot;Visions of Liberty&quot;).
*&quot;The Tree of Dreams&quot; (February 2005, &quot;Cosmic Tales II: Adventures in Far Futures&quot;, collected in &quot;Catastrophes, Chaos &amp; Convolutions&quot;).
*&quot;The Falcon&quot; (June 2005, &quot;Apex Science Fiction and Horror Digest, Summer 2005&quot;, collected in &quot;Catastrophes, Chaos &amp; Convolutions&quot;).
*&quot;Decontamination Squad&quot; (July 2005, &quot;Challenger #22&quot;, collected in &quot;Catastrophes, Chaos &amp; Convolutions&quot;).
*&quot;The Guardians&quot; (December 2005, &quot;Catastrophes, Chaos &amp; Convolutions&quot;).
*&quot;Murphy&#x27;s War&quot; (August 2007, &quot;Jim Baen&#x27;s Universe&quot;).
*&quot;Escape&quot; (February 2008, &quot;Transhuman&quot;).

===Short story collections and fixups===
*&quot;Minds, Machines &amp; Evolution&quot; () – June 1988 (Bantam Spectra, republished by Baen, December 1999, short stories and essays).
*&quot;Star Child&quot; () – June 1998 (expansion of &quot;Silver Shoes for a Princess&quot; to a four-story cycle: &quot;Silver Shoes for a Princess&quot;, &quot;Silver Gods from the Sky&quot;, &quot;Three Domes and a Tower&quot; and &quot;The Stillness Among the Stars&quot;)
*&quot;Rockets, Redheads &amp; Revolution&quot; () – April 1999 (Baen, short stories and essays)
*&quot;Martian Knightlife&quot; () – October 2001 (two novellas, &quot;His Own Worst Enemy&quot; and &quot;The Kahl of Tadzhikstan&quot;, both featuring the Simon Templar-influenced Kieran Thane)
*&quot;Catastrophes, Chaos &amp; Convolutions&quot; (title as published; was to be &quot;Catastrophes, Creation &amp; Convolutions&quot;) () – December 2005 (Baen, short stories and essays)

===Omnibus editions===
Compilations of novels in the &quot;Giants series&quot;.
*&quot;The Minervan Experiment&quot; () – November 1982 (an omnibus edition of the first three books of the Giants series)
*&quot;The Giants Novels: Inherit the Stars, The Gentle Giants of Ganymede, and Giants&#x27; Star&quot; () – March 1994 (republication of &quot;The Minervan Experiment&quot;)
*&quot;The Two Moons&quot; () - April 2006 (omnnibus of the first two Giants novels)
*&quot;The Two Worlds&quot; () - September 2007 (omnibus of the third and fourth Giants novels)

===Non-fiction===
*&quot;Mind Matters – Exploring the World of Artificial Intelligence&quot; () – March 1997
*&quot;Kicking the Sacred Cow: Heresy and Impermissible Thoughts in Science&quot; () – July 2004

==References==

==External links==
*
*James P. Hogan, entry at The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, 4th edition
*James P. Hogan on SciFan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1061225" start="0" end="19" title="James P. Hogan (writer)" label="James Patrick Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="116" end="134" title="Giants (series)" label="&amp;quot;Giants&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813941" start="261" end="276" title="Portobello Road" label="Portobello Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="455" end="483" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231271" start="487" end="498" title="Farnborough Airfield" label="Farnborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="803" end="812" title="Honeywell" label="Honeywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="845" end="874" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="944" end="950" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="1040" end="1057" title="Inherit the Stars" label="Inherit The Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="1176" end="1192" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q953567" start="1265" end="1283" title="Sonora, California" label="Sonora, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q349749" start="1380" end="1399" title="Immanuel Velikovsky" label="Immanuel Velikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q826716" start="1418" end="1431" title="catastrophism" label="catastrophism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65913" start="1768" end="1782" title="Peter Duesberg" label="Peter Duesberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="1817" end="1831" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333233" start="1857" end="1871" title="AIDS denialism" label="AIDS denialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q948814" start="1904" end="1914" title="gradualism" label="gradualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="1918" end="1927" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="1964" end="1975" title="creationism" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="2001" end="2014" title="climate change denial" label="was skeptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2045" end="2059" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="2064" end="2079" title="ozone depletion" label="ozone depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="2106" end="2130" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust did not happen"/>
<link wikidata="Q523174" start="2215" end="2226" title="Arthur Butz" label="Arthur Butz"/>
<link wikidata="Q452802" start="2231" end="2241" title="Mark Weber (historian)" label="Mark Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q190721" start="2311" end="2341" title="History is written by the victors" label="history written by the victors"/>
<link wikidata="Q60811" start="2408" end="2420" title="Ernst Zündel" label="Ernst Zündel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736092" start="2738" end="2757" title="The Genesis Machine" label="The Genesis Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798123" start="2843" end="2861" title="Thrice Upon a Time" label="Thrice Upon a Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942410" start="2892" end="2914" title="Voyage from Yesteryear" label="Voyage from Yesteryear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140094" start="2971" end="2992" title="Code of the Lifemaker" label="Code of the Lifemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q691243" start="3036" end="3055" title="Clanking replicator" label="Clanking replicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758618" start="3080" end="3101" title="The Proteus Operation" label="The Proteus Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301376" start="3429" end="3447" title="Realtime Interrupt" label="Realtime Interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575486" start="3607" end="3622" title="List of Jupiter Novels" label="A Jupiter Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746675" start="3678" end="3703" title="The Legend That Was Earth" label="The Legend That Was Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="3987" end="4004" title="Giants (series)" label="Inherit the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="4033" end="4062" title="Giants (series)" label="The Gentle Giants of Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="4091" end="4108" title="Giants (series)" label="Giants&amp;#x27; Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="4138" end="4147" title="Giants (series)" label="Entoverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="4180" end="4198" title="Giants (series)" label="Mission to Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="4781" end="4826" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140094" start="5369" end="5400" title="Code of the Lifemaker" label="Code of the Lifemaker: Prologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="6138" end="6169" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Analog Science Fiction and Fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193477" start="8198" end="8222" title="Jim Baen&amp;#x27;s Universe" label="Jim Baen&amp;#x27;s Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q388271" start="9006" end="9019" title="Simon Templar" label="Simon Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="9295" end="9308" title="Giants series" label="Giants series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676458" start="9424" end="9437" title="Giants series" label="Giants series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="10066" end="10101" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16570" wikidata="Q314358" url="?curid=16570" title="Jeff Lynne">
<text>Jeffrey Lynne (born 30 December 1947) is an English musician, singer-songwriter and record producer. He is the co-founder, and latterly the sole member of the rock band Electric Light Orchestra (ELO), which was formed in 1970, and has written all of the band&#x27;s music since 1972. This includes hits such as &quot;Evil Woman&quot;, &quot;Livin&#x27; Thing&quot;, &quot;Telephone Line&quot;, &quot;Mr. Blue Sky&quot;, &quot;Don&#x27;t Bring Me Down&quot;, and &quot;Hold On Tight&quot;. He also has had a solo career, with two albums: &quot;Armchair Theatre&quot; (1990) and &quot;Long Wave&quot; (2012).

In 2014, Lynne received a star on the Birmingham Walk of Stars, and was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame the following year. He received three Ivor Novello Awards, including the award for Outstanding Services to British Music. In 2017, Lynne was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of ELO, and was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 2020.

Born in Birmingham, Lynne became interested in music during his youth and was heavily inspired by the Beatles. He began his music career in 1963 as a member of the Andicaps, then left the group the next year to join the Chads. From 1966 to 1970, he was a founding member and principal songwriter of the Idle Race. In 1970, he accepted Roy Wood&#x27;s offer to join the Move, and he was a major contributor to the band&#x27;s last two albums. Later that year, Lynne, Wood, and Bev Bevan formed the band ELO as a side project to which they intended to devote most of their energies, out of their desire to create modern rock and pop songs with classical overtones. Following Wood&#x27;s departure from ELO in 1972, Lynne assumed sole leadership of the band and wrote, arranged, and produced virtually all of its subsequent records. During the 1970s and 1980s, ELO released a string of top 10 albums and singles, including the band&#x27;s most commercially successful album, the double album &quot;Out of the Blue&quot; (1977). Two ELO albums reached the top of the British chart: the disco-inspired &quot;Discovery&quot; (1979) and the science fiction–themed concept album &quot;Time&quot; (1981). In 1986, Lynne disbanded the group after losing interest in it. Lynne produced all fifteen ELO singles that rose to the Top 10 record charts in the UK. 

After ELO&#x27;s original disbandment in 1986, he began producing for various artists. In 1988, under the pseudonyms Otis Wilbury and Clayton Wilbury, he co-founded the supergroup Traveling Wilburys with George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Roy Orbison, and Tom Petty. Lynne co-produced the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Anthology&quot; reunion singles from John Lennon demos, &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; (1995), &quot;Real Love&quot; (1996), and &quot;Now and Then&quot; (2023). In 2014, Lynne re-formed ELO and resumed concert touring under the name &quot;Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO&quot;. Outside of ELO, Lynne&#x27;s producing credits include the UK or US Top 10 albums &quot;Cloud Nine&quot; (Harrison, 1987), &quot;Mystery Girl&quot; (Orbison, 1989), &quot;Full Moon Fever&quot; (Petty, 1989), &quot;Into the Great Wide Open&quot; (Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, 1991), &quot;Flaming Pie&quot; (Paul McCartney, 1997), and &quot;Get Up!&quot; (Bryan Adams, 2015).

==Early life==
Lynne was born in Erdington, Birmingham, England, to Nancy and Philip Lynne, and grew up nearby in Shard End, Birmingham, where he attended Alderlea Boys&#x27; Secondary School. As a native of Birmingham, he still has his Brummie accent. His father bought him his first guitar, an acoustic instrument, for £2. He was still playing it as of 2012.

==Musical career==
In 1963, he formed a group with Robert Reader and David Walsh using little more than Spanish guitars and cheap electrical instruments. They were originally named the Rockin&#x27; Hellcats, then the Handicaps, and finally the Andicaps. They practised at Shard End Community Centre and performed weekly. However, in 1964, Robert Reader and David Walsh left the band and Lynne brought in replacements. At the end of 1964, Lynne decided to leave the band to replace Mick Adkins of the local band &quot;the Chads&quot;.

Some time in or after 1965, he acquired his first item of studio recording equipment, a Bang &amp; Olufsen &#x27;Beocord 2000 De Luxe&#x27; stereo reel-to-reel tape recorder, which allowed multi-tracking between left and right channels. He says it &quot;taught me how to be a producer&quot;. In 1966, Lynne joined the line-up of the Nightriders as guitarist, having responded to an advertisement in the &quot;Birmingham Evening Mail&quot;.

The band soon changed their name to the Idle Race. Despite recording two critically-acclaimed albums with the band and producing the second, success eluded him. In 1970, Lynne accepted an offer from friend Roy Wood to join the line-up of the more successful band the Move.

=== 1975: Jasper Carrott ===

Lynne produced comedian Jasper Carrott&#x27;s 1975 hit single &quot;Funky Moped&quot;.

=== 1970–1986: The Move and ELO ===

Lynne contributed many songs to the Move&#x27;s last two albums while formulating, with Roy Wood and Bev Bevan, a band built around a fusion of rock and classical music – a project which would eventually become the Electric Light Orchestra (ELO). The original idea was that both bands would exist in tandem. Bevan has, however, since suggested that Lynne had little interest in the Move, stating: &quot;The only reason Jeff Lynne ever joined the Move was to form a new band. He was never interested in being a part of the Move.&quot;

The band&#x27;s eponymous first album was released in December 1971, featuring heavy contributions from Lynne and Wood and producing the band&#x27;s debut single &quot;10538 Overture&quot;. Problems led to Wood&#x27;s departure in 1972 (he formed the band Wizzard later that year), a year after the release of the band&#x27;s first album, leaving Lynne as ELO&#x27;s dominant creative force. Thereafter followed a succession of band personnel changes and increasingly popular albums: &quot;ELO 2&quot; and &quot;On the Third Day&quot; (both 1973), &quot;Eldorado&quot; (1974), and &quot;Face the Music&quot; (1975). By &quot;A New World Record&quot; (1976), Lynne had almost developed the roots of the group into a more complex and unique pop-rock sound mixed with studio strings, layered vocals, and tight, catchy pop singles. Lynne&#x27;s now almost complete creative dominance as producer, songwriter, arranger, lead singer and guitarist could make ELO appear to be an almost solo effort. However, the ELO sound and the focus of Lynne&#x27;s writing was also shaped by Louis Clark&#x27;s and Richard Tandy&#x27;s co-arranging, under Lynne&#x27;s direction (especially the large string sections in addition to ELO&#x27;s own string trio), and Bev Bevan&#x27;s drumming, while Richard Tandy&#x27;s integration of the piano, Moog, harmonium, and Mellotron, with more novel keyboard technology, gave Lynne&#x27;s songs a more symphonic sound. Bassist Kelly Groucutt&#x27;s distinctive voice mixed with Lynne&#x27;s to produce the classic ELO harmonic vocal sound.

The pinnacle of ELO&#x27;s chart success and worldwide popularity was the expansive double album &quot;Out of the Blue&quot; (1977), which was largely conceived in a Swiss chalet during a two-week writing marathon. The band&#x27;s 1978 world tour featured an elaborate &quot;space ship&quot; set and laser light show. In order to recreate the complex instrumental textures of their albums, the band used pre-recorded supplemental backing tracks in live performances. Although that practice has now become commonplace, it caused considerable derision in the press of the time. Lynne has often stated that he prefers the creative environment of the studio to the rigours and tedium of touring. Lynne followed up the success of &quot;Out of the Blue&quot; with &quot;Discovery&quot; (1979), which held No. 1 in the UK for 5 weeks. The album is primarily associated with its two disco-flavoured singles (&quot;Shine a Little Love&quot; and &quot;Last Train to London&quot;) and with the title&#x27;s word play on &quot;disco&quot; and &quot;very&quot;. However, the remaining seven non-disco tracks on the album reflected Lynne&#x27;s range as a pop-rock songwriter, including a heavy, mid-tempo rock anthem (&quot;Don&#x27;t Bring Me Down&quot;) which uses a drum loop. Lynne later recalled his forays into dance music: &quot;I love the force of disco. I love the freedom it gave me to make different rhythms across it. I enjoyed that really steady driving beat. Just steady as a rock. I’ve always liked that simplicity in the bass drum.&quot;

In 1979, Lynne rejected an offer for ELO to headline the Knebworth Concert in the UK, allowing Led Zeppelin to headline instead. In the absence of any touring to support &quot;Discovery&quot;, Lynne had time to contribute five tracks to the soundtrack for the 1980 film musical &quot;Xanadu&quot;. The score yielded three Top 20 singles for ELO in both the UK and the US: &quot;I&#x27;m Alive&quot; (UK No. 20, US No. 16), &quot;All Over The World&quot; (UK No. 11, US No. 13), and the title track &quot;Xanadu&quot;, featuring Olivia Newton-John joining ELO on lead vocals, which reached number one in the UK (US No. 8). Nevertheless, Lynne was not closely involved with the development of the film, and his material consequently had only superficial attachment to the plot. &quot;Xanadu&quot; performed weakly at the box office (although it later has experienced popularity as a cult favourite).
Lynne took the band in a somewhat different direction with the science-fiction themed album &quot;Time&quot; (1981), reaching number one for two weeks in the UK, producing the second Top 3 single in less than two years. The strings were still featured, but with heavily synthesised textures. Following a marginally successful tour, Lynne kept this general approach with &quot;Secret Messages&quot; (1983) and a final contractually-obligated ELO album &quot;Balance of Power&quot; (1986). Lynne discusses the contractually-obligated nature of the final albums on the short interview included with the &#x27;Zoom&#x27; DVD. ELO now had only three remaining official members (Lynne, Bevan and Tandy), and Lynne began devoting more time to producing. During his time in the Electric Light Orchestra, Lynne had managed to release a few recordings under his own name. In 1976, Lynne covered the Beatles songs &quot;With a Little Help from My Friends&quot; and &quot;Nowhere Man&quot; for &quot;All This and World War II&quot;. In 1977, Lynne released his first solo single, the disco-flavoured &quot;Doin&#x27; That Crazy Thing&quot;/&quot;Goin&#x27; Down to Rio&quot;. Despite ELO&#x27;s high profile at that time, it received little airplay and failed to chart.

In 1984, Lynne and Tandy contributed two original songs &quot;Video!&quot; and &quot;Let It Run&quot; to the film &quot;Electric Dreams&quot; (they also provided a third song, &quot;Sooner Or Later&quot;, which was released as the b-side of &quot;Video!&quot;). Lynne also wrote the song &quot;The Story of Me,&quot; which was recorded by the Everly Brothers on their comeback album &quot;EB84&quot;. Even before the official end of ELO, Lynne began his move toward focusing almost exclusively on studio production work. Lynne produced and wrote the 1983 top-40 hit &quot;Slipping Away&quot; for Dave Edmunds and played on sessions (with Tandy) for Edmunds&#x27;s album, &quot;Information&quot;. Lynne also produced six tracks on Edmunds&#x27;s follow-up album in 1984, &quot;Riff Raff&quot;. Lynne collaborated with Tandy again in 1986 with Lynne producing the charity single &quot;Action!&quot; for Tandy Morgan Band. 

In contrast to the dense, boomy, baroque sound of ELO, Lynne&#x27;s post-ELO studio work has tended toward more minimal, acoustic instrumentation and a sparse, &quot;organic&quot; quality that generally favours light room ambience and colouration over artificial reverb, especially on vocals. Lynne&#x27;s recordings also often feature the jangling compressed acoustic guitar sound pioneered by Roger McGuinn and a heavily gated snare drum sound.

=== 1980s–1990s: Collaborations with the Beatles ===

During the 1980s and 1990s, Lynne collaborated on various projects with former members of the Beatles. The band had been a major influence on Lynne since the release of their debut album, &quot;Please Please Me,&quot; in 1963, and have continued to influence him throughout his career to date.

In 1968, while performing with The Idle Race, Lynne and the other members of the band were invited to a Beatles session at Abbey Road Studios. While there, he met the Beatles during the making of &quot;The White Album&quot;, witnessing the band making it together. He spent an hour at the session, before going back to the sessions with the Idle Race. Years later, he admitted that being in the same room &quot;caused me not to sleep for, like, three days.&quot; The original aim of Electric Light Orchestra was to take up &quot;where the Beatles had left off, and to present it on stage.&quot; John Lennon praised the group, calling them the &quot;sons of the Beatles&quot; on a radio station when discussing the group&#x27;s 1973 single &quot;Showdown&quot; on the New York radio station WNEW.

Lynne worked with George Harrison very closely in the late 1980s. This friendship eventually led to Harrison&#x27;s appearance at the Birmingham Heartbeat Charity Concert, showing up as the finale of the concert and joining many other musicians in a rendition of &quot;Johnny B. Goode&quot;, as well as a one-off Electric Light Orchestra concert, both in 1986. In 1987, he appeared with Harrison at Prince&#x27;s Trust in Wembley Arena.

Critics often compared Electric Light Orchestra to The Beatles, and they were often criticised for &quot;ripping off&quot; the band. Lynne admitted that he &quot;was very influenced by the Beatles&#x27; sound of &#x27;68 and &#x27;69. That has obviously been a big influence on the way [he] looked at songwriting&quot; and said that being compared with The Beatles was the &quot;ultimate compliment&quot;.

=== 1987–1991: Traveling Wilburys ===
Lynne&#x27;s Beatles influence was clearly evident in his ELO work, and the connection to the Beatles was strengthened when Lynne produced George Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Cloud Nine.&quot; The latter was a successful comeback album for Harrison, released in 1987, featuring the popular singles &quot;Got My Mind Set on You&quot;, &quot;When We Was Fab&quot; (appearing in the video) and &quot;This Is Love&quot;, the last two of which were co-written by Lynne. Lynne&#x27;s association with Harrison led to the 1988 formation of the Traveling Wilburys, a studio &quot;supergroup&quot; that also included Tom Petty, Bob Dylan and Roy Orbison and resulted in two albums (&quot;Vol. 1&quot; and &quot;Vol. 3&quot;), both produced by Harrison and Lynne. In 1988, Lynne also worked on Orbison&#x27;s album &quot;Mystery Girl&quot;, co-writing and producing Orbison&#x27;s last major hit, &quot;You Got It&quot;, plus two other tracks on that album. For &quot;Rock On!&quot;, the final Del Shannon album, Lynne co-wrote &quot;Walk Away&quot; and finished off several tracks after Shannon&#x27;s death.

In 1989, Lynne co-produced &quot;Full Moon Fever&quot; by Tom Petty, which included the hit singles &quot;Free Fallin&#x27;&quot;, &quot;I Won&#x27;t Back Down&quot; and &quot;Runnin&#x27; Down a Dream&quot;, all co-written by Lynne. This album and &quot;Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1&quot; received nominations for the Grammy Award for Best Album of the Year in 1989. The Traveling Wilburys won a Grammy for &quot;Best Rock Performance By a Duo or Group with Vocal&quot; that year. Lynne&#x27;s song &quot;One Way Love&quot; was released as a single by Agnetha Fältskog and appeared on her second post-ABBA album, &quot;Eyes of a Woman&quot;. Lynne co-wrote and produced the track &quot;Let It Shine&quot; for Beach Boys founder Brian Wilson&#x27;s first solo album in 1988. Lynne also contributed three tracks to an album by Duane Eddy and &quot;Falling in Love&quot; on &quot;Land of Dreams&quot; for Randy Newman.

In 1990, Lynne collaborated on the Wilburys&#x27; follow up &quot;Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3&quot; and released his first solo album &quot;Armchair Theatre&quot;. The album featured Harrison and Tandy and included the singles &quot;Every Little Thing&quot; and &quot;Lift Me Up&quot;. It received some positive critical attention but little commercial success. Lynne also provided the song &quot;Wild Times&quot; to the motion picture soundtrack &quot;Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves&quot; in 1991. In 1991, Lynne returned to the studio with Petty, co-writing and producing the album &quot;Into the Great Wide Open&quot; for Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, which featured the singles &quot;Learning to Fly&quot; and &quot;Into the Great Wide Open&quot;. The following year he produced two songs on Roy Orbison&#x27;s posthumous album &quot;King of Hearts&quot;, including the single &quot;I Drove All Night&quot;.

===1990s–2000s===

In February 1994, Lynne worked with the three surviving Beatles on the &quot;Anthology&quot; album series. At Harrison&#x27;s request, Lynne was brought in to assist in reevaluating John Lennon&#x27;s original studio material. The songs &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; and &quot;Real Love&quot; were created by digitally processing Lennon&#x27;s demos for the songs and overdubbing the three surviving band members to form a virtual Beatles reunion that the band had mutually eschewed during Lennon&#x27;s lifetime. He also worked on the song &quot;Now and Then&quot;, which remained unfinished until 2023. Lynne has also produced records for Ringo Starr and worked on Paul McCartney&#x27;s Grammy-nominated album &quot;Flaming Pie&quot;.

Lynne&#x27;s work in the 1990s also includes production of a 1993 album for singer-songwriter Julianna Raye titled &quot;Something Peculiar&quot; and production or songwriting contributions to albums by Roger McGuinn (&quot;Back from Rio&quot;) and Joe Cocker (&quot;Night Calls&quot;), songs by Aerosmith (&quot;Lizard Love&quot;), Tom Jones (&quot;Lift Me Up&quot;), Bonnie Tyler (&quot;Time Mends a Broken Heart&quot;), the film &quot;Still Crazy&quot;, Hank Marvin (&quot;Wonderful Land&quot; and &quot;Nivram&quot;) and Et Moi (&quot;Drole De Vie&quot;). In 1996, Lynne was officially recognised by his peers when he was awarded the Ivor Novello Award for &quot;Outstanding Contributions to British Music&quot; for a second time.

In the year 2000, Lynne reactivated ELO and released the retrospective box set &quot;Flashback&quot;, containing many newly finished, previously unreleased tracks. The following year Lynne debuted the first new ELO album in fifteen years, &quot;Zoom&quot;. The album featured guest appearances by Ringo Starr, George Harrison and Richard Tandy, with Lynne multi-tracking a majority of the instruments and vocals. The album received positive reviews but had no hit singles. It was marketed as a &quot;return to the classic ELO sound&quot; in an attempt to connect with a loyal body of fans and to jump-start a planned concert tour (with Lynne and Tandy as the only returning original ELO members). While a live performance was taped at CBS Television City over two consecutive nights and shown on PBS (with subsequent DVD release), the tour itself was cancelled.

Earlier in 2001, Lynne began working with George Harrison on what would turn out to be Harrison&#x27;s final album, &quot;Brainwashed&quot;. After Harrison&#x27;s death from cancer on 29 November 2001, Lynne returned to the studio in 2002 to help finish the uncompleted album. Lynne was heavily involved in the memorial &quot;Concert for George&quot;, held at London&#x27;s Royal Albert Hall in November 2002, which also featured Traveling Wilburys member Petty. Lynne sang the lead vocal on &quot;The Inner Light&quot;, &quot;I Want to Tell You&quot; and &quot;Give Me Love (Give Me Peace on Earth)&quot;, and subsequently produced the Surround Sound audio mix for the &quot;Concert for George&quot; DVD, released in November 2003, which later received a Grammy. Lynne reunited in 2006 with Petty to produce the latter&#x27;s third solo release, &quot;Highway Companion&quot;. In 2004, Lynne and Petty inducted Harrison into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and performed &quot;Handle with Care&quot; with Dhani Harrison, and &quot;While My Guitar Gently Weeps&quot; with Prince, Steve Winwood, and others.

In a Reuters article on 23 April 2009, Lynne said that he had been working on the follow-up to his 1990 solo debut album &quot;Armchair Theatre&quot; with a possible tentative release date of &quot;later this year&quot;. He also produced four tracks on Regina Spektor&#x27;s fifth album &quot;Far&quot;, released on 23 June 2009.

===2010s===
In a March 2010 interview with the &quot;Daily Express&quot; newspaper, Lynne confirmed he was working on a new album with Joe Walsh and simultaneously &quot;writing a couple of albums under his own name, though he won&#x27;t tell us in which musical direction he&#x27;s heading.&quot; Lynne contributed a cover of Buddy Holly&#x27;s &quot;Words of Love&quot; for the tribute album &quot;Listen to Me: Buddy Holly&quot;, which was released on 6 September 2011. On 31 December 2011, Brian Williams reported on NBC New Year&#x27;s Eve with Carson Daly that &quot;2012 releases will include rare new work from Jeff Lynne.&quot;

In 2012, Walsh released his &quot;Analog Man&quot; album which was produced by Lynne. Lynne&#x27;s second solo album, a covers album titled &quot;Long Wave&quot;, was released on 8 October 2012. A greatest hits collection of re-recorded ELO songs by Lynne titled &quot;Mr. Blue Sky: The Very Best of Electric Light Orchestra&quot; was also released under the ELO moniker on the same day. Lynne suggested that a new album with original material could be released during 2013. In 2012, Lynne and Tandy teamed up at Lynne&#x27;s Bungalow Palace home studios to record a live set of ELO&#x27;s songs. This was broadcast on TV as part of the &quot;Mr. Blue Sky&quot; documentary. Lynne and Tandy reunited again on 12 November 2013 to perform, under the name Jeff Lynne and Friends, &quot;Livin&#x27; Thing&quot; and &quot;Mr. Blue Sky&quot; at the Children in Need Rocks concert at Hammersmith Eventim Apollo, London.

On 9 February 2014, Lynne performed George Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Something&quot; with Joe Walsh and Dhani Harrison on &quot;The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to The Beatles&quot;, as well as &quot;Hey Bulldog&quot; from the &quot;Yellow Submarine soundtrack&quot;, while accompanying Dave Grohl, commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Beatles&#x27; performance on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;. On 5 March 2014, Lynne received an honorary doctorate degree from Birmingham City University. He also mentioned he was working with Bryan Adams on new material. On 14 September 2014, Jeff Lynne and his touring band, under the name Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO, played a public concert for the first time in over 25 years, headlining at the Radio 2 festival in Hyde Park, London. Never particularly enthusiastic for live performance even in his younger days, Lynne has called this event &quot;easily the best concert I&#x27;ve ever been involved with&quot;.

On 8 February 2015, Lynne appeared at the Grammy Awards, playing &quot;Evil Woman&quot; and &quot;Mr. Blue Sky&quot; with Ed Sheeran.

On 10 September 2015, Lynne&#x27;s website announced he had signed a contract to deliver an album of new ELO music for Columbia Records marking the first time in 14 years new ELO music would be released. On 24 September 2015, &quot;When I Was a Boy&quot;, the first single from &quot;Alone in the Universe&quot; was released on the internet with a music video scheduled not long after. The album was released on 13 November 2015 and was followed by promotional shows including the first ELO shows in the United States in 30 years. A 2016 European tour was scheduled, with Dublin, Amsterdam and Zürich being some of the locations toured. Notably, the Dublin concert was delayed by a week due to medical advice given to Lynne. In September, 2016, shortly after the European dates, ELO played three shows at the Hollywood Bowl, Los Angeles, with full orchestra and fireworks. Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO also played two concerts at Radio City Music Hall in New York City, on 16 and 18 September 2016 respectively.

On 24 June 2017, Lynne performed at Wembley Stadium to a crowd of 60,000, playing a 24-song setlist including &quot;Xanadu&quot;, &quot;Do Ya&quot; and &quot;Twilight&quot;. The concert was released on DVD and CD, under the title &quot;Wembley or Bust&quot;. On 2 August 2018, Lynne and his band Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO began a 10-city tour of North America which included Oakland, Los Angeles, Denver, Houston, Dallas, Rosemont, Illinois, Detroit, New York City, Philadelphia and Toronto. On 12 September 2018, Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO began a tour throughout Europe including dates in Stockholm, Oslo, Copenhagen, Hamburg, Berlin, Munich, Mannheim, Vienna, Amsterdam, Nottingham, Glasgow, Manchester, Newcastle upon Tyne, Birmingham, Leeds, London, Liverpool, Dublin, and Belfast. On 20 June 2019, Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO began a North American tour with Dhani Harrison.

On 26 September 2019, Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO announced a new album, called &quot;From Out of Nowhere&quot;, which was subsequently released on 1 November of the same year. The album was accompanied by the release of an eponymous single which premiered on BBC Radio 2 that same day. The album went to number 1 on the UK Albums Chart.

===2020s===

On 18 March 2024, Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO announced the Over And Out Tour, a final tour of North America that would span from August to October 2024. Tandy died on 1 May 2024, at the age of 76. Announcing his death on social media, Lynne memorialised Tandy as &quot;a remarkable musician and friend&quot;. In late 2024, the band announced the addition of five extra shows in the United Kingdom, all of which are due to take place during the following summer. In December 2024, Lynne received an award from Spotify celebrating 1 billion streams of ELO&#x27;s biggest hit, &quot;Mr. Blue Sky&quot;.

==Personal life==
Lynne was married to his first wife Rosemary Adams from 1972 to 1977, and then to Sandi Kapelson, with whom he has two daughters, in 1979. After divorcing Kapelson, Lynne married Camelia Kath in 2017. Kath, née Ortiz, had previously been married to Terry Kath and Kiefer Sutherland. She is the mother of Sarah Sutherland and Michelle Kath.

Despite his success, Lynne has spoken of his aversion to the stereotypical rock star lifestyle. Reflecting on the 1970s, he told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine: &quot;I was reluctant to become a real rock star. I was shy and was always told to not get a big head. And my favourite thing in the world was to work 14 hours a day in the studio. Everything else was peripheral to me, like having the record out and promoting it. I did have a big house, but I didn&#x27;t do rock-star things. I never saw myself like that. I was a songwriter, singer and producer. Rock stars are different. They dress all flashy and hang out in nightclubs. That just wasn&#x27;t my priority. I liked to spend my spare moments at the pub.&quot;

Lynne was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2020 Birthday Honours for services to music. He is a fan of Birmingham City F.C.

==Awards and honours==

* 2009: Golden Note Award from the ASCAP
* 2013: Songwriters Hall of Fame nominee for 2014 induction
* 2014: Star on the Birmingham Walk of Stars
* 2014: Honorary doctorate degree from Birmingham City University
* 2015: Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame
* 2015: Songwriters Hall of Fame nominee for 2016 induction
* 2016: Songwriters Hall of Fame nominee for 2017 induction
* 2017: Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee as a member of Electric Light Orchestra
* 2018: Songwriters Hall of Fame nominee for 2019 induction
* 2019: ASCAP Founders Award from the ASCAP
*2023: Songwriters Hall of Fame induction.

==Solo discography==
===Studio albums===
===Compilation albums===
===Singles===
===Compilation appearances===
==Producer discography==
See also: The Idle Race discography, the Move discography, Electric Light Orchestra discography, Traveling Wilburys discography

===Albums===
Co-produced

===Soundtracks===

Co-produced
===Singles===
A-sides
A-sides co-produced
B-sides

B-sides co-produced

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Van der Kiste, John. &quot;Jeff Lynne: The Electric Light Orchestra, before and after&quot;, (Stroud: Fonthill Media, 2015)

==External links==
* 
* Jeff Lynne Songs database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="0" end="13" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeffrey Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="159" end="163" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="169" end="193" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061621" start="317" end="327" title="Evil Woman (Electric Light Orchestra song)" label="Evil Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257141" start="341" end="358" title="Livin&amp;#x27; Thing" label="Livin&amp;#x27; Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517328" start="372" end="386" title="Telephone Line (song)" label="Telephone Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545323" start="400" end="412" title="Mr. Blue Sky" label="Mr. Blue Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035653" start="426" end="450" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Bring Me Down" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Bring Me Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q930063" start="468" end="481" title="Hold On Tight (Electric Light Orchestra song)" label="Hold On Tight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757930" start="543" end="559" title="Armchair Theatre (album)" label="Armchair Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673370" start="583" end="592" title="Long Wave" label="Long Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062637" start="646" end="670" title="Birmingham Walk of Stars" label="Birmingham Walk of Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="702" end="724" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154726" start="757" end="762" title="List of Ivor Novello Award winners" label="three"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="763" end="782" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="884" end="910" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="1010" end="1020" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1100" end="1111" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812612" start="1301" end="1314" title="the Idle Race" label="the Idle Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q918484" start="1337" end="1345" title="Roy Wood" label="Roy Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133828" start="1367" end="1375" title="the Move" label="the Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q374843" start="1478" end="1487" title="Bev Bevan" label="Bev Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q973040" start="1997" end="2012" title="Out of the Blue (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Out of the Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="2084" end="2089" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731518" start="2105" end="2114" title="Discovery (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="2136" end="2151" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="2159" end="2172" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q966331" start="2179" end="2183" title="Time (ELO album)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="2318" end="2324" title="Record chart" label="Top 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="2469" end="2481" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Otis Wilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="2486" end="2501" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Clayton Wilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="2521" end="2531" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q332399" start="2532" end="2550" title="Traveling Wilburys" label="Traveling Wilburys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="2556" end="2571" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="2573" end="2582" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="2584" end="2595" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="2601" end="2610" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q572541" start="2654" end="2663" title="The Beatles Anthology" label="Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="2691" end="2702" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="2716" end="2730" title="Free as a Bird" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698590" start="2751" end="2760" title="Real Love (Beatles song)" label="Real Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293037" start="2785" end="2797" title="Now and Then (Beatles song)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q514298" start="3007" end="3017" title="Cloud Nine (George Harrison album)" label="Cloud Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889239" start="3048" end="3060" title="Mystery Girl" label="Mystery Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754734" start="3090" end="3105" title="Full Moon Fever" label="Full Moon Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q785412" start="3133" end="3157" title="Into the Great Wide Open" label="Into the Great Wide Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117272" start="3165" end="3196" title="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers" label="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q137399" start="3211" end="3222" title="Flaming Pie" label="Flaming Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="3230" end="3244" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q20853485" start="3263" end="3270" title="Get Up! (Bryan Adams album)" label="Get Up!"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="3278" end="3289" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385291" start="3332" end="3341" title="Erdington" label="Erdington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="3343" end="3353" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489455" start="3413" end="3422" title="Shard End" label="Shard End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978814" start="3536" end="3543" title="Brummie dialect" label="Brummie"/>
<link wikidata="Q790020" start="4284" end="4302" title="Bang &amp;amp; Olufsen" label="Bang &amp;amp; Olufsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916749" start="4605" end="4628" title="Birmingham Mail" label="Birmingham Evening Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812612" start="4673" end="4686" title="the Idle Race" label="the Idle Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q918484" start="4843" end="4851" title="Roy Wood" label="Roy Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133828" start="4900" end="4908" title="the Move" label="the Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597366" start="4965" end="4979" title="Jasper Carrott" label="Jasper Carrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q374843" start="5167" end="5176" title="Bev Bevan" label="Bev Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="5219" end="5234" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="5281" end="5305" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202623" start="5617" end="5638" title="The Electric Light Orchestra (album)" label="eponymous first album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806755" start="5769" end="5783" title="10538 Overture" label="10538 Overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q426015" start="5857" end="5864" title="Wizzard" label="Wizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319406" start="6091" end="6096" title="ELO 2" label="ELO 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q786650" start="6113" end="6129" title="On the Third Day" label="On the Third Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q750987" start="6155" end="6163" title="Eldorado (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Eldorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q764422" start="6188" end="6202" title="Face the Music (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Face the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q300498" start="6226" end="6244" title="A New World Record" label="A New World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686911" start="6673" end="6684" title="Louis Clark" label="Louis Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q547183" start="6696" end="6709" title="Richard Tandy" label="Richard Tandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="6926" end="6930" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="6932" end="6941" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="6947" end="6956" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q980282" start="7051" end="7065" title="Kelly Groucutt" label="Kelly Groucutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q973040" start="7268" end="7283" title="Out of the Blue (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Out of the Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731518" start="7929" end="7938" title="Discovery (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482185" start="8071" end="8090" title="Shine a Little Love" label="Shine a Little Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218416" start="8107" end="8127" title="Last Train to London" label="Last Train to London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035653" start="8376" end="8400" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Bring Me Down" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Bring Me Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110388" start="8764" end="8781" title="Knebworth Festival 1979" label="Knebworth Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="8802" end="8814" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="8977" end="8984" title="musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q777970" start="8991" end="8997" title="Xanadu (film)" label="Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146400" start="9085" end="9099" title="I&amp;#x27;m Alive (Electric Light Orchestra song)" label="I&amp;#x27;m Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q733423" start="9136" end="9154" title="All Over the World (ELO song)" label="All Over The World"/>
<link wikidata="Q728982" start="9211" end="9217" title="Xanadu (Olivia Newton-John and Electric Light Orchestra song)" label="Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="9588" end="9602" title="cult following" label="cult favourite"/>
<link wikidata="Q966331" start="9703" end="9707" title="Time (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931642" start="9981" end="9996" title="Secret Messages" label="Secret Messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q789150" start="10062" end="10078" title="Balance of Power (album)" label="Balance of Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="10490" end="10501" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q368735" start="10514" end="10548" title="With a Little Help from My Friends" label="With a Little Help from My Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418568" start="10565" end="10576" title="Nowhere Man (song)" label="Nowhere Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q654160" start="10593" end="10618" title="All This and World War II" label="All This and World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="10677" end="10682" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288638" start="10699" end="10726" title="Doin&amp;#x27; That Crazy Thing" label="Doin&amp;#x27; That Crazy Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577685" start="10739" end="10761" title="Goin&amp;#x27; Down to Rio" label="Goin&amp;#x27; Down to Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927771" start="10926" end="10932" title="Video!" label="Video!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325887" start="10984" end="10999" title="Electric Dreams (film)" label="Electric Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927771" start="11046" end="11061" title="Sooner Or Later (Jeff Lynne song)" label="Sooner Or Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q690138" start="11207" end="11222" title="Everly Brothers" label="Everly Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322601" start="11253" end="11257" title="EB 84" label="EB84"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540932" start="11436" end="11449" title="Slipping Away (Dave Edmunds song)" label="Slipping Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q545186" start="11460" end="11472" title="Dave Edmunds" label="Dave Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333225" start="11640" end="11649" title="Riff Raff (album)" label="Riff Raff"/>
<link wikidata="Q547183" start="11765" end="11782" title="Tandy Morgan Band" label="Tandy Morgan Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q46046" start="11819" end="11826" title="Baroque pop" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q449140" start="12181" end="12194" title="Roger McGuinn" label="Roger McGuinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="12215" end="12225" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="12378" end="12389" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q181826" start="12482" end="12498" title="Please Please Me" label="Please Please Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812612" start="12614" end="12627" title="The Idle Race" label="The Idle Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="12706" end="12724" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="12785" end="12800" title="The Beatles (album)" label="The White Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="13066" end="13090" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="13178" end="13189" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083961" start="13328" end="13336" title="Showdown (Electric Light Orchestra song)" label="Showdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="13398" end="13413" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993820" start="13514" end="13550" title="Heart Beat 86" label="Birmingham Heartbeat Charity Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q931481" start="13649" end="13664" title="Johnny B. Goode" label="Johnny B. Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="14402" end="14417" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q514298" start="14431" end="14441" title="Cloud Nine (George Harrison album)" label="Cloud Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538709" start="14560" end="14582" title="Got My Mind Set on You" label="Got My Mind Set on You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078785" start="14596" end="14611" title="When We Was Fab" label="When We Was Fab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341550" start="14653" end="14665" title="This Is Love (George Harrison song)" label="This Is Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q332399" start="14793" end="14811" title="Traveling Wilburys" label="Traveling Wilburys"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="14828" end="14838" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="14864" end="14873" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="14875" end="14884" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="14889" end="14900" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q748411" start="14935" end="14941" title="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1" label="Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506513" start="14958" end="14964" title="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3" label="Vol. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889239" start="15067" end="15079" title="Mystery Girl" label="Mystery Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022983" start="15149" end="15159" title="You Got It (Roy Orbison song)" label="You Got It"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025667" start="15214" end="15222" title="Rock On! (Del Shannon album)" label="Rock On!"/>
<link wikidata="Q323456" start="15240" end="15251" title="Del Shannon" label="Del Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754734" start="15390" end="15405" title="Full Moon Fever" label="Full Moon Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499835" start="15463" end="15480" title="Free Fallin&amp;#x27;" label="Free Fallin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979954" start="15494" end="15516" title="I Won&amp;#x27;t Back Down" label="I Won&amp;#x27;t Back Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379924" start="15533" end="15558" title="Runnin&amp;#x27; Down a Dream" label="Runnin&amp;#x27; Down a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="15673" end="15685" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542205" start="15768" end="15818" title="Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal" label="Best Rock Performance By a Duo or Group with Vocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093349" start="15860" end="15872" title="One Way Love (Agnetha Fältskog song)" label="One Way Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q173144" start="15907" end="15923" title="Agnetha Fältskog" label="Agnetha Fältskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="15956" end="15960" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757199" start="15974" end="15989" title="Eyes of a Woman" label="Eyes of a Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q247876" start="16041" end="16053" title="Let It Shine (Brian Wilson song)" label="Let It Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="16064" end="16074" title="Beach Boys" label="Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q313013" start="16083" end="16095" title="Brian Wilson" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q247876" start="16103" end="16119" title="Brian Wilson (album)" label="first solo album"/>
<link wikidata="Q455818" start="16180" end="16190" title="Duane Eddy" label="Duane Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11057232" start="16232" end="16246" title="Land of Dreams (Randy Newman album)" label="Land of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q318475" start="16257" end="16269" title="Randy Newman" label="Randy Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506513" start="16338" end="16363" title="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3" label="Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757930" start="16410" end="16426" title="Armchair Theatre (Jeff Lynne album)" label="Armchair Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417530" start="16503" end="16521" title="Every Little Thing (Jeff Lynne song)" label="Every Little Thing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16723" end="16752" title="Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves" label="Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q785412" start="16859" end="16883" title="Into the Great Wide Open" label="Into the Great Wide Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117272" start="16894" end="16925" title="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers" label="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759602" start="16960" end="16975" title="Learning to Fly (Tom Petty song)" label="Learning to Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412249" start="17110" end="17124" title="King of Hearts (Roy Orbison album)" label="King of Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732232" start="17159" end="17176" title="I Drove All Night" label="I Drove All Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q572541" start="17281" end="17290" title="The Beatles Anthology" label="Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="17386" end="17397" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="17447" end="17461" title="Free as a Bird (song)" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698590" start="17478" end="17487" title="Real Love (John Lennon song)" label="Real Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293037" start="17748" end="17760" title="Now and Then (Beatles song)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="17842" end="17853" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="17868" end="17882" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q137399" start="17919" end="17930" title="Flaming Pie" label="Flaming Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285414" start="18033" end="18046" title="Julianna Raye" label="Julianna Raye"/>
<link wikidata="Q449140" start="18142" end="18155" title="Roger McGuinn" label="Roger McGuinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839238" start="18163" end="18176" title="Back from Rio" label="Back from Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q190076" start="18188" end="18198" title="Joe Cocker" label="Joe Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033242" start="18206" end="18217" title="Night Calls (album)" label="Night Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="18235" end="18244" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="18272" end="18281" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="18308" end="18320" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Bonnie Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003756" start="18328" end="18353" title="Time Mends a Broken Heart" label="Time Mends a Broken Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q934960" start="18377" end="18388" title="Still Crazy" label="Still Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q365478" start="18396" end="18407" title="Hank Marvin" label="Hank Marvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296673" start="18415" end="18429" title="Wonderful Land" label="Wonderful Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="18577" end="18595" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280898" start="18760" end="18769" title="Flashback (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930415" start="18920" end="18924" title="Zoom (Electric Light Orchestra album)" label="Zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="18972" end="18983" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009284" start="19410" end="19429" title="CBS Television City" label="CBS Television City"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="19471" end="19474" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q666903" start="19660" end="19671" title="Brainwashed (George Harrison album)" label="Brainwashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q868678" start="19864" end="19882" title="Concert for George" label="Concert for George"/>
<link wikidata="Q670989" start="20036" end="20051" title="The Inner Light (song)" label="The Inner Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375266" start="20065" end="20083" title="I Want to Tell You" label="I Want to Tell You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663415" start="20100" end="20137" title="Give Me Love (Give Me Peace on Earth)" label="Give Me Love (Give Me Peace on Earth)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="20175" end="20189" title="Surround Sound" label="Surround Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="20294" end="20300" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948307" start="20391" end="20408" title="Highway Companion" label="Highway Companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="20468" end="20494" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405772" start="20516" end="20532" title="Handle with Care (song)" label="Handle with Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q611349" start="20544" end="20558" title="Dhani Harrison" label="Dhani Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q548046" start="20570" end="20598" title="While My Guitar Gently Weeps" label="While My Guitar Gently Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="20610" end="20616" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q314397" start="20618" end="20631" title="Steve Winwood" label="Steve Winwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="20651" end="20658" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757930" start="20773" end="20789" title="Armchair Theatre (album)" label="Armchair Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q229274" start="20899" end="20913" title="Regina Spektor" label="Regina Spektor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761663" start="20939" end="20942" title="Far (album)" label="Far"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="21030" end="21043" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q354033" start="21112" end="21121" title="Joe Walsh" label="Joe Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977" start="21304" end="21315" title="Buddy Holly" label="Buddy Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565537" start="21329" end="21342" title="Words of Love" label="Words of Love"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21377" end="21402" title="Listen to Me: Buddy Holly" label="Listen to Me: Buddy Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q459695" start="21471" end="21485" title="Brian Williams" label="Brian Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739748" start="21527" end="21538" title="Carson Daly" label="Carson Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751046" start="21649" end="21659" title="Analog Man (album)" label="Analog Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="21735" end="21747" title="covers album" label="covers album"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673370" start="21761" end="21770" title="Long Wave" label="Long Wave"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21884" end="21939" title="Mr. Blue Sky: The Very Best of Electric Light Orchestra" label="Mr. Blue Sky: The Very Best of Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957572" start="22458" end="22480" title="Children in Need Rocks 2013" label="Children in Need Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337772" start="22492" end="22518" title="Hammersmith Eventim Apollo" label="Hammersmith Eventim Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210485" start="22594" end="22603" title="Something (Beatles song)" label="Something"/>
<link wikidata="Q611349" start="22629" end="22643" title="Dhani Harrison" label="Dhani Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22653" end="22715" title="The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to The Beatles" label="The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616910" start="22740" end="22751" title="Hey Bulldog" label="Hey Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q206097" start="22773" end="22800" title="Yellow Submarine (album)" label="Yellow Submarine soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="22827" end="22837" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="22877" end="22888" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="22916" end="22936" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="22979" end="23004" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary doctorate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547145" start="23010" end="23036" title="Birmingham City University" label="Birmingham City University"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="23076" end="23087" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="23175" end="23196" title="Jeff Lynne&amp;#x27;s ELO" label="Jeff Lynne&amp;#x27;s ELO"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="23277" end="23284" title="BBC Radio 2" label="Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281155" start="23285" end="23293" title="Radio festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="23297" end="23314" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545323" start="23593" end="23605" title="Mr. Blue Sky" label="Mr. Blue Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="23617" end="23627" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="23749" end="23765" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q21042638" start="23862" end="23878" title="When I Was a Boy (Electric Light Orchestra song)" label="When I Was a Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21042638" start="23914" end="23935" title="Alone in the Universe" label="Alone in the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="24202" end="24208" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="24210" end="24219" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="24224" end="24230" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="24932" end="24953" title="Jeff Lynne&amp;#x27;s ELO" label="Jeff Lynne&amp;#x27;s ELO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="25007" end="25014" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="25029" end="25035" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="25037" end="25044" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="25046" end="25052" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191401" start="25054" end="25072" title="Rosemont, Illinois" label="Rosemont, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="25074" end="25081" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="25098" end="25110" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="25115" end="25122" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="25218" end="25227" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="25229" end="25233" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="25235" end="25245" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="25247" end="25254" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="25256" end="25262" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="25264" end="25270" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119" start="25272" end="25280" title="Mannheim" label="Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="25282" end="25288" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="25290" end="25299" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="25301" end="25311" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="25313" end="25320" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="25322" end="25332" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="25334" end="25353" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="25355" end="25365" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="25367" end="25372" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="25382" end="25391" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="25393" end="25399" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="25405" end="25412" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q611349" start="25486" end="25500" title="Dhani Harrison" label="Dhani Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q73127847" start="25583" end="25602" title="From Out of Nowhere (Jeff Lynne&amp;#x27;s ELO album)" label="From Out of Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="25757" end="25768" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545323" start="26424" end="26436" title="Mr. Blue Sky" label="Mr. Blue Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q692632" start="26712" end="26722" title="Terry Kath" label="Terry Kath"/>
<link wikidata="Q103946" start="26727" end="26744" title="Kiefer Sutherland" label="Kiefer Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224507" start="26767" end="26783" title="Sarah Sutherland" label="Sarah Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="26939" end="26952" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="27551" end="27593" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q96134180" start="27607" end="27628" title="2020 Birthday Honours" label="2020 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="27667" end="27687" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="27748" end="27753" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="27762" end="27786" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062637" start="27834" end="27858" title="Birmingham Walk of Stars" label="Birmingham Walk of Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547145" start="27898" end="27924" title="Birmingham City University" label="Birmingham City University"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="27945" end="27967" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="27976" end="28000" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="28036" end="28060" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785694" start="28096" end="28131" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="28180" end="28204" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="28270" end="28275" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="28283" end="28307" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28465" end="28490" title="The Idle Race#Discography" label="The Idle Race discography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28492" end="28512" title="The Move#Discography" label="the Move discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325895" start="28514" end="28550" title="Electric Light Orchestra discography" label="Electric Light Orchestra discography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28552" end="28582" title="Traveling Wilburys#Discography" label="Traveling Wilburys discography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16572" wikidata="Q1065786" url="?curid=16572" title="Judge Dredd">
<text>Judge Joseph Dredd is a fictional character created by writer John Wagner and artist Carlos Ezquerra. He first appeared in the second issue of the British weekly anthology comic &quot;2000 AD&quot; (1977). He is the magazine&#x27;s longest-running character, and in 1990 he got his own title, the &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot;. He also appears in a number of film and video game adaptations.

Judge Dredd is a law enforcement and judicial officer in the dystopian future city of Mega-City One, which covers most of the east coast of North America. He is a &quot;street judge&quot;, empowered to summarily arrest, convict, sentence, and execute criminals. Judge Dredd stories often satirize American and British culture, with a focus on authoritarianism and police brutality.

Judge Dredd made his live-action debut in 1995 in &quot;Judge Dredd&quot;, portrayed by Sylvester Stallone. Later, he was portrayed by Karl Urban in the 2012 adaptation &quot;Dredd&quot;. In audio dramas by Big Finish Productions, Dredd is voiced by Toby Longworth.

==Publication history==
When comics editor Pat Mills was developing &quot;2000 AD&quot; in 1976, he brought in his former writing partner, John Wagner, to develop characters. Wagner had written a &quot;Dirty Harry&quot;-style &quot;tough cop&quot; story, &quot;One-Eyed Jack&quot;, for &quot;Valiant&quot;, and suggested a character who took that concept to its logical extreme. In a 1995 interview, Wagner said: &quot;When Pat was putting together &quot;2000 AD&quot;, we realised from the success of &quot;One-Eyed Jack&quot; this was the kind of story the paper should have – a really hard, tough cop.&quot;

Mills had developed a horror strip called &quot;Judge Dread&quot; (named after the stage name of British ska and reggae artist Alexander Minto Hughes), before abandoning the idea as unsuitable for the new comic; but the name, with the spelling modified to &quot;Dredd&quot; at the suggestion of sub-editor Kelvin Gosnell, was adopted by Wagner. 
According to Mills, the name Joseph – given to Dredd in a story written by Mills which appeared in &quot;prog&quot; (short for programme or issue) no. 30 – refers to where he went to school, St Joseph&#x27;s College, Ipswich.

The task of visualising the character was given to Carlos Ezquerra, a Spanish artist who had worked for Mills before on &quot;Battle Picture Weekly&quot;. Wagner gave Ezquerra an advertisement for the film &quot;Death Race 2000&quot;, showing the character Frankenstein (played by David Carradine) clad in black leather on a motorbike, as a suggestion of Dredd&#x27;s appearance. Ezquerra added body-armour, zips, and chains, which Wagner initially objected to, commenting that the character looked like a &quot;Spanish pirate.&quot; Wagner&#x27;s initial script was rewritten by Mills and drawn up by Ezquerra. The hardware and cityscapes Ezquerra had drawn were far more futuristic than the near-future setting originally intended; in response, Mills set the story further into the future, on the advice of his art assistant Doug Church. The original launch story written by Wagner and drawn by Ezquerra was vetoed by the board of directors for being too violent. A new script was needed for the first episode.

By this stage, Wagner had quit, disillusioned that a proposed buy-out of the new comic by another company, which would have given him and Mills a greater financial stake in the comic, had fallen through. Mills was reluctant to lose &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; and farmed the strip out to a variety of freelance writers, hoping to develop it further. Their scripts were given to a variety of artists as Mills tried to find a strip which would provide a good introduction to the character. This &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; would not be ready for the first issue of &quot;2000 AD&quot;, launched in February 1977.
The story chosen to introduce the character was submitted by freelance writer Peter Harris, and was extensively re-written by Mills, who added a new ending suggested by Kelvin Gosnell. It was drawn by newcomer Mike McMahon. The strip debuted in prog 2. Around this time Ezquerra quit and returned to work for &quot;Battle&quot;. There are conflicting sources about why. Ezquerra says it was because he was angry that another artist had drawn the first published &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; strip. Mills says he chose McMahon because Ezquerra had already left, having been offered a better deal by the editor of &quot;Battle&quot;.

Wagner soon returned to the character, starting in prog 9. His storyline, &quot;The Robot Wars&quot;, was drawn by a rotating team of artists (including Ezquerra), and marked the point where Dredd became the most popular character in the comic, a position he has rarely relinquished. Judge Dredd has appeared in almost every issue since, most of the stories written by Wagner (in collaboration with Alan Grant between 1980 and 1988).

In 1983, Judge Dredd made his American debut with his own series from publisher Eagle Comics, titled &quot;Judge Dredd&quot;. It consisted of stories reprinted from the British comic, but since 2012 IDW Publishing has published a variety of &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; titles featuring original stories. Since 1990, Dredd has also had his own title in Britain, the &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot;. With Wagner concentrating his energies on that, the &quot;Dredd&quot; strip in &quot;2000 AD&quot; was left to younger writers, including Garth Ennis, Mark Millar, Grant Morrison and John Smith. Their stories were less popular with fans, and sales fell. Wagner returned to writing the character full-time for &quot;2000 AD&quot; in 1994.

&quot;Judge Dredd&quot; has also been published in a long-running comic strip (1981–1998) in the &quot;Daily Star&quot;, and briefly in &quot;Metro&quot; from January to April 2004. These were usually created by the same teams writing and drawing the main strip, and some of the &quot;Daily Star&quot; strips have been collected into two hardback volumes. Originally published in black and white, some of the &quot;Daily Star&quot; strips were subsequently coloured and published in &quot;Metal Hammer&quot; magazine in the 1990s.

In 2012, Dredd was one of 10 British comic characters commemorated in a series of stamps issued by the Royal Mail.

Between 2015 and 2018, Hachette Partworks published a fortnightly partwork collection of hardback books entitled &quot;Judge Dredd: The Mega Collection&quot;. This included not only &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; stories but also a variety of spin-off stories set in the same universe.

===Lists of stories===

* A list of all &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; stories to appear in &quot;2000 AD&quot; from March 1977 to September 2024 (#2 to #2400) is available at WikiCommons.

* A list of all &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; stories to appear in the &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot; from October 1990 to December 2024 (#1 to #475) is available at WikiCommons.
Almost all of the stories from both comics are currently being reprinted in their original order of publication in a series of trade paperbacks. Stories from the regular issues of &quot;2000 AD&quot; and the &quot;Megazine&quot; are collected in a series entitled &quot;Judge Dredd: The Complete Case Files.&quot; This series began in 2005 and is still ongoing as of 2024. Stories from special holiday issues and annuals appeared in &quot;Judge Dredd: The Restricted Files&quot;. This four-volume series began in 2010 and concluded in 2012.

==Character and appearance==

Joseph Dredd is the most famous of the Street Judges that patrol Mega-City One, empowered to instantly convict, sentence, and sometimes execute offenders. Dredd is armed with a &quot;Lawgiver&quot;, a pistol programmed to recognise only his palm-print and capable of firing six types of ammunition, a daystick, a boot knife and stun or gas grenades. His helmet obscures his face, except for his mouth and jaw. He rides a large &quot;Lawmaster&quot; motorcycle equipped with machine-guns, a powerful laser cannon, and full artificial intelligence capable of responding to orders from the Judge and operating itself.

In an interview, Ezquerra commented on how he designed the character, stating he received the basic description of &quot;a menacing policeman dressed in black and driving a motorbike.&quot; He later described his process on creating the character: &quot;When I create a character, I&#x27;ll do it fairly quickly, the longer you stay working on an idea, the more chances you have to spoil it and Dredd was not an exception. I draw the essentials: grim face, black suit, menacing helmet (based on the Greeks), protections, and gun readily available when sitting on the bike, after that I started to embellish the protections and bike with symbols, maybe a couple of days in total.&quot;

Dredd&#x27;s entire face is never shown in the strip. This began as an unofficial guideline, but soon became a rule. As John Wagner explained: &quot;It sums up the facelessness of justice − justice has no soul. So it isn&#x27;t necessary for readers to see Dredd&#x27;s face, and I don&#x27;t want you to&quot;.

On rare occasions, Dredd&#x27;s face has been seen in flashbacks to his childhood; but these pictures lack detail. In an early story, Dredd is forced to remove his helmet and the other characters react as if he is disfigured, but his face was covered by a faux censorship sticker. In prog 52, during Dredd&#x27;s tenure on the Lunar Colonies, he uses a &#x27;face-change&#x27; machine to impersonate the crooked lawyer of a gang of bank robbers.

In Carlos Ezquerra&#x27;s original design, Dredd had large lips, &quot;to put a mystery as to his racial background&quot;. Not all of the artists who worked on the strip were told of this. Mike McMahon drew Dredd as a black man, while Brian Bolland and Ron Smith drew him as white. The strip was not yet printed in colour, and this went unnoticed. The idea was dropped.

Time passes in the &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; strip in real time, so as a year passes in life, a year passes in the comic. The first Dredd story, published in 1977, was set in 2099, 122 years in the future, and so stories published in 2025 are set 122 years in the future, in 2147. Consequently, as former editor Alan McKenzie explains, &quot;every year that goes by Dredd gets a year older – unlike Spider-Man, who has been a university student for the past twenty-five years!&quot;. Therefore, Dredd was 38 when he first appeared, but is now years old, with years of active service (2079–2147), and for almost 30 years Dredd&#x27;s age and fitness for duty were recurring plot points (in prog 1595 (2008), Dredd was diagnosed with benign cancer of the duodenum).

How Dredd&#x27;s aging would be addressed was a source of reader speculation until 2016, when writer Michael Carroll and artist Ben Willsher published the story &quot;Carousel&quot;, in which Dredd is ordered to undertake rejuvenation treatment that restores him to his physical prime. Regarding the possible death of the character, in an interview with &quot;Empire&quot; in 2012 Wagner said: &quot;There could be many ways to end it, but the probability is that I won&#x27;t still be around when it happens! I would love to write it, but I can&#x27;t see it happening. I&#x27;ll leave the script in my will&quot;.

===Weapon===
The Lawgiver is a fictional weapon used by the Judges including &quot;Judge Dredd&quot;. The Lawgiver is a self-loading handgun featuring manual and automatic focusing and targeting, plus a built-in computer capable of controlling its operation. An in-line gunsight shows the view directly down the barrel. A Lawgiver can only be operated by its designated Judge owner, whose palm print is programmed into the gun&#x27;s memory. Any attempt by a non-designated user to fire a Lawgiver causes the weapon to self-destruct (a feature introduced by writer Malcolm Shaw).

The gun fires six different kinds of rounds, which a Judge can switch via voice command:
*&quot;Standard execution&quot; – A standard bullet.
*&quot;Heat Seeker&quot; or &quot;Hot Shot&quot; – Heatseeker rounds lock onto the target&#x27;s heat source.
*&quot;Ricochet&quot; – A bullet coated with rubber. Ricochet rounds can bounce off solid surfaces while retaining enough kinetic energy to penetrate flesh. This enables the Judge to, for example, kill a perp that is using a human shield, bouncing their shot off a back wall and hitting the target from behind.
*&quot;Incendiary&quot; – A napalm round.
*&quot;Armour Piercing&quot; – Useful against robots and armoured opponents.
*&quot;High-Explosive&quot; (Hi-Ex) – An explosive shell.

As well as the usual six rounds listed above, a stun shot has also been depicted in the comic, and a variety of other rounds have been shown in the films.

==Setting==
Dredd&#x27;s first stories take place in the year 2099, 122 years after their publication date in 1977. His regular stories are generally set 122 years after their real-world publication date (unless otherwise stated as a flashback or prequel story), so that stories published in 2025 are set in 2147.

The setting of &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; is a dystopian future Earth damaged by a series of international conflicts; much of the planet has become radioactive wasteland, and so populations have aggregated in enormous conurbations known as &#x27;mega-cities&#x27;. The story is centred on the megalopolis of Mega-City One, on the east coast of North America. Within Mega-City One, extensive automation (including intelligent robots) has rendered the majority of the population unemployed. As a consequence, the general population is prone to embracing any fashion or craze they encounter. Mega-City One is surrounded by the inhospitable &quot;Cursed Earth&quot;, a radioactive desert populated by outlaws and mutants. Much of the remaining world&#x27;s geography is somewhat vague, although other mega-cities are visited in the strip.

The majority of Mega-City One&#x27;s population lives in gigantic towers known as City Blocks, each holding some 50,000 people. Each is named after some historical person or TV character, usually for comic effect. A minority live in &quot;mopads&quot; - an evolution of the mobile home, and constantly travel Mega-City One&#x27;s extensive road network. Mega-City One extends from Boston to Charlotte; but extended into Florida before the Apocalypse War laid waste to the southern sectors. At its height, the city contained a population of about 800 million; after the Apocalypse War, it was halved to 400 million.

===The Judge system===

Street Judges act as police, judge, jury, and executioner. Capital punishment in Mega-City One is rarely used, though deaths while resisting arrest are commonplace. Numerous writers have used the Judge System to satirize contemporary politics.

Judges, once appointed, can be broadly characterised as &quot;Street Judges&quot; (who patrol the city), and administrative (office-based) Judges. The Justice Department is responsible not only for law enforcement, but is also the government, since the United States was overthrown in 2070 following the Third World War, which devastated much of America. The Judges are a ruling class, the ordinary citizens having no participation in government except at the municipal level. Dredd was once offered the job of Chief Judge, but he refused it.

The Judge System has spread world-wide, with various super-cities possessing similar methods of law enforcement. As such, this political model has become the most common form of government on Earth, with only a few small areas practicing civilian rule.

==Fictional character biography==

In 2066, Joseph Dredd and his older (by twelve minutes) &quot;brother&quot; Rico Dredd are cloned from the DNA of Chief Judge Fargo, the founder of the Judge System, who was said to have died in the line of duty years before. Their growth is artificially accelerated in gestation so they are &quot;born&quot; with the physiological and mental development of a 5-year-old child, with appropriate knowledge and training already implanted in their brains. The last name &quot;Dredd&quot; is chosen by the genetic scientist who created them, Morton Judd, to &quot;instill fear in the population.&quot;

In 2070, the corrupt President Robert Linus Booth starts World War III, also known as the Atomic Wars, and the Judges move to restore order to the panic-stricken public. Cadets Joe Dredd and Rico Dredd are temporarily made full judges to help restore order under the supervision of Judge Kinnison, despite being physically and mentally only nine years old. They make their first kills stopping a rape gang but are unable to prevent Kinnison&#x27;s death in action. During the war, they discover their clone-father Eustace Fargo is still alive, hidden by higher ranking judges. Seeing them as kin, Fargo recruits Joe and Rico to be his temporary bodyguards. He openly tells them his doubts regarding the Justice Department, wondering if the system has taken away &quot;life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness&quot; while trying to instill strict order and control. Three weeks later, Fargo is placed in suspended animation and the Dredd brothers return to the Academy. After the Battle of Armageddon in 2071, President &quot;Bad Bob&quot; Booth is captured, tried for war crimes, and sentenced to suspended animation. In the wake of World War III, the office of the President is retired and the Judges now have full control over what&#x27;s left of America.

Distinguishing themselves, the Dredds are fast-tracked through the Academy of Law. Rico graduates at the top of their class in 2079, with Joseph graduating second. Joe&#x27;s final assessment is done under the supervision of Judge Morphy, who is impressed with the young man and passes him. Joe later discovers Rico has embraced corruption, engaging in multiple crimes including murder, justifying his actions by saying Judges are thugs and killers by nature. Rico asks Joe to help him cover his crimes, but Joe arrests his brother instead, sentencing him to 20 years of hard labour on the penal colony on Saturn&#x27;s moon Titan (a typical punishment for corrupt Judges). Joe Dredd continues operating as a judge, quickly gaining a reputation throughout the city as a formidable and incorruptible law enforcement agent. In 2099, Rico Dredd returns to Earth after serving his 20-year sentence. He comes after Joe for revenge, challenging him to a fast draw. No longer used to Earth&#x27;s gravity, Rico loses and Joe shoots him dead in self-defence. Visibly upset, Joe insists he be the one to carry his brother&#x27;s body away.

Over the decades, Joe Dredd becomes a major force protecting Mega-City One and is sometimes the biggest catalyst in preventing its destruction. Offered the opportunity to become Chief Judge in 2101, Dredd declines, preferring to serve on the streets enforcing the law, though he does temporarily serve in other senior positions. In &quot;Tour of Duty&quot;, Dredd is appointed to the Council of Five, Mega-City One&#x27;s highest governing body below the Chief Judge, on which he serves for two years (2132 to 2134). On several occasions, he saves his city from conquest or destruction by powerful enemies, and in 2114, he saves the entire world during the Fourth World War.

In 2107, Dredd loses his eyes in combat during the story &quot;City of the Damned&quot;. He has them replaced with bionic eyes that grant him night-vision. In 2112, he suffers near-fatal wounds when a battle causes him to fall into a lake of acidic chemicals, burning his entire body. Later on, he undergoes rejuvenation treatment, healing him and adding more vitality than a man his age would normally have. In 2130, Dredd is diagnosed with cancer of the duodenum, though it was benign. In 2138, at 72 years old, Dredd undergoes another &quot;rejuve&quot; treatment after being ordered to. It is specified that his entire epidermis, vascular, and muscular tissue are rebuilt on a cellular level, once again restoring some lost youth and vitality. He turns down an offer for a full treatment that would rebuild his internal organs and skeleton.

Although Dredd holds his duty above every other priority, this devotion is not blind. On two occasions (in &quot;The Robot Wars&quot; and &quot;Tale of the Dead Man&quot;), Dredd resigns from the force on principle, but both times he later returns, believing the Judge System, while imperfect and vulnerable to corruption, is the best protection that currently exists for people. In 2113, Dredd insists the Justice Department gamble its existence on a referendum to prove its legitimacy. In 2116, he risks 20 years imprisonment with hard labour when he challenges the policy of a Chief Judge. In 2129, Dredd threatens to resign if the Chief Judge doesn&#x27;t change the city&#x27;s harsh anti-mutant apartheid laws.

In 2129 (&quot;2000 AD&quot; #1535), Dredd is present when his clone-father Eustace Fargo is revived from cryogenic suspension, only to die later the same day. Before Fargo dies, he calls for Dredd to be at his side and admits his conclusion that the Judge system was a mistake that killed the American Dream, that it was meant to fix things but not last forever. Since Joe and Rico Dredd are his blood, Eustace hopes they will fix his mistakes, implying they should replace the Judge System with something else (he was unaware Rico Dredd had gone renegade and later died by Joe&#x27;s hand). After Eustace Fargo dies, Dredd decides not to share the man&#x27;s final words.

In more recent years, Dredd has met other Fargo clones such as Kraken and Nimrod. He has also developed a family of sorts with the introduction of two younger clones of his own named Dolman and Judge Rico (no first name). Dredd also discovered his older brother Rico Dredd fathered a daughter, Vienna Dredd, who now sees Joe as an uncle.

===Family and associates===
* Judge Rico Dredd. Judge Joe Dredd&#x27;s older &quot;brother,&quot; also cloned from Chief Judge Eustace Fargo and initially superior to him in physical skills. Soon after Joseph and Rico Dredd became Judges, Rico became corrupt. Joe arrested him and sentenced him to twenty years on the penal colony on Saturn&#x27;s moon Titan. Twenty years later, Rico sought revenge, and Joe killed him in self-defense.
* Vienna. The daughter of Rico Dredd and a journalist who visited him on Titan. Dredd considers her his niece and goes out of his way to help her on occasion.
* Judge Rico. A clone created directly from Joe Dredd&#x27;s own DNA, identical to him but decades younger. Rather than adopt the same last name as Joe Dredd, this clone decides to redeem the name of Joe&#x27;s late, corrupt older brother and so becomes Judge Rico with no first name. Judge Rico eventually inherits Joe Dredd&#x27;s old apartment at Rowdy Yates Block.
* Judge Anderson. For years, Dredd had a close but uneasy friendship with Cassandra Anderson of Psi-Division, which came to an end when Anderson briefly abandoned the law. After she returned to duty, Dredd initially denied their friendship, but re-affirmed it after she was injured while saving the city. Dredd has great respect for Anderson&#x27;s abilities and trusts her often with his life, but sometimes finds her flippant attitude and playful jokes annoying.
* Judge Hershey. Dredd knew Chief Judge Hershey for forty years. Like all chief judges since Goodman, Dredd had easy access to her, but they also had a personal relationship based on mutual respect. While they had differences at times, Dredd believed her to be &quot;the best chief judge we&#x27;ve ever had&quot;. After Hershey became terminally ill, she hid her illness from Dredd and all others but requested him to be at her side when she chose to be euthanised. Her death was initially faked so she could leave the city on an undercover mission, but after completing her private mission (and one final meeting with Dredd) her illness claimed her on her own terms - while bringing law to the lawless.
* Dolman. Another clone grown from Joe Dredd&#x27;s DNA, but years younger. Formerly a trainee judge and member of the MC1 Space Corps. Has undergone face changing procedures to hide his heritage and so bears no resemblance to Dredd or Rico, and Vienna is the only person outside the Justice Department who knows his true identity.
* Judge Beeny. Dredd&#x27;s protégée since 2007. On Dredd&#x27;s recommendation, Hershey appointed her to the Council of Five. She was initially dismissed from the council when Hershey stepped down but was later reappointed by Chief Judge Logan.
* Walter the Wobot and Maria. Dredd used to rent his Rowdy Yates Block apartment from Maria, a landlady with a thick, stereotypical Italian accent. After helping the Judges fight a robot revolution, a former vending machine robot called Walter the Wobot became the city&#x27;s first free robot and moved in with Dredd, acting as his cook and housekeeper out of love. After several years, Dredd parts company with both Walter and Maria. Walter starts a business, then briefly goes rogue and starts his own robot revolution, leading Dredd and the second Judge Giant to arrest him. Dredd later assigns Walter a probation sentence of community service as house robot and caretaker of Mrs Gunderson.
* Mrs Gunderson. A deaf widow living in Sylvia Plath Block in a large apartment with multiple bedrooms that she often rents. Following the &quot;Necropolis&quot; affair, the supernatural alien Judge Death rented a room from her, using the name &quot;Jay De&#x27;Ath.&quot; Mrs. Gunderson was unaware of Judge Death&#x27;s true nature due to the fact she is partially deaf and nearly blind, and he spared her after concluding she was the one truly innocent soul he had met. Since that story, she has been an occasional recurring character used for comic relief.
* Galen DeMarco. A former Judge infatuated with Dredd. This breach of regulations led her to resign from the Justice System and become a private investigator. Dredd first tried to help her adjust to civilian life but she severed contact when he again rejected her advances. She has her own occasional series called &quot;DeMarco P. I.&quot;
* Fargo clan. A town occupied by the mutated descendants of Ephram Fargo, the twin brother of Chief Judge Eustace Fargo. These mutants, who share the common mutation of an overly large, exaggerated chin, are relatives of Judge Dredd himself, and consider him a &quot;cousin&quot;. This led to Dredd campaigning to have Mega-City One&#x27;s mutant segregation laws repealed.
* Judge Morphy. Dredd&#x27;s mentor at the beginning of his career. The two maintained a respect and appreciation for each other over the years, arguably making him one of Dredd&#x27;s only friends. The same day he told Dredd he would retire from street duty soon and hoped to become a teacher, Morphy was killed in the line of duty.
* Judge Logan. Dredd&#x27;s assistant for a number of years, later promoted to Senior Judge and later Sector House Chief (Sector 6). Dredd encouraged Logan to stand for Chief Judge when Hershey resigned. Dredd&#x27;s and Hershey&#x27;s public endorsements were instrumental in Logan being elected as Chief Judge.
* Judge Giant Senior. Dredd&#x27;s first cadet trainee, introduced during Dredd&#x27;s first year of stories. Having graduated from the Academy of Law, he was assigned to Dredd for his final field assessment, which he passed. Giant was a recurring character for years and saved Dredd from execution when Mega-City One was temporarily controlled by the insane Chief Judge Cal. Judge Giant Sr. was shot in the back and killed in the line of duty during the &quot;Block Mania&quot; story (1981) while trying to arrest Orlok, just before the Apocalypse War.
* Judge Giant Junior. Judge Giant fathered a child in 2101 before his death, despite judges being prohibited from having sexual relations. Orphaned in 2104, Giant&#x27;s son was inducted into the Academy of Law. Years later, the ten-year-old Cadet Giant was supervised on a field test by Judge Dredd. Giant spent the next several years as a cadet, helping Dredd on different occasions such as during the &quot;Necropolis&quot; affair and &quot;Judgement Day.&quot; Five years after his introduction, Giant&#x27;s final assessment was conducted by Judge Dredd and he became a street judge in 2116, the youngest to do so, at age 15.
* Judge Dekker. Dredd&#x27;s second cadet trainee, first appearing in &quot;Super Bowl&quot; (in &quot;2000 AD&quot; #370–371, 1984). Dekker quickly proved her worth and became a judge after Dredd&#x27;s assessment. The two fought alongside each other several times after she became a full Judge, and Dredd considered her his best cadet trainee. She died during the 1992 story &quot;Judgement Day.&quot;
* Judge Kraken. Another clone of Chief Judge Fargo, decades younger than Joe Dredd but otherwise identical in appearance and similar in skill. Kraken was created by Morton Judd, the geneticist who cloned and named Joe and Rico Dredd. Kraken was one of the Judda, clones subservient to Judd. After Judd&#x27;s defeat, Kraken is groomed to one day succeed Dredd and trained to become a Judge, though Dredd believes he isn&#x27;t mentally fit. When Dredd first temporarily quits, Chief Judge Silver makes Kraken a Judge and has him impersonate Dredd so others won&#x27;t know that one of Mega-City&#x27;s greatest lost faith in the system. Kraken is then manipulated and corrupted by the Dark Judges, forced to help them temporarily turn Mega-City One into Necropolis, leading to the deaths of 60 million. After the Dark Judges are defeated, Kraken&#x27;s mind is free and he peacefully accepts execution by Dredd.
* Cadet Jessica Paris. A clone of Joe Dredd grown without SRY, making her a woman as a result. Has only made a single appearance in the comic to date in which she was shown as being heavily pregnant and the decision on what to do with her and the child being left ambiguous.

===Recurring adversaries===
Dredd&#x27;s adversaries generally do not return in sequels, since they are usually killed or sentenced to long terms of incarceration. However, a few notable villains have returned in multiple stories, and some later got their own spin-off series.

* The Dark Judges are a group of undead judges from another dimension, who believe that since all crime is committed by the living, life itself should be a crime. Usually four in number, their leader Judge Death may be said to be Dredd&#x27;s arch-enemy. Death was first introduced to the series in 1980 and has featured in many stories since, in &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; and in his own series.
* Orlok the Assassin was a secret agent from East-Meg One, the Russian counterpart to Mega-City One. He killed millions of innocent citizens with a chemical weapon.
* Mean Machine Angel is a psychopath from the Cursed Earth around Texas. He had a cybernetic arm and head, and preferred to kill people by head-butting them to death. Generally used as comic relief.
* PJ Maybe was a serial killer who murdered his first victim at the age of only 12. He evaded detection several times, and claimed thousands of victims, including a mayor and a deputy mayor of Mega-City One, over a criminal career lasting three decades.
* Judge Jura Edgar was a serious adversary of Dredd even before he discovered that she was a criminal. A high-ranking judge (the head of the Public Surveillance Unit), Edgar clashed with Dredd several times, and sometimes got the better of him: a very rare example of an opponent Dredd could not simply arrest or kill.

==Major storylines== 
There have been a number of Judge Dredd stories that have significantly developed the Dredd character and/or the fictional world, or which create and add to a larger storyline. These are listed below (for a complete list of all stories see here).

* &quot;The Robot Wars&quot; (&quot;2000 AD&quot; progs 10–17; prologue in prog 9). The Mega-City Judges face an uprising by the city&#x27;s robot servant workforce, led by carpenter-droid Call-Me-Kenneth. The first multi-part Dredd story. Walter the Wobot, a robot who often pronounces R sounds as W, helps Dredd against the uprising and rallies together other robots that wish to still serve humanity. As a result, he is made a &quot;free robot&quot;. Due to his love and respect for Dredd, Walter decides to remain as the judge&#x27;s personal valet, housekeeper, and cook.
*&quot;The Return of Rico&quot; (prog 30). It is revealed that Joe Dredd is a clone who was artificially aged and trained to be a judge since childhood. The story also reveals he has an older (by 12 minutes) clone &quot;brother&quot; Rico Dredd who became a judge alongside him. Rico grew corrupt, taking bribes and killing people in his way until Joe arrested him, leading to a sentence of 20 years hard labor on Saturn&#x27;s moon Titan (this penal colony will be mentioned again in several later stories, particularly as a place where renegade judges are sent). Now in 2099, 20 years later, Rico comes to Mega-City One seeking revenge. No longer used to Earth&#x27;s gravity, Rico Dredd is outdrawn and killed by Joe, who seems to mourn his brother despite their differences. Some later stories expand Rico&#x27;s life and personality.
* &quot;Luna-1&quot; (multiple stories; progs 42–59) Dredd is assigned to act for six months as Judge Marshall of Luna-1, a colony on Earth&#x27;s moon governed by judges from all three Mega-Cities. This story introduced Luna-1 and Judges from East-Meg One and Texas City.
* &quot;The Cursed Earth&quot; (progs 61–85). Dredd, accompanied by punk biker Spikes Harvey Rotten (and later the alien Tweak), leads a small group of Judges on an epic journey across the Cursed Earth, transporting vaccine for the deadly 2T-FRU-T virus that is devastating Mega-City Two. This multi-part epic is often referred to as &#x27;the first Dredd epic&#x27; and was inspired by Roger Zelazny&#x27;s &quot;Damnation Alley.&quot;
* &quot;The Day the Law Died&quot; (progs 89–108; prologues in 86–88). It is 2101. The insane Judge Cal, head of the Special Judicial Squad (SJS), arranges the assassination of Chief Judge Goodman and then assumes the man&#x27;s position himself. By brainwashing Judges and employing alien mercenaries, Cal rules Mega-City One like a new version of Caligula. Dredd rallies together a few other Judges and Judge-Tutors to lead a resistance movement, and eventually Fergee kills Cal. This story introduced the alien Kleggs and saw Chief Judge Griffin assume the Chief Judgeship after Cal&#x27;s death.
* &quot;Judge Death&quot; (progs 149–151). The first appearance of Judge Death and Dredd&#x27;s recurring ally Psi-Judge Anderson. On a parallel Earth, the undead Judge Death decides that since crime is committed by the living, life itself is a crime and the only sentence is death. After laying waste to his Earth (later called Deadworld), Judge Death arrives in Dredd&#x27;s dimension in 2102, determined to continue killing. His body is destroyed in battle with the Judges, leading his spirit to seek a new host until he is trapped inside the powerful telepathic mind of Psi-Judge Anderson. Anderson subjects herself to suspended animation, acting as a living cage. A later story reveals Judge Death was not alone but was one of four &quot;Dark Judges&quot;.
* &quot;The Judge Child&quot; (progs 156–181; epilogue in 182). Along with taking Judge Dredd outside the boundaries of Mega-City One, this story introduced several long-running characters and concepts into the Dredd mythos including: Judge Hershey, The Angel Gang (except for Fink Angel, introduced later), Murd the Oppressor, the Judge Child, and the new head of the SJS, McGruder. This story also begins writer Alan Grant&#x27;s tenure as John Wagner&#x27;s long-term co-writer of the Dredd series. The story starts when Psi-Judge Feyy, the best &#x27;pre-cog&#x27; in Psi-Division, predicts that a psychic child bearing the mark of the Eagle of Justice will need to rule Mega-City One in order to save it from a future disaster. Dredd is assigned to lead a team on a galaxy-spanning search for the &quot;Judge Child&quot;, Owen Krsyler, leading to several battles, as well as Judge Lopez losing his life. Dredd realizes the boy&#x27;s psychic predictions of death and disaster are intentionally caused by manipulative, self-fulfilling prophecies. On finding Owen Krysler, Dredd concludes that he is evil and abandons the Judge Child on the planet Xanadu rather than risk Mega-City One having a corrupt ruler, despite his orders and the sacrifices made. In the epilogue, Dredd&#x27;s reputation is shaken and Judge McGruder questions his judgment, however he would be vindicated by events that occur in &quot;City of the Damned&quot;
* &quot;Judge Death Lives!&quot; (progs 224–228). Voted #3 for &quot;best story ever printed&quot; in the Dredd comics in a 2005 poll on the 2000 AD online website, this tale introduced the other three Dark Judges: Judges Fear, Fire and Mortis. A year after Judge Death&#x27;s defeat, the three other Dark Judges journey to Dredd&#x27;s dimension, free Death from Judge Anderson&#x27;s mind, and provide him a new host body. After the host body is killed and made undead, Judge Death regains his full power and leads the other three on a killing spree. Released from suspended animation, Anderson joins Dredd in fighting the Dark Judges. The two then follow the quartet to their native parallel Earth, the &#x27;Deadworld.&#x27; By tapping into the psychic anguish of all their victims, Anderson is seemingly able to destroy the four Dark Judges (though they will return years later).
*&quot;Block Mania&quot; (progs 236–244). Contamination of water supplies by Orlok the Assassin leads to madness and violent aggression in many citizens. Minor wars break out between many city blocks of Mega-City One. This story introduced Orlok and saw the death of Judge Giant.
* &quot;The Apocalypse War&quot; (progs 245–270, except 268). In 2104, Mega-City One is still weakened by the events of Block Mania, leaving it a vulnerable target for the Soviet forces of East-Meg One. Almost half the city (400 million people) are killed in nuclear strikes, while more die from radiation sickness, starvation, and cold. The Mega-City Judges are unable to strike back, as the Soviet city is protected by a dimensional force field that sends all incoming nukes to a parallel Earth. The Judges fight a guerilla war that eventually culminates in the destruction of East-Meg One when Dredd captures a Soviet missile bunker. This story features the death of Chief Judge Griffin, with McGruder becoming the new Chief Judge.
* &quot;City of the Damned&quot; (progs 393–406). By 2107, the Judges have developed reliable - albeit power-hungry - time travel technology. Dredd and Anderson travel to the year 2120 to discover more about the disaster predicted in &quot;The Judge Child&quot; storyline. Arriving in May 2120, Mega-City One is a wasteland inhabited by monsters, vampire Judges, and ruled by a powerful being called the Mutant. Dredd is separated from Anderson and blinded. He learns the Mutant is a clone of the Judge Child Owen Krysler, born with an inhuman appearance but inheriting all of his memories. The Mutant caused the destruction of Mega-City One and, for his own amusement reanimated the future corpse of Dredd, making him a zombie servant. Chased by his undead double, Dredd and Anderson flee back to 2107, where his eyes are replaced by bionics. The Judge Child clone is then located in 2107 and killed, along with all those involved, supposedly erasing the dystopian timeline. Anderson questions the certainty of this though as the Zombie Dredd still exists in their current timeline. This storyline was originally intended to be much longer, but the creative team disliked time-travel stories and decided to finish the saga early.
* &quot;Oz&quot; (progs 545–570). When sky-surfer Chopper breaks out of jail and flees to the Sydney-Melbourne Conurb in Australia to take part in the (now legal) Supersurf 10, Dredd is sent to retrieve him. But Dredd’s real mission is to fight former Council of Five member Morton Judd, the scientist who created him from the cloned DNA of Judge Fargo. After escaping justice 40 years earlier, Judd has created a new army of clones called the Judda, planning to use them to dominate Mega-City One. Dredd destroys the Judda’s base in Uluru (Ayers Rock) with a nuclear bomb, although some Judda survive and are captured.
* &quot;The Dead Man&quot; (progs 650–662). When first published in &quot;2000 AD&quot;, this was not billed as a &#x27;Judge Dredd&#x27; tale and was printed as an extra storyline while the main &#x27;Judge Dredd&#x27; series continued in parallel. No references to established Dredd comic locations or characters were made until the storyline&#x27;s last few chapters. The story begins when a boy named Yassa Povey, one of a group of settlers living in a desolate landscape, discovers an amnesiac near-dead man whose entire body and face have been burned. Supernatural forces hunt the Dead Man, who then retraces his steps with Yassa&#x27;s help. In the 11th chapter of the story, the two find the remains of a Judge uniform and a badge reading &quot;Dredd&quot;. The Dead Man recalls he is Joseph Dredd and that, following the events of &quot;A Letter to Judge Dredd&quot;, he recently lost faith in the system and retired, taking the &quot;long walk&quot; into the Cursed Earth (where Yassa lives). He was then attacked by psychic projections of the Sisters of Death, the witches who made the Dark Judges into supernatural monsters, which led to him falling into an acidic chemical lake. After encountering the Sisters again, Dredd returns Yassa home and heads back to Mega-City One.
* &quot;A Letter to Judge Dredd&quot; (prog 661). Published alongside the penultimate chapter of &quot;The Dead Man&quot; storyline, this story reveals that during the Judges&#x27; suppression of a protest rally of Democrats (citizens who want democracy instead of Judge control), a protestor named Sholley was struck so hard he suffered permanent brain damage. Sholley has regular fits of violent delusions for the next two years, often attacking his family. Since Dredd was in charge of breaking up the rally that day, a boy named Wenders writes to him asking why Sholley was permanently injured during a seemingly peaceful protest. He also has several questions regarding the effectiveness and fairness of the Judge system when crime, violence, and corruption don&#x27;t improve, the people fear their own protectors, and punishments are dealt so harshly by people whose judgment may not be perfect. Sholley has another violent episode and kills Wenders, whose letter is given to Dredd. Already having had doubts for years, Dredd questions the Judge system even more after reading it. Thus the story reveals what set in motion his retirement mentioned in &quot;The Dead Man&quot;, and sets up a chain of events in stories to follow.
* &quot;Tale of the Dead Man&quot; (progs 662–668). The first chapter of this story was published in the same issue as the final chapter of &quot;The Dead Man&quot;, linking that story back into the main &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; series. As Dredd heads back to Mega-City One following the events of &quot;The Dead Man&quot;, he recalls what led to him retiring and leaving for the Cursed Earth. Disillusioned with the system, Dredd assesses his younger clone-brother Kraken, a former Judda who is now a Cadet. During the assessment, Dredd&#x27;s former mentor Morphy is killed, bringing up more feelings in Dredd that his own time as a Judge should end. Kraken impresses many but Dredd sees a glimmer of Judda attitude when the young man is angry, and recommends he not be a Judge. Dredd then announces his retirement and pardons all the Democrats he arrested from the protest two years earlier mentioned in the Wenders letter. The next day, he leaves for the Cursed Earth, leading into the events of &quot;The Dead Man&quot;. This story acts as a prologue to &quot;Necropolis&quot;.
* &quot;Countdown to Necropolis&quot; (progs 669–673). Kraken is sentenced to death based on Dredd&#x27;s belief that he is still a Judda at heart. But this is actually a final test of loyalty to see if he attempts to defend himself. Seeing that Kraken accepts the sentence and is willing to execute himself, Chief Judge Silver makes him a full Judge. Since the population of Mega-City One and most Judges don&#x27;t know that Dredd retired, Silver then orders Judge Kraken to pretend to be Dredd for the time being, to avoid admitting to the public that such a famous and trusted Judge lost faith in the justice system. Meanwhile, a woman named Xena is becoming obsessed with Judge Death, having barely survived an encounter with him during one of the previous Dark Judge rampages. It is revealed that the Sisters of Death have influencing Xena from Deadworld, gaining her loyalty and convincing her she will be the &quot;Bride of Death&quot;. Eventually, they use her mind and life force to create a psychic bridge allowing them to manifest on Earth.
* &quot;Necropolis&quot; (progs 674–699). Two months after Dredd left Mega-City One, the Sisters of Death attack and take control of the vulnerable minded Judge Kraken. Realizing Xena is too weak to be of much further use, the Sisters have Kraken bring them Psi-Judge Kit Agee so her psychic power can form a stronger bridge from Deadworld. Increasingly corrupted by the Sisters, Kraken later forces an extra-dimensional research lab to bring the Dark Judges back to Mega-City One. The Sisters use magic to corrupt MC1 into &quot;Necropolis&quot; and the Dark Judges take over, making Kraken a fifth Dark Judge and corrupting many Judges who can&#x27;t resist. Under their rule, the population is systematically murdered, while some commit suicide to avoid horrific death. Finding the retired former Chief Judge McGruder in the Cursed Earth, Dredd recruits her and returns to Mega-City One. He then recruits Anderson and others. Locating Agee, they kill her, cutting off the Sisters&#x27; power and influence. Judges Mortis, Fear, and Fire are then captured. In the end, 60 million are dead, their bodies buried in a mass grave just outside the walls of Mega-City One. Freed from being a slave to the Dark Judges, Kraken welcomes his execution by Dredd. With Chief Judge Thomas Silver missing and presumed dead, McGruder returns to the position of Chief Judge but decides not to create a new Council of Five.
* &quot;Return of the King&quot; (progs 733-735). In this aftermath to &quot;Necropolis&quot;, the undead Chief Judge Silver returns to the Grand Hall of Justice. After his botched suicide attempt, Silver had been captured and murdered by Judge Death who reanimated him as a zombie (albeit with all his mental faculties intact) and tortured him mercilessly. Fearing summary execution by the survivors of the Necropolis, Silver had hidden for months before discovering that, in his absence, his predecessor McGruder had reclaimed the office of chief judge. A constitutional crisis breaks out when Silver challenges McGruder&#x27;s right to be chief judge, pointing out she had resigned the position whereas he had not. Silver and McGruder agree to abide by Dredd&#x27;s decision as to who is the rightful chief judge. Since Silver had never resigned or been formally removed from power, Dredd rules in his favour, formally returning Silver to office. Dredd then tells Silver he is unfit for command and convicts him of gross dereliction of duty for precipitating the Necropolis and deserting his command in time of war. Initially sentencing Silver to twenty years of penal servitude, Dredd defers the sentence to execution. Silver pleads for his life but an impassive Dredd incinerates him to ashes, making McGruder chief judge by default.
* &quot;The Devil You Know&quot; and &quot;Twilight&#x27;s Last Gleaming&quot; (progs 750–753 and 754–756). The long-running tensions in Mega-City One between the totalitarian Judge system and the movement for the restoration of democracy conclude with a vote. A large number of apathetic citizens take no part in the process, while the majority of those who do vote want the Judges to remain in control. A pro-democracy protest march of almost 2 million people heads for Justice Central and is ready to riot, but Dredd convinces the leaders the referendum was fair and votes were counted accurately. During this time, Dredd undergoes &quot;rejuve&quot; treatment for the first time, restoring his damaged skin and muscle from &quot;The Dead Man&quot; story and gaining more vitality and youth than a man his age should have.
* &quot;Top Dogs&quot; (&quot;Judge Dredd Annual&quot; 1991). Published in 1990, this is the first crossover between Judge Dredd&#x27;s stories and another long-running &quot;2000 AD&quot; comic strip &quot;Strontium Dog&quot; starring Johnny Alpha. Mutated by strontium radiation fallout resulting from a nuclear war in 2150, Alpha (like many mutants) works as a Search/Destroy Agent, bounty hunters often referred to as &quot;S/D&quot; Agents or &quot;Strontium Dogs&quot;. In this story, Johnny and his partner Wulf Sternhammer time travel from 2176 to pursue fugitives who have escaped to Dredd&#x27;s time in 2112. Although Dredd realizes Alpha and Sternhammer are time travelers, he does not recognize their legal authority and considers their actions criminal. After a fight and chase, the S/D Agency transports Johnny, Sternhammer, and their bounty target back to 2176. Dredd regards Alpha and Sternhammer as wanted fugitives. Although this story implies Alpha&#x27;s stories are set in Dredd&#x27;s future, writer John Wagner later said the world of &quot;Strontium Dog&quot; is one of several possible futures for Dredd&#x27;s reality.
* &quot;America&quot; (&quot;Megazine&quot; 1.01–1.07). Dredd&#x27;s philosophy is explored when democracy activists resort to terrorism. This story introduces the tragic characters America Jara and Bennett Beeny, as well as the terrorist group Total War.
* &quot;Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgement on Gotham&quot;, an intercompany crossover story co-published by DC Comics and Fleetway, written by Alan Grant and John Wagner, and featuring painted artwork by Simon Bisley. The universe-hopping undead monster Judge Death uses dimension-jump technology to breach the DC Universe and attack Gotham City. Batman uses the same technology to travel to Dredd&#x27;s reality, leading to a battle and then the Dark Knight&#x27;s arrest. After scanning Batman&#x27;s mind, Judge Anderson realizes they&#x27;re on the same side and helps him return to Gotham to stop Judge Death and Scarecrow. Dredd reluctantly joins forces with Batman, returning home with Anderson once Death is defeated. The story was followed by three other crossovers also written by Wagner and Grant but with different artists each time: &quot;Batman/Judge Dredd: Vendetta in Gotham, Batman/Judge Dredd: The Ultimate Riddle,&quot; and &quot;Batman/Judge Dredd: Die Laughing&quot; #1–2.
* &quot;Judgement Day&quot; (progs 786–799 and &quot;Megazine&quot; 2.04–2.09). Published in 1992, this was the first story to feature Johnny Alpha of &quot;Strontium Dog&quot; after his death in 1990. In this story, the villain Sabbat the Necromagus destroys a world in 2178 (two years before Alpha&#x27;s Death) then journeys to Dredd&#x27;s time in 2114. Johnny Alpha pursues him to ensure he doesn&#x27;t completely alter future history. Using a lodestone to tap into Earth&#x27;s own energy field, Sabbat re-animates most of Earth&#x27;s dead, including the 60 million buried outside of Mega-City One after &quot;Necropolis&quot;, and releases zombie armies against the world&#x27;s Mega-Cities, causing the Fourth World War. Many minor supporting characters are killed, including Dredd&#x27;s former cadet trainee Dekker. At an international conference of Judges, Sabbat briefly appears and explains that since he can control the dead, he will kill the entire human race to create a planet-scale army to conquer the galaxy. After learning the cities of Brasilia, Djakarta, Mega-City Two, Sino-Cit, and South-Am City have all fallen to Sabbat, Dredd suggests nuking them so the dead won&#x27;t become new zombie soldiers. Although horrified this will kill any survivors still in those cities, the other cities agree and the attacks kill over 2 billion across Earth, with another billion later dying in the surviving cities from the zombies. When Sabbat&#x27;s base is located in the Radlands of Ji (an area of post-nuclear China), Dredd leads a squad to stop him and Johnny Alpha tags along. In the end, only he and Dredd survive, decapitating Sabbat and pinning his head to his own magical lodestone so he can&#x27;t regenerate or leave. With Sabbat&#x27;s power shut down (even though his head lives), the undead armies fall. Dredd and Alpha are then forced to walk back to civilization from the Radlands, with Dredd deciding that Alpha&#x27;s actions have earned him a pardon for crimes in Mega-City One. (The end of their journey together, and Johnny Alpha&#x27;s return to the future, is told in the Big Finish Productions audio play &quot;Judge Dredd: Pre-Emptive Revenge&quot; starring Toby Longworth as Dredd and Simon Pegg as Johnny Alpha.)
* &quot;Mechanismo&quot; trilogy (&quot;Megazine&quot; 2.12–17, 2.22–26 and 2.37–43). After &quot;Necropolis&quot; and &quot;Judgment Day&quot;, Mega-City has lost far too many judges. To combat this, the Chief Judge test-runs 10 robotic &quot;Mechanismo&quot; Judges, with disastrous results.
* &quot;Inferno&quot; (progs 842–853). Escaped rogue Judges from Titan take over the city, forcing the Judges into exile out in the Cursed Earth.
* &quot;Wilderlands&quot; storyline (progs 891–894 and 904–918 and &quot;Megazine&quot; 2.57–2.67). This story introduced Judge Volt and Judge Castillo, revived the Council of Five, and ended many long-running subplots, including the Mechanismo Program and McGruder&#x27;s second stint as Chief Judge. Dredd is exposed as falsifying evidence to shut down the Mechanismo project and is arrested, while Chief Judge McGruder attempts to remain in power and see Mechanismo implemented. When a malfunctioning Mechanismo crashes a space cruiser on an alien world in an attempt to kill McGruder, Dredd takes control of the survivors.
* &quot;The Pit&quot; (progs 970–999). This story introduced Judge Galen DeMarco, who would become protagonist of her own strip. Dredd takes the job of Sector Chief at Sector 301, an isolated area of the city that has become a dumping ground for corrupt and incompetent judges.
* &quot;The Doomsday Scenario&quot; (progs 1141–1164 and 1167, and &quot;Megazine&quot; 3.52–3.59). The first series to run the same story from different viewpoints concurrently from start to finish, one in &quot;2000 AD&quot; and the other in the &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot;. One is told from the viewpoint of Galen DeMarco, now a civilian, as she is caught up in crimelord Nero Narcos&#x27; attempt to take over the city with his army of robots. The other is told from Dredd&#x27;s viewpoint as he is taken prisoner by Orlok the Assassin and tried by the East-Meg One government in exile for his war crimes during the Apocalypse War. Once Dredd escapes (with Anderson&#x27;s assistance), he secures the help of Brit-Cit in breaking Narcos&#x27; control over his robot hordes. The story saw the Judges briefly lose power and Chief Judge Volt commits suicide as a result. Hershey replaces him.
* &quot;Blood Cadets&quot; (progs 1186–1188). This introduces a new, young clone of Dredd who calls himself Rico (no first name) to try to redeem that name. &quot;Blood and Duty&quot; (progs 1300–1301) saw the return of Dredd&#x27;s niece Vienna Pasternak. With Vienna&#x27;s reintroduction and the arrival of Judge Rico, Dredd is given a family and several new plot points for future stories, including the Justice Department creating a large number of Dredd clones, and Dredd&#x27;s problems with trying to connect with his niece.
* &quot;Helter Skelter&quot; (progs 1250-1261). Dredd and warp specialist Darien Kenzie battle an invasion from an alliance of alternate universes where Dredd&#x27;s greatest foes were victorious, led by none other than Chief Judge Cal. This story features parallel version of previous Dredd foes such as Cal, Rico Dredd, War Marshal &quot;Mad Dog&quot; Kazan, Call-Me-Kenneth, Grampus the Klegg, Fink Angel, and Murd the Oppressor. Other non-Dredd characters from &quot;2000 AD&quot; also appeared - albeit as background characters - from alternate universes, such as the Norts from Rogue Trooper, D.R. &amp; Quinch and the Vampires from Fiends of the Eastern Front.
* &quot;Judge Dredd vs. Aliens&quot; (prog 2003 special and 1322–1335). Dredd faces the Xenomorphs, with mutant criminal &#x27;Mister Bones&#x27; breeding an army thereof to attack the Department of Justice.
* &quot;Terror&quot; and &quot;Total War&quot; (progs 1392–1399 and 1408–1419). A pair of stories wherein the fanatical organisation &#x27;Total War&#x27; smuggles 12 nuclear devices into the city and threatens to detonate them all unless the Judges leave. A standard thriller plot made more significant through explorations of Judge Dredd&#x27;s extended family, including Vienna and another Dredd clone named Nimrod.
* &quot;Blood Trails&quot; (progs 1440–1449). Following elements of &quot;Total War&quot; and &quot;Gulag&quot; (where Dredd led a Judge team to try and free prisoners from the Sov block), a clone of Sov Judge Kazan tries to attack Dredd by targeting Vienna, sending the face-changing assassin Pasha to abduct her. In the aftermath of the story, the Kazan clone is cut loose by East-Meg 2 and claims political asylum from Mega-City One. Dredd&#x27;s long-term ally Guthrie is severely injured, losing both legs and an arm, eventually becoming a cyborg. Judge Giant and Judge Rico are severely injured.
* &quot;Origins&quot; (progs 1505–1519 and 1529–1535; prologue in 1500–1504). Consisting largely of flashbacks, this story lays out the history of the Judges and founder Chief Judge Fargo, as well as scenes from Dredd&#x27;s childhood during the Third World War.
* &quot;Mutants in Mega-City One&quot; (progs 1542–1545). The first in a series of short stories in which Dredd campaigns to change the apartheid laws prohibiting mutants from entering the city. This results in Chief Judge Hershey being voted out of office and replaced with Judge Francisco.
* &quot;Tour of Duty&quot; (progs 1650–1693). Judge Dredd is posted in the Cursed Earth to oversee the foundations of four new mutant townships. The corrupt Judge Martin Sinfield manipulates Francisco so he can become Chief Judge, and promptly becomes the target of repeated assassination attempts. Dredd is recalled to lead the investigation into the attacks, which are the work of serial mass-murderer PJ Maybe, who has assumed the identity of Mayor Byron Ambrose.
* &quot;Day of Chaos&quot; (progs 1743–1789) depicts the deaths of 87 per cent of the population of Mega-City One by a biological weapon unleashed by East-Meg survivors of the Apocalypse War.
* &quot;The Cold Deck&quot; (progs 1806–1811; prologue in 1803, epilogue in 1812). A cross-over between &quot;Dredd&quot; and the spin-offs &quot;The Simping Detective&quot; and &quot;Low Life&quot;, this story sees the machinations of Black Ops head Judge Bachmann, who is plotting a coup (the three stories together are known as &quot;Trifecta&quot;). Introduces Judge Smiley.
* &quot;Every Empire Falls&quot; (progs 1973–1990 and &quot;Megazine&quot; 371–374). An attempted coup in Mega-City One by the chief judge of Texas City, Pamela Oswin. Dredd is seemingly killed, but this is a deception to hide the fact that he has actually been kidnapped.
* &quot;Harvey&quot; (progs 2024-2029) and &quot;Machine Law&quot; (progs 2115-2122). This story introduces a new generation of robot judges that prove significantly more reliable than their predecessors and continue to appear in later stories. Judge Hershey resigns and is succeeded by Logan as Chief Judge.
* &quot;The Carousel&quot; (&quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot; vol. 5 #375, published in 2016). In the year 2138, Joe Dredd - now 72 years old - is ordered to undergo another &quot;rejuve treatment&quot; at the Carousel Clinic (the first rejuve treatment happened soon after &quot;Necropolis&quot; due to his injuries in &quot;The Dead Man&quot;, in the years 2112 when he was 46). His entire epidermis, vascular system, and muscular tissue are restructured at a cellular level, giving him somewhat greater youth and vitality than a person his age and condition should have. Though he is told he can also have his internal organs and bones rebuilt, he turns this down, satisfied for now.
* &quot;The Small House&quot; (progs 2100-2109). The culmination of storylines started in Trifecta, Judge Dredd goes on the hunt for Judge Smiley&#x27;s black ops unit that has been operating in the walls of the Justice Department for decades. Notable for the reveal of Dirty Frank&#x27;s backstory, Dredd&#x27;s break with some of his allies including Chief Judge Hershey, and the overt confrontation with the fascist nature of Mega-City One.

==Alternative versions==
Shortly before the release of the 1995 film, three new comic book titles were released, followed by a one-off comic version of the film story.

;&quot;Judge Dredd&quot; (DC Comics)
DC Comics published an alternative version of Judge Dredd between 1994 and 1996, lasting 18 issues. Continuity and history were different from both the original &quot;2000 AD&quot; version and the 1995 film. A major difference was that Chief Judge Fargo, portrayed as incorruptible in the original version, was depicted as evil in the DC version. Most issues were written by Andrew Helfer, but the last issue was written by Gordon Rennie, who has since written &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; for &quot;2000 AD&quot; (Note: the DC crossover story &quot;Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgment on Gotham&quot; featured the original Dredd, not the version depicted in this title).

;&quot;Judge Dredd – Legends of the Law&quot;
Another DC Comics title, lasting 13 issues between 1994 and 1995. Although these were intended to feature the same version of Judge Dredd as in the other DC title, the first four issues were written by John Wagner and Alan Grant and were consistent with their original &quot;2000 AD&quot; version.

;&quot;Judge Dredd – Lawman of the Future&quot;
From the same publishers as &quot;2000 AD&quot;, this was nevertheless a completely different version of Dredd aimed at younger readers. Editor David Bishop prohibited writers from showing Dredd killing anyone, a reluctance which would be completely unfamiliar to readers acquainted with the original version. As one reviewer put it years later: &quot;this was Judge Dredd with two vital ingredients missing: his balls.&quot; It ran fortnightly for 23 issues from 1995 to 1996, plus one &quot;Action Special&quot;.

;&quot;Judge Dredd: The Official Movie Adaptation&quot;
Written by Andrew Helfer and illustrated by Carlos Ezquerra and Michael Danza. Published by DC Comics in 1995, but a different version of Dredd to that in the DC comic books described above.

;&quot;Shōnen Jump&quot;
In Japan, manga comic &quot;Shōnen Jump Autumn Special&quot; (1995) included a one-off story featuring a unique version of Judge Dredd which was entirely different to both the comic character and the film character. Set in Tokyo in 2099, Dredd Takeru is a part-time street judge whose day job is working as a primary school teacher.

;&quot;Heavy Metal Dredd&quot;
From the same publishers as &quot;2000 AD&quot;, this was a series of ultra-violent one-off stories from &quot;a separate and aggressive Dredd world&quot;. The first eight episodes were originally published in &quot;Rock Power&quot; magazine, and were all co-written by John Wagner and Alan Grant and illustrated by Simon Bisley. These were reprinted, together with 11 new stories (some by other creators), in &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot;. The original eight stories were collected in a trade paperback by Hamlyn in 1993. The complete series was collected by Rebellion Developments in 2009.

;&quot;Dredd&quot; (2012 film continuity)
In the week that the 2012 film &quot;Dredd&quot; was released in the UK, a 10-page prologue was published in issue #328 of &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot;, written by its editor, Matt Smith, and illustrated by Henry Flint. &quot;Top of the World, Ma-Ma&quot; told the backstory of the film&#x27;s main antagonist, Ma-Ma. Five more stories featuring this version of the character were published in &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot;: &quot;Underbelly&quot; in #340–342 (2013), &quot;Uprise&quot; in #350–354 (2014), &quot;Dust&quot; in #367–371 (2015–&#x27;16), &quot;Furies&quot; in #386–387 (2017), and &quot;The Dead World&quot; in #392–396 (2018) (there were also two &quot;Judge Anderson&quot; stories featuring the film version of that character in #377–379).

;&quot;Judge Dredd&quot; (IDW Publishing)

* In November 2012, IDW Publishing began a new monthly series written by Duane Swierczynski and illustrated by Nelson Daniel. It lasted for 30 issues.
* IDW began a new four-issue miniseries called &quot;Judge Dredd: Year One&quot; in March 2013, set during Dredd&#x27;s first year as a judge.
* In September 2013, IDW began publishing the four-issue miniseries &quot;Mars Attacks Judge Dredd&quot;.
* In January 2014, IDW began another miniseries, &quot;Judge Dredd: Mega-City Two&quot;. There were five issues.
* In July 2015, IDW announced a new miniseries called &quot;Judge Dredd: Mega-City Zero&quot;, starting in January 2016. This ran for 12 issues, and then was followed by a sequel, set 10 years later, called &quot;Judge Dredd: The Blessed Earth&quot;, which lasted for nine issues.
* IDW and Dark Horse Comics published a four issue miniseries, &quot;Predator vs. Judge Dredd vs. Aliens&quot;, beginning in July 2016 and ending in June 2017.
* A one-shot comic called &quot;Deviations: Howl of the Wolf&quot; was published in 2017.
* A four-issue miniseries, &quot;Under Siege&quot;, began in May 2018. It is not connected with any previous IDW &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; series.
* &quot;Toxic&quot; began in October 2018 and ran for four issues.
* &quot;False Witness&quot; was a four-issue miniseries published in 2020.
&quot;Year One, Mega-City Two, Deviations, Under Siege, Toxic&quot; and &quot;False Witness&quot; were later reprinted in the &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot; from 2022 to 2024.

==In other media==
===Films===
====&quot;Judge Dredd&quot; (1995)====

An American film loosely based on the comic strip was released in 1995, starring Sylvester Stallone as Dredd. The film received generally negative reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes it has a 22% rating, and the site&#x27;s critical consensus states that &quot;Director [Danny] Cannon fails to find the necessary balance to make it work&quot;. In deference to its expensive Hollywood star, Dredd&#x27;s face was shown. In the comic, he very rarely removes his helmet, and even then his real face is never revealed. Also, the writers largely omitted the ironic humour of the comic strip, and ignored important aspects of the &quot;Dredd mythology&quot;. The co-creator and main writer of the comic character, John Wagner, said: 

In retrospect the film received some praise for its depiction of Dredd&#x27;s city, costumes, humour and larger-than-life characters.

====&quot;Dredd&quot; (2012)====

Reliance Entertainment produced &quot;Dredd&quot;, which was released in September 2012. It was positively received by critics with Rotten Tomatoes&#x27; rating of 80%. It was directed by Pete Travis and written by Alex Garland. Michael S. Murphey was co-producer with Travis. Karl Urban was cast as Judge Dredd and Olivia Thirlby portrayed Judge Anderson. Dredd&#x27;s costume was radically redesigned for the film, adding armor plates and reducing the size and prominence of the shoulder insignia.

The main &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; writer John Wagner said:

The film was shot in 3-D and filmed in Cape Town and Johannesburg. Funding was secured from Reliance Big Entertainment.

===Television===
On 10 May 2017, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; announced that independent entertainment studio IM Global and Rebellion have partnered to develop a live-action TV show called &quot;Judge Dredd: Mega-City One&quot;. The show is planned to be an ensemble drama about a team of Judges as they deal with the challenges of the future-shocked 22nd century.

Jason Kingsley, owner of Rebellion, told the &quot;Guardian&quot; in May 2017 that the TV show will be far more satirical than the film adaptions and could become &quot;one of the most expensive TV shows the UK has ever seen&quot;.

According to Karl Urban, the studio&#x27;s concept is to &quot;build the show around more rookie judges and young, new judges&quot;, where Dredd himself &quot;would come in and out&quot;. Urban stated that he would be interested in reprising the role for this, on the condition that Dredd&#x27;s part of the story be implemented in a &quot;meaningful way&quot;.

In November 2018, Rebellion began setting up a new studio in Didcot, Oxfordshire, valued at $100 million, for Film and TV series based on &quot;2000 AD&quot; characters, including &quot;Judge Dredd: Mega City One.&quot;

===Novels===
From 1993 to 1995, Virgin Books published nine Judge Dredd novels. In August 2015, these novels were re-released as e-books. The books are:

* &quot;Deathmasques&quot; (Dave Stone, August 1993 )
* &quot;The Savage Amusement&quot; (David Bishop, August 1993 )
* &quot;Dreddlocked&quot; (Stephen Marley, October 1993 )
* &quot;Cursed Earth Asylum&quot; (David Bishop, December 1993 )
* &quot;The Medusa Seed&quot; (Dave Stone, January 1994 )
* &quot;Dread Dominion&quot; (Stephen Marley, May 1994 )
* &quot;The Hundredfold Problem&quot; (John Grant, August 1994 ) (Re-released by BeWrite Books in 2003, rewritten as a non-Dredd novel.)
* &quot;Silencer&quot; (David Bishop, November 1994 )
* &quot;Wetworks&quot; (Dave Stone, February 1995 )

Also in 1995, St. Martin&#x27;s Press published two novelizations of the film:

* &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; (Neal Barrett Jr., June 1995 )
* &quot;Judge Dredd: The Junior Novelisation&quot; (Graham Marks, May 1995 )

In 1997, Virgin published a &quot;Doctor Who&quot; novel by Dave Stone which had originally been intended to feature Judge Dredd, called &quot;Burning Heart&quot;. However this idea was abandoned after the film was released, and Dredd was replaced by another character called Adjudicator Joseph Craator.

From 2003 to 2007, Black Flame published official &quot;2000 AD&quot; novels, including a new run of Judge Dredd novels. After Black Flame closed in 2007, Rebellion picked up the rights to their &quot;2000 AD&quot; titles in 2011, and began republishing them as e-books. Their nine Judge Dredd books are:

* &quot;Dredd Vs Death&quot; (Gordon Rennie, October 2003 )
* &quot;Bad Moon Rising&quot; (David Bishop, June 2004 )
* &quot;Black Atlantic&quot; (Peter J. Evans &amp; Simon Jowett, June 2004 )
* &quot;Eclipse&quot; (James Swallow, August 2004 )
* &quot;Kingdom of the Blind&quot; (David Bishop, November 2004 )
* &quot;The Final Cut&quot; (Matt Smith, February 2005 )
* &quot;Swine Fever&quot; (Andrew Cartmel, May 2005 )
* &quot;Whiteout&quot; (James Swallow, September 2005 )
* &quot;Psykogeddon&quot; (Dave Stone, January 2006 )

In July 2012, three of these novels – Gordon Rennie&#x27;s &quot;Dredd Vs Death&quot;, David Bishop&#x27;s &quot;Kingdom of the Blind&quot;, and Matt Smith&#x27;s &quot;The Final Cut&quot; – were republished in a single paperback volume titled &quot;Dredd&quot;, as a tie-in with the 2012 film of the same title. ()

In August 2012, Rebellion announced a new series of e-books under the series title &quot;Judge Dredd: Year One&quot;, about Dredd&#x27;s first year as a judge (the stories in the comic strip having begun in his 20th year when he was already a veteran). All three stories were published by Abaddon Books in a paperback book called &quot;Judge Dredd Year One Omnibus&quot; in October 2014.

* &quot;City Fathers&quot; (Matthew Smith, August 2012)
* &quot;The Cold Light of Day&quot; (Michael Carroll, July 2014)
* &quot;Wear Iron&quot; (Al Ewing, October 2014)

In 2016 and 2017, more e-books were published under the series title &quot;Judge Dredd: Year Two&quot;:

* &quot;The Righteous Man&quot; (Michael Carroll, January 2016)
* &quot;Down and Out&quot; (Matthew Smith, September 2016)
* &quot;Alternative Facts&quot; (Cavan Scott, October 2017)

In 2020, more e-books were published under the series title &quot;Judge Dredd: Year Three&quot;:

* &quot;Fallen Angel&quot; (Michael Carroll)
* &quot;Machineries of Hate&quot; (Matthew Smith)
* &quot;Bitter Earth&quot; (Lauren Sills)

====Novels about related characters====
As well as novels starring Judge Dredd, there are other novels and novellas in the franchise about other characters. For a list of books about Anderson, see Judge Anderson#Novels.

Michael Carroll wrote three novellas about Dredd&#x27;s brother, Rico Dredd, under the series title &quot;Rico Dredd: The Titan Years&quot;. They were originally published as e-books, but the trilogy was published in an omnibus paperback volume by Abaddon Books in 2019.
* &quot;The Third Law&quot; (June 2014)
* &quot;The Process of Elimination&quot; (October 2018)
* &quot;For I Have Sinned&quot; (March 2019)

Another series of books, collectively called &quot;Judges&quot;, is about the first generation of judges, and are set six decades before Dredd&#x27;s first stories to appear in the comic. The books, all published by Abaddon Books, are:
* &quot;The Avalanche&quot; (Michael Carroll, May 2018)
* &quot;When the Light Lay Still&quot; (Charles J. Eskew, August 2018)
* &quot;Lone Wolf&quot; (George Mann, January 2019)
* &quot;Golgotha&quot; (Michael Carroll, July 2019)
* &quot;Psyche&quot; (Maura McHugh, January 2020)
* &quot;The Patriots&quot; (Joseph Elliott-Coleman, March 2020)
These six books were later republished in two omnibus volumes. A seventh book in the series was published in 2021:
* &quot;Necessary Evil&quot; (Michael Carroll, July 2021)

A trilogy about the Dark Judges, &quot;The Fall of Deadworld&quot;, was written by &quot;2000 AD&quot;&#x27;s editor, Matt Smith, and published by Abaddon Books:
* &quot;Red Mosquito&quot; (September 2019)
* &quot;Bone White Seeds&quot; (February 2020)
* &quot;Grey Flesh Flies&quot; (April 2020)
These were collected into an omnibus edition in June 2020.

A trilogy of novellas called &quot;The Apocalypse War&quot;, all written by John Ware, was released in 2022:
* &quot;Pack Instinct&quot;
* &quot;The World Will End Today&quot;
* &quot;The Bloody Fist of Justice&quot;
These were collected in an omnibus edition called &quot;Apocalypse War Dossier&quot;.

====Other books====
* &quot;Judge Fear&#x27;s Big Day Out and Other Stories&quot; (2020), a collection of short stories by various writers which originally appeared in the &quot;Judge Dredd Megazine&quot;, edited by Michael Carroll.

===Games===
====Video games====
There have been multiple Judge Dredd games released for various video game consoles and several home computers such as the ZX Spectrum, PlayStation and Commodore 64. The first game, titled &quot;Judge Dredd&quot;, was released in 1986. Another game, also titled &quot;Judge Dredd&quot;, was released in 1990. At one time, an arcade game was being developed by Midway Games but it was never released. It can however be found online and has three playable levels.

A game loosely based on the first live action film, called &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; was developed by Probe Software and released by Acclaim for the Genesis, Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Game Boy, and Game Gear. Bally produced a &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; pinball machine based on the comics. In 1997, Acclaim released a &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; arcade game, a rail shooter with 3D graphics and full motion video footage shot specifically for the game.

&quot;Judge Dredd: Dredd Vs. Death&quot; was produced by Rebellion Developments and released in early 2003 by Sierra Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, and GameCube. The game sees the return of the Dark Judges when Mega-City One becomes overrun with vampires and the undead. The player takes control of Judge Dredd, with the optional addition of another Human player in co-operative play. The game is a first-person shooter  – with key differences such as the requirement to arrest lawbreakers, and an SJS death squad which will hunt down Dredd should the player kill too many civilians. The player can also go up against three friends in the various multiplayer modes which include &quot;Deathmatch&quot;, &quot;Team Deathmatch&quot;, &quot;Elimination&quot;, &quot;Team Elimination&quot;, &quot;Informant&quot;, &quot;Judges Vs. Perps&quot;, &quot;Runner&quot; and more. A novel was based on the game.

A costume set for the PlayStation 3 video game &quot;LittleBigPlanet&quot; was released in May 2009, which contained outfits to dress the game&#x27;s main character Sackboy as five &quot;2000 AD&quot; characters, one of which is Judge Dredd. Dredd&#x27;s uniform is also used to create the Judge Anderson costume for the Sackpeople.

In 2012, Rebellion released &quot;Judge Dredd Vs. Zombies&quot;, a game application for iPhone, Android phones, Windows 8 and Windows Phone.

====Role-playing games====

Games Workshop released a &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; role-playing game in 1985. Mongoose Publishing released &quot;The Judge Dredd Roleplaying Game&quot; in 2002 and another &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; game using the &quot;Traveller&quot; system in 2009. Their licence ended in 2016. In February 2017, EN Publishing announced the new &quot;Judge Dredd &amp; The Worlds of 2000 AD Tabletop Adventure Game&quot; using the WOIN (&quot;What&#x27;s OLD is NEW&quot;) role-playing game system.

On 17 July 2012, Tin Man Games released a &quot;Judge Dredd&quot;-themed digital role-playing gamebook titled &quot;Judge Dredd: Countdown Sector 106&quot;, available for the iOS operating system.

====Board games====
Games Workshop produced a &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; board game based on the comic strip in 1982. In the game players, who represent judges, attempt to arrest perps that have committed crimes in different location in Mega City One. A key feature of the game is the different action cards that are collected during play; generally these cards are used when trying to arrest perps although some cards can also be played against other players to hinder their progress. The winner of the game is the judge who collected the most points arresting perps. Players could sabotage each other&#x27;s arrest attempts. Additionally, there were many amusing card combinations such as arresting Judge Death for selling old comics, as the &quot;Old Comic Selling&quot; crime card featured a &quot;2000 AD&quot; cover with Judge Death on it. The game used characters, locations and artwork from the comic. It was re-released by Rebellion in 2022.

In 1987, Games Workshop published a second Dredd-inspired board game, &quot;Block Mania&quot;. In this game for two players, players take on the role of rival neighboring blocks at war. This was a heavier game than the earlier Dredd board game, focused on tactical combat, in which players control these residents as they use whatever means they can to vandalize and destroy their opponent&#x27;s block. Later the same year, Games Workshop released the Mega-Mania expansion for the game, allowing the game to be played by up to four players.

Mongoose Publishing have released a miniatures skirmish game of gang warfare based in Mega-City One called &quot;Gangs of Mega-City One&quot;, often referred to as GOMC1. The game features judges being called in when a gang challenges another gang that is too tough to fight. A wide range of miniatures has been released including box sets for an Ape Gang and an Undercity Gang. A Robot Gang was also produced but was released as two blister packs instead of a box set. Only one rules expansion has been released, called &quot;Death on the Streets&quot;. The expansion introduced many new rules including usage of the new gangs and the ability to bring Judge Dredd himself into a fight. This game went out of print shortly thereafter, but was replaced by the &quot;Judge Dredd Miniatures Game&quot;, which was published free in many stages as the company sought feedback from fans and players. In 2012, an expansion was released called &quot;Block War!&quot;. Miniatures continue to be manufactured at a slow pace.

In November 2017, Osprey Games announced their development of a new graphic adventure card game, entitled &quot;Judge Dredd: The Cursed Earth&quot;. The game is designed and based on &quot;The Lost Expedition&quot;, a game from designer Peer Sylvester. In the game, one to five players &quot;[lead] a team of judges against dinosaurs, mutants, and the Cursed Earth itself&quot;. It was released on 21 February 2019.

====Collectible card game====
There was a short-lived collectible card game called simply &quot;Dredd&quot;. In the game, players would control a squad of judges and arrest perps. The rules system was innovative and the game was well-received by fans and collectors alike, but various issues unrelated to the game&#x27;s quality caused its early demise.

====Pinball====

There was a four-player pinball game released in 1993, produced by Bally Manufacturing.

===Audio series===

&quot;The Day the Law Died&quot; and &quot;The Apocalypse War&quot; stories were produced by Dirk Maggs and broadcast in three-minute segments (40 for each story) on Mark Goodier&#x27;s afternoon show on BBC Radio One in 1995. The cast include Lorelei King and Gary Martin. They were issued separately on dual cassette and double CD. Both titles have since been deleted. &quot;The Apocalypse War&quot; also contains plot elements from &quot;Block Mania&quot;, because this story set the scene for the main story.

Since then, Big Finish Productions has produced 18 audio plays featuring &quot;2000 AD&quot; characters. These have mostly featured Judge Dredd, although three have also featured characters from the series &quot;Strontium Dog&quot;. In these, Judge Dredd is played by Toby Longworth, and Johnny Alpha from &quot;Strontium Dog&quot; is played by Simon Pegg.

The list of &quot;2000 AD&quot; audio plays featuring Dredd includes:
# Judge Dredd: Wanted: Dredd or Alive by David Bishop
# Judge Dredd: Death Trap! by David Bishop
# Judge Dredd: The Killing Zone by Dave Stone
# Judge Dredd: The Big Shot! by David Bishop
# Judge Dredd: Trapped on Titan by Jonathan Clements
# Judge Dredd: Get Karter! by David Bishop
# Judge Dredd: I Love Judge Dredd by Jonathan Morris
# Judge Dredd: Dreddline by James Swallow
# Judge Dredd: 99 Code Red! by Jonathan Clements
# Judge Dredd: War Planet by Dave Stone
# Judge Dredd: Jihad by James Swallow
# Judge Dredd: War Crimes by David Bishop
# Judge Dredd: For King and Country by Cavan Scott
# Judge Dredd: Pre-Emptive Revenge by Jonathan Clements (with Strontium Dog)
# Judge Dredd: Grud is Dead by James Swallow
# Judge Dredd: Solo by Jonathan Clements

&quot;Note: 3 and 10 are &quot;Strontium Dog&quot; stories that do not feature Dredd.&quot;

Starting in 2009, four further Judge Dredd titles were released under the banner &quot;Crime Chronicles&quot;, once more featuring Toby Longworth.

# Judge Dredd: Crime Chronicles – Stranger Than Truth by David Bishop (October 2009)
# Judge Dredd: Crime Chronicles – Blood Will Tell by James Swallow (November 2009)
# Judge Dredd: Crime Chronicles – The Devil&#x27;s Playground by Jonathan Clements (December 2009)
# Judge Dredd: Crime Chronicles – Double Zero by James Swallow (January 2010)

==In popular culture==

* The metal band Anthrax included a song about Judge Dredd on their third album (&quot;Among the Living&quot;) entitled &quot;I Am the Law&quot;. It is one of their most popular and well-known songs, and often features as an encore to setlists. They also released a 12&quot; single and a 7&quot; picture disc, both bearing the image of Dredd. One 12&quot; version featured a fold-out poster of the band dressed as Judges drawn by drummer Charlie Benante.
* The UK ska/pop band Madness recorded a tribute single to Dredd under the name of The Fink Brothers, entitled &quot;Mutants in Mega-City One&quot;. Released on the Zarjazz label in February 1985, the record featured a cover drawn by &quot;2000 AD&quot; Dredd artist Brian Bolland.
* The UK band The Human League also wrote a song about Judge Dredd. &quot;I Am the Law&quot; appeared on the album &quot;Dare&quot;.
* The Screaming Blue Messiahs recorded a song entitled &quot;Mega-City One&quot; on their final album &quot;Totally Religious&quot;.
* The Manic Street Preachers&#x27; song &quot;Judge Yr&#x27;Self&quot; was influenced by the comic, and was intended to appear on the &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; film soundtrack. It reached the demo stage, but after lyricist and guitarist Richey Edwards disappeared, the other members of the band said that a song for a soundtrack was the last thing on their mind. Edwards himself was heavily influenced by the Judge Dredd and &quot;2000 AD&quot; comics (the slogan &quot;Be pure. Be vigilant. Behave&quot; from the &quot;2000 AD&quot; strip &quot;Nemesis the Warlock&quot; was included in the song &quot;P.C.P.&quot;). A fully produced mix of &quot;Judge Yr&#x27;Self&quot; (by long time Manics producer Dave Eringa) was released on the 2003 double-album of B-sides and rarities, &quot;Lipstick Traces&quot;. Richey was a great fan of Judge Dredd and even had one of his drawings published in the comic during his late childhood. Richey was later parodied as &quot;Clarence&quot; of the &quot;Crazy Sked Moaners&quot; in the Dredd story &quot;Muzak Killer: Live! Part 3&quot; (prog 838, 5 June 1993), in a scene which parodied the infamous 1991 incident of Richey carving 4 REAL into his forearm with a razor (Clarence lasers 4 RALE into his forehead).
* Simon Pegg is a fan of &quot;2000 AD&quot;, and Judge Dredd memorabilia (supplied by the comic) appears in the background of several episodes of &quot;Spaced&quot;.
* Multiple references to the 1995 film are made on the sitcom &quot;Scrubs&quot;, notably by J.D. at the end of the episode &quot;His Story II&quot;, while being wooed by Elliot.
* The British band Pitchshifter, also fans of &quot;2000 AD&quot;, released a Judge Dredd t-shirt for their final tour. It included the slogan &quot;13 years punk&quot;, referring to how long the band had been together before they broke up.
* In the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; universe, the Imperium&#x27;s police force, the Arbites, (Latin; translates as Judge or judgment) were visually based upon Judge Dredd stemming from the time Games Workshop held the rights to Judge Dredd games. The original designs for the Space Marine power armour and bikes also drew heavily on the Judges&#x27; uniform and Lawmaster bikes. In return the original design for the Space Marine jet bike also featured in an episode of Judge Dredd as a Judge antigravity bike. A number of artists who have worked on Judge Dredd have also worked for Games Workshop.
* WizKids / NECA have released four figures of Judge Dredd as part of their HeroClix collectable miniatures game (Rookie, Experienced and Veteran and Promotional versions). These were only released in the United Kingdom, alongside other 2000AD related figures, as part of the &quot;Indy&quot; expansion to the game. This led to something of an outcry from the American fans of both the game and the character, and this style of &quot;regional&quot; figure-release was not continued in later sets of HeroClix. The &quot;Promotional&quot; version is not legal in normal gameplay. It has an entirely different blue ringed dial to the standard &quot;Experienced&quot; version, and the word &quot;Promo&quot; on the base.
* The video game &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War&quot; features a purchasable Judge Dredd character skin as part of a limited-time bundle. The skin is for a playable Operator character, Ingo Beck, and designed after Dredd&#x27;s comic book appearance, featuring a coloured and black-and-white version, as well as weapons themed after Dredd&#x27;s arsenal.

==See also==
* &quot;2000 AD&quot; crossovers. Judge Dredd&#x27;s timeline has crossed over with many other &quot;2000 AD&quot; stories.

==Notes==
==References==

* Bishop, David (2007) &quot;Thrill-Power Overload&quot;, Rebellion Developments, )
* Butcher, Mike (1995) &quot;The A-Z of Judge Dredd: The Complete Encyclopedia from Aaron Aardvark to Zachary Zziiz&quot;, St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 
* Jarman, Colin M. and Peter Acton (1995) &quot;Judge Dredd: The Mega-History&quot;, Lennard Publishing, 
* Mills, Pat (2017) &quot;Be Pure! Be Vigilant! Behave! 2000AD and Judge Dredd: The Secret History&quot;, Millsverse Books, 
* Dredd&#x27;s universe at the International Catalogue of Superheroes
==External links==

* Judge Dredd, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 5 March 2002
* &quot;The Devil You Know&quot; by Chloe Maveal at Neotext, 2020
* BBC Cult 2000AD audio page
* BBC Cult 2000AD comics page
* Block Mania boardgame page at BoardGameGeek
* Big Finish Productions 2000AD page
* Judge Dredd boardgame page at BoardGameGeek
* Dredd: The Card game details
* 35 Years of 2000AD and Judge Dredd at Comics Bulletin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="0" end="18" title="Judge Dredd" label="Judge Joseph Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360654" start="62" end="73" title="John Wagner" label="John Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042063" start="85" end="100" title="Carlos Ezquerra" label="Carlos Ezquerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="172" end="177" title="Comic book" label="comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="184" end="191" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302512" start="303" end="323" title="Judge Dredd Megazine" label="Judge Dredd Megazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="482" end="495" title="Mega-City One" label="Mega-City One"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="565" end="577" title="Judge (2000 AD)" label="street judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="760" end="776" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q645597" start="835" end="846" title="Judge Dredd (film)" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="867" end="885" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q132430" start="914" end="924" title="Karl Urban" label="Karl Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q276772" start="954" end="959" title="Dredd" label="Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905688" start="986" end="1008" title="Big Finish Productions" label="Big Finish Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811834" start="1029" end="1043" title="Toby Longworth" label="Toby Longworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043544" start="1089" end="1098" title="Pat Mills" label="Pat Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360654" start="1185" end="1196" title="John Wagner" label="John Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q110206" start="1248" end="1259" title="Dirty Harry" label="Dirty Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070157" start="1307" end="1320" title="One-Eyed Jack (comics)" label="One-Eyed Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911637" start="1338" end="1345" title="Valiant (comics)" label="Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="1680" end="1686" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028859" start="1785" end="1807" title="Judge Dread" label="Alexander Minto Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386660" start="1964" end="1978" title="Kelvin Gosnell" label="Kelvin Gosnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593831" start="2195" end="2228" title="St Joseph&amp;#x27;s College, Ipswich" label="St Joseph&amp;#x27;s College, Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042063" start="2282" end="2297" title="Carlos Ezquerra" label="Carlos Ezquerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870085" start="2357" end="2378" title="Battle Picture Weekly" label="Battle Picture Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q647870" start="2443" end="2458" title="Death Race 2000" label="Death Race 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490689" start="2488" end="2500" title="Frankenstein_(Death_Race)" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q187038" start="2512" end="2527" title="David Carradine" label="David Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313444" start="4058" end="4070" title="Mike McMahon (comics)" label="Mike McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q327222" start="4875" end="4885" title="Alan Grant (writer)" label="Alan Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325049" start="4991" end="5003" title="Eagle Comics" label="Eagle Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203156" start="5110" end="5124" title="Judge Dredd (IDW Publishing)" label="IDW Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302512" start="5278" end="5298" title="Judge Dredd Megazine" label="Judge Dredd Megazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q541374" start="5444" end="5455" title="Garth Ennis" label="Garth Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543" start="5457" end="5468" title="Mark Millar" label="Mark Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="5470" end="5484" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258312" start="5489" end="5499" title="John Smith (comics writer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="5711" end="5722" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312950" start="5748" end="5758" title="Daily Star (United Kingdom)" label="Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307433" start="5787" end="5792" title="Metro (Associated Metro Limited)" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="5992" end="5999" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="volumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="6134" end="6146" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="6280" end="6290" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q349566" start="6316" end="6334" title="Hachette Partworks" label="Hachette Partworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345830" start="6359" end="6367" title="partwork" label="partwork"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6412" end="6444" title="Judge Dredd: The Mega Collection" label="Judge Dredd: The Mega Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="6664" end="6671" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302512" start="6827" end="6847" title="Judge Dredd Megazine" label="Judge Dredd Megazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="7058" end="7074" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="7542" end="7555" title="Judge (2000 AD)" label="Street Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="7568" end="7581" title="Mega-City One" label="Mega-City One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="7686" end="7694" title="Lawgiver (Judge Dredd)" label="Lawgiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="7790" end="7800" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="7804" end="7812" title="Baton (law enforcement)" label="daystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4187830" start="7816" end="7826" title="boot knife" label="boot knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="7843" end="7850" title="grenade" label="grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="8002" end="8007" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="8025" end="8048" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q425554" start="8618" end="8624" title="corinthian helmet" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360654" start="8925" end="8936" title="John Wagner" label="John Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9522" end="9536" title="Rondo Hatton#Legacy" label="crooked lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313444" start="9754" end="9766" title="Mike McMahon (comics)" label="Mike McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q911912" start="9800" end="9813" title="Brian Bolland" label="Brian Bolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364402" start="9818" end="9827" title="Ron Smith (artist)" label="Ron Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707293" start="10246" end="10259" title="Alan McKenzie" label="Alan McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="10333" end="10343" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266395" start="10673" end="10695" title="Duodenal cancer" label="cancer of the duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829135" start="10800" end="10815" title="Michael Carroll (Irish writer)" label="Michael Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="11059" end="11065" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="11376" end="11382" title="Judge (2000 AD)" label="Judges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11436" end="11448" title="action (firearms)#Autoloading operation" label="self-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q98649219" start="11881" end="11893" title="Malcolm Shaw (comics)" label="Malcolm Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="12488" end="12494" title="napalm" label="napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="13153" end="13162" title="dystopian" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="13324" end="13335" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q471822" start="13399" end="13410" title="Megalopolis (city type)" label="megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="13414" end="13427" title="Mega-City One" label="Mega-City One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="14024" end="14035" title="City Block (Judge Dredd)" label="City Blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="14333" end="14342" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403016" start="14713" end="14729" title="resisting arrest" label="resisting arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="15131" end="15146" title="Third World War" label="Third World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="15736" end="15746" title="Rico Dredd" label="Rico Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="15774" end="15791" title="Chief Judge Fargo" label="Chief Judge Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="16198" end="16209" title="Morton Judd" label="Morton Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102618" start="16349" end="16360" title="Atomic Wars" label="Atomic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="16482" end="16493" title="Judge (2000 AD)" label="full judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="18831" end="18842" title="Judge (2000 AD)" label="Chief Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="19310" end="19326" title="Judgement Day (Judge Dredd)" label="Fourth World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="19392" end="19410" title="City of the Damned" label="City of the Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="19785" end="19793" title="duodenum" label="duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="20663" end="20670" title="Mechanismo" label="In 2116"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="20708" end="20719" title="Penal labour" label="hard labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="20864" end="20890" title="Mutants (Judge Dredd)" label="anti-mutant apartheid laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="20908" end="20915" title="2000 AD (comic)" label="2000 AD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21937" end="21953" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Rico Dredd" label="Judge Rico Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="22260" end="22265" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22505" end="22515" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Rico" label="Judge Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302479" start="22874" end="22888" title="Judge Anderson" label="Judge Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="23339" end="23352" title="Judge Hershey" label="Judge Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23430" end="23437" title="List of minor characters in Judge Dredd#Goodman" label="Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24376" end="24387" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Beeny" label="Judge Beeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="24402" end="24410" title="Mentorship" label="protégée"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="25508" end="25519" title="Judge Death" label="Judge Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="26013" end="26033" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26219" end="26229" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Fargo Clan" label="Fargo clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="26344" end="26351" title="Mutants (Judge Dredd)" label="mutants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26593" end="26605" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Morphy" label="Judge Morphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="26620" end="26626" title="mentor" label="mentor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26927" end="26938" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Logan" label="Judge Logan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27240" end="27258" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Giant" label="Judge Giant Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="27699" end="27710" title="Block Mania" label="Block Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="27753" end="27758" title="Orlok the Assassin" label="Orlok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="27776" end="27790" title="The Apocalypse War" label="Apocalypse War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27794" end="27812" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Judge Giant Jr" label="Judge Giant Junior"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28425" end="28437" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Dekker" label="Judge Dekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813125" start="28789" end="28793" title="1992 in comics" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="28806" end="28819" title="Judgement Day (Judge Dredd story)" label="Judgement Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28829" end="28841" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Kraken" label="Judge Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="29512" end="29523" title="Dark Judges" label="Dark Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q409114" start="29797" end="29800" title="Testis determining factor" label="SRY"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="30295" end="30310" title="Dark Judges" label="The Dark Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="30493" end="30504" title="Judge Death" label="Judge Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="30689" end="30707" title="Orlok the Assassin" label="Orlok the Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="30854" end="30872" title="Mean Machine Angel" label="Mean Machine Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="31053" end="31061" title="PJ Maybe" label="PJ Maybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="31307" end="31323" title="Judge Edgar" label="Judge Jura Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31887" end="31891" title="#Lists of stories" label="here"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32084" end="32099" title="List of minor characters in Judge Dredd#Call-Me-Kenneth" label="Call-Me-Kenneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="32479" end="32497" title="Rico Dredd" label="The Return of Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="32706" end="32716" title="Rico Dredd" label="Rico Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="33319" end="33325" title="Luna-1 (Judge Dredd)" label="Luna-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728484" start="33592" end="33608" title="The Cursed Earth (Judge Dredd story)" label="The Cursed Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131285" start="33652" end="33656" title="Punk ideology" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="33663" end="33683" title="Spikes Harvey Rotten" label="Spikes Harvey Rotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="33971" end="33984" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q919814" start="33998" end="34013" title="Damnation Alley" label="Damnation Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="34029" end="34049" title="Judge Cal" label="The Day the Law Died"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="34115" end="34124" title="Judge Cal" label="Judge Cal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="34311" end="34322" title="mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="34334" end="34347" title="Mega-City One" label="Mega-City One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="34370" end="34378" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="34485" end="34491" title="Fergee" label="Fergee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="34550" end="34569" title="Jürgen Griffin" label="Chief Judge Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="34629" end="34640" title="Judge Death" label="Judge Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302479" start="34732" end="34750" title="Judge Anderson" label="Psi-Judge Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="35618" end="35631" title="Judge Hershey" label="Judge Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="35691" end="35709" title="Murd the Oppressor" label="Murd the Oppressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="35757" end="35765" title="Judge McGruder" label="McGruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q327222" start="35797" end="35807" title="Alan Grant (writer)" label="Alan Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="35907" end="35921" title="Psi-Judge Feyy" label="Psi-Judge Feyy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="37782" end="37800" title="Orlok the Assassin" label="Orlok the Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="37972" end="37983" title="Judge Giant" label="Judge Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="38728" end="38746" title="City of the Damned" label="City of the Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="38838" end="38849" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189131" start="39555" end="39561" title="bionic" label="bionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="39990" end="40000" title="sky-surfer" label="sky-surfer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40001" end="40008" title="List_of_Judge_Dredd_characters#Chopper" label="Chopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="40395" end="40400" title="Judda" label="Judda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33910" start="40485" end="40490" title="Uluru" label="Uluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729304" start="40579" end="40591" title="The Dead Man" label="The Dead Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729304" start="40976" end="40987" title="Yassa Povey" label="Yassa Povey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="41625" end="41641" title="Dark Judges" label="Sisters of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="44638" end="44650" title="Judge Kraken" label="Judge Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985699" start="45238" end="45248" title="Necropolis (Judge Dredd story)" label="Necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597112" start="48903" end="48912" title="2000 AD crossovers" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246907" start="49011" end="49024" title="Strontium Dog" label="Strontium Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246907" start="49040" end="49052" title="Johnny Alpha" label="Johnny Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50214" end="50253" title="Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgement on Gotham" label="Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgement on Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21192427" start="50264" end="50286" title="intercompany crossover" label="intercompany crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="50309" end="50318" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992227" start="50323" end="50331" title="Fleetway" label="Fleetway"/>
<link wikidata="Q660225" start="50405" end="50417" title="Simon Bisley" label="Simon Bisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152150" start="50512" end="50523" title="DC Universe" label="DC Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q732858" start="50535" end="50546" title="Gotham City" label="Gotham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="50548" end="50554" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q295375" start="50819" end="50828" title="Scarecrow (DC Comics)" label="Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="51203" end="51216" title="Judgement Day (Judge Dredd story)" label="Judgement Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246907" start="51330" end="51342" title="Johnny Alpha" label="Johnny Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246907" start="51352" end="51365" title="Strontium Dog" label="Strontium Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="51424" end="51445" title="Sabbat the Necromagus" label="Sabbat the Necromagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905688" start="53305" end="53327" title="Big Finish Productions" label="Big Finish Productions"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53345" end="53377" title="Judge Dredd: Pre-Emptive Revenge" label="Judge Dredd: Pre-Emptive Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811834" start="53393" end="53407" title="Toby Longworth" label="Toby Longworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238464" start="53421" end="53431" title="Simon Pegg" label="Simon Pegg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53752" end="53759" title="Judge Dredd: Inferno" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="54584" end="54597" title="Galen DeMarco" label="Galen DeMarco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="54803" end="54824" title="The Doomsday Scenario" label="The Doomsday Scenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="55111" end="55124" title="Galen DeMarco" label="Galen DeMarco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="55933" end="55949" title="Vienna Dredd" label="Vienna Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048401" start="56811" end="56824" title="Rogue Trooper" label="Rogue Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203445" start="56826" end="56843" title="D.R. &amp;amp; Quinch" label="D.R. &amp;amp; Quinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="56852" end="56860" title="Vampires" label="Vampires"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447257" start="56866" end="56893" title="Fiends of the Eastern Front" label="Fiends of the Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302517" start="56903" end="56925" title="Judge Dredd vs. Aliens" label="Judge Dredd vs. Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q209758" start="56983" end="56993" title="Xenomorph (Alien)" label="Xenomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="58294" end="58311" title="Chief Judge Fargo" label="Chief Judge Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102618" start="58370" end="58385" title="Atomic Wars" label="Third World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="58550" end="58557" title="Mutants (Judge Dredd)" label="mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="59083" end="59091" title="PJ Maybe" label="PJ Maybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="59154" end="59166" title="Day of Chaos" label="Day of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841478" start="59346" end="59359" title="Trifecta (Judge Dredd story)" label="The Cold Deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114635" start="59484" end="59505" title="Jack Point" label="The Simping Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692914" start="59522" end="59530" title="Low Life (comics)" label="Low Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="59589" end="59603" title="Judge Bachmann" label="Judge Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59871" end="59883" title="List of minor characters in Judge Dredd#Chief Judge Oswin" label="Pamela Oswin"/>
<link wikidata="Q645597" start="61489" end="61498" title="Judge Dredd (film)" label="1995 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114502" start="61510" end="61520" title="American comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="61636" end="61645" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="61872" end="61889" title="Chief Judge Fargo" label="Chief Judge Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821975" start="62011" end="62024" title="Andy Helfer" label="Andrew Helfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538080" start="62060" end="62073" title="Gordon Rennie" label="Gordon Rennie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62181" end="62219" title="Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgment on Gotham" label="Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgment on Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360654" start="62545" end="62556" title="John Wagner" label="John Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q327222" start="62561" end="62571" title="Alan Grant (writer)" label="Alan Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="62834" end="62846" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="63507" end="63533" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Shōnen Jump Autumn Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733442" start="63914" end="63927" title="Aestheticization of violence" label="ultra-violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360654" start="64114" end="64125" title="John Wagner" label="John Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q327222" start="64130" end="64140" title="Alan Grant (writer)" label="Alan Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q660225" start="64160" end="64172" title="Simon Bisley" label="Simon Bisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302512" start="64260" end="64280" title="Judge Dredd Megazine" label="Judge Dredd Megazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="64335" end="64350" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645521" start="64354" end="64360" title="Hamlyn (publishers)" label="Hamlyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030718" start="64407" end="64429" title="Rebellion Developments" label="Rebellion Developments"/>
<link wikidata="Q276772" start="64519" end="64524" title="Dredd" label="Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302512" start="64611" end="64631" title="Judge Dredd Megazine" label="Judge Dredd Megazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789360" start="64662" end="64672" title="Matt Smith (comics editor)" label="Matt Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721334" start="64693" end="64704" title="Henry Flint" label="Henry Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146596" start="65310" end="65324" title="IDW Publishing" label="IDW Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310393" start="65363" end="65381" title="Duane Swierczynski" label="Duane Swierczynski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65401" end="65414" title="Nelson Daniel" label="Nelson Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203884" start="65658" end="65682" title="Mars Attacks Judge Dredd" label="Mars Attacks Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="66094" end="66111" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q645597" start="66883" end="66887" title="Judge Dredd (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="66952" end="66970" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="67030" end="67045" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360654" start="67571" end="67582" title="John Wagner" label="John Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634702" start="67761" end="67783" title="Reliance Entertainment" label="Reliance Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527684" start="67949" end="67960" title="Pete Travis" label="Pete Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q542634" start="67976" end="67988" title="Alex Garland" label="Alex Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q132430" start="68038" end="68048" title="Karl Urban" label="Karl Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q242550" start="68077" end="68091" title="Olivia Thirlby" label="Olivia Thirlby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302479" start="68102" end="68116" title="Judge Anderson" label="Judge Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360654" start="68302" end="68313" title="John Wagner" label="John Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="68342" end="68345" title="3-D film" label="3-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="68360" end="68369" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="68374" end="68386" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634702" start="68413" end="68439" title="Reliance Big Entertainment" label="Reliance Big Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="68481" end="68501" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741255" start="68556" end="68565" title="Global Road Television Entertainment" label="IM Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030718" start="68570" end="68579" title="Rebellion Developments" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030718" start="68837" end="68846" title="Rebellion Developments" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="68863" end="68871" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132430" start="69058" end="69068" title="Karl Urban" label="Karl Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009242" start="69469" end="69475" title="Didcot" label="Didcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="69477" end="69488" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138589" start="69661" end="69673" title="Virgin Books" label="Virgin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247688" start="69791" end="69803" title="Deathmasques" label="Deathmasques"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229938" start="69811" end="69821" title="Dave Stone" label="Dave Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762338" start="69845" end="69865" title="The Savage Amusement" label="The Savage Amusement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="69873" end="69885" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306839" start="69909" end="69920" title="Dreddlocked" label="Dreddlocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609904" start="69928" end="69942" title="Stephen Marley (writer)" label="Stephen Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195311" start="69967" end="69986" title="Cursed Earth Asylum" label="Cursed Earth Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="69994" end="70006" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750897" start="70032" end="70047" title="The Medusa Seed" label="The Medusa Seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229938" start="70055" end="70065" title="Dave Stone" label="Dave Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306210" start="70090" end="70104" title="Dread Dominion" label="Dread Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609904" start="70112" end="70126" title="Stephen Marley (writer)" label="Stephen Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740981" start="70147" end="70170" title="The Hundredfold Problem" label="The Hundredfold Problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181632" start="70178" end="70188" title="John Grant (author)" label="John Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514428" start="70284" end="70292" title="Silencer (Judge Dredd novel)" label="Silencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="70300" end="70312" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990200" start="70338" end="70346" title="Wetworks (Judge Dredd novel)" label="Wetworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229938" start="70354" end="70364" title="Dave Stone" label="Dave Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445044" start="70397" end="70420" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q645597" start="70452" end="70460" title="Judge Dredd (film)" label="the film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984054" start="70490" end="70506" title="Neal Barrett Jr." label="Neal Barrett Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="70632" end="70642" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933962" start="70741" end="70754" title="Burning Heart (novel)" label="Burning Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920773" start="70922" end="70933" title="Black Flame (publisher)" label="Black Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="71165" end="71172" title="e-books" label="e-books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187950" start="71217" end="71231" title="Dredd Vs Death" label="Dredd Vs Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538080" start="71239" end="71252" title="Gordon Rennie" label="Gordon Rennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840386" start="71277" end="71292" title="Bad Moon Rising (Judge Dredd novel)" label="Bad Moon Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="71300" end="71312" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920302" start="71334" end="71348" title="Black Atlantic" label="Black Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519074" start="71377" end="71389" title="Simon Jowett" label="Simon Jowett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332987" start="71411" end="71418" title="Eclipse (Judge Dredd novel)" label="Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143871" start="71426" end="71439" title="James Swallow" label="James Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412683" start="71463" end="71483" title="Kingdom of the Blind" label="Kingdom of the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="71491" end="71503" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733900" start="71529" end="71542" title="The Final Cut (Judge Dredd novel)" label="The Final Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789360" start="71550" end="71560" title="Matt Smith (comics editor)" label="Matt Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658462" start="71586" end="71597" title="Swine Fever (Cartmel novel)" label="Swine Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756569" start="71605" end="71619" title="Andrew Cartmel" label="Andrew Cartmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996194" start="71640" end="71648" title="Whiteout (Judge Dredd novel)" label="Whiteout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143871" start="71656" end="71669" title="James Swallow" label="James Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256566" start="71696" end="71707" title="Psykogeddon" label="Psykogeddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229938" start="71715" end="71725" title="Dave Stone" label="Dave Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q276772" start="72023" end="72036" title="Dredd" label="the 2012 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="72112" end="72118" title="e-book" label="e-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663206" start="72349" end="72362" title="Abaddon Books" label="Abaddon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789360" start="72477" end="72490" title="Matt Smith (comics editor)" label="Matthew Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829135" start="72542" end="72557" title="Michael Carroll (comics)" label="Michael Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703791" start="72595" end="72603" title="Al Ewing" label="Al Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054855" start="72881" end="72892" title="Cavan Scott" label="Cavan Scott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73342" end="73363" title="Judge Anderson#Novels" label="Judge Anderson#Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="73431" end="73441" title="Rico Dredd" label="Rico Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542111" start="74167" end="74178" title="George Mann (writer)" label="George Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792620" start="74268" end="74280" title="Maura McHugh" label="Maura McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="74554" end="74565" title="Dark Judges" label="Dark Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789360" start="74652" end="74662" title="Matt Smith (comics editor)" label="Matt Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="75525" end="75543" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="75584" end="75595" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323662" start="75597" end="75608" title="PlayStation" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="75613" end="75625" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q85772267" start="75656" end="75667" title="Judge Dredd (1986 video game)" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q55353020" start="75729" end="75740" title="Judge Dredd (1990 video game)" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="75786" end="75797" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q149947" start="75821" end="75833" title="Midway Games" label="Midway Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112232" start="75989" end="76000" title="Judge Dredd (1995 video game)" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278089" start="76024" end="76038" title="Probe Software" label="Probe Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q339228" start="76055" end="76062" title="Acclaim Entertainment" label="Acclaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="76071" end="76078" title="Sega Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="76080" end="76115" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="76117" end="76125" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="76131" end="76140" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q805383" start="76142" end="76147" title="Bally Technologies" label="Bally"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158542" start="76165" end="76176" title="Judge Dredd (pinball)" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q653928" start="76183" end="76190" title="pinball" label="pinball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187953" start="76254" end="76265" title="Judge Dredd (1997 video game)" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127647" start="76287" end="76299" title="rail shooter" label="rail shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="76305" end="76316" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="76321" end="76338" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76386" end="76414" title="Judge Dredd: Dredd Vs. Death" label="Judge Dredd: Dredd Vs. Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030718" start="76437" end="76459" title="Rebellion Developments" label="Rebellion Developments"/>
<link wikidata="Q494614" start="76490" end="76510" title="Sierra Entertainment" label="Sierra Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="76515" end="76532" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="76534" end="76547" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="76549" end="76553" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="76559" end="76567" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="76601" end="76612" title="Dark Judges" label="Dark Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="76618" end="76631" title="Mega-City One" label="Mega-City One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="76773" end="76785" title="co-operative" label="co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="76806" end="76826" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48510" start="77092" end="77102" title="deathmatch (gaming)" label="Deathmatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48510" start="77116" end="77131" title="Team Deathmatch" label="Team Deathmatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187950" start="77276" end="77283" title="Dredd Vs Death" label="A novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="77330" end="77343" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q31953" start="77361" end="77376" title="LittleBigPlanet" label="LittleBigPlanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302479" start="77598" end="77612" title="Judge Anderson" label="Judge Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="77730" end="77736" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="77738" end="77745" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="77754" end="77763" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885200" start="77768" end="77781" title="Windows Phone" label="Windows Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="77812" end="77826" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="" start="77844" end="77855" title="Judge Dredd: The Role-Playing Game" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="77862" end="77879" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575373" start="77889" end="77908" title="Mongoose Publishing" label="Mongoose Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233525" start="77924" end="77956" title="The Judge Dredd Roleplaying Game" label="The Judge Dredd Roleplaying Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164069" start="78028" end="78037" title="Traveller (role-playing game)" label="Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78107" end="78120" title="EN World#EN Publishing" label="EN Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q642946" start="78388" end="78396" title="gamebook" label="gamebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="78512" end="78526" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790109" start="78544" end="78555" title="Judge Dredd (board game)" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="78562" end="78572" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927155" start="79517" end="79528" title="Block Mania (board game)" label="Block Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q102227157" start="79894" end="79904" title="Mega-Mania" label="Mega-Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575373" start="79984" end="80003" title="Mongoose Publishing" label="Mongoose Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697821" start="81018" end="81030" title="Osprey Publishing" label="Osprey Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="81471" end="81492" title="collectible card game" label="collectible card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851974" start="81856" end="81875" title="Bally Manufacturing" label="Bally Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="81904" end="81924" title="Judge Cal" label="The Day the Law Died"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="81941" end="81959" title="The Apocalypse War" label="The Apocalypse War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280844" start="81991" end="82001" title="Dirk Maggs" label="Dirk Maggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767771" start="82064" end="82076" title="Mark Goodier" label="Mark Goodier"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="82102" end="82115" title="BBC Radio One" label="BBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836823" start="82142" end="82154" title="Lorelei King" label="Lorelei King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525531" start="82159" end="82170" title="Gary Martin (actor)" label="Gary Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="82339" end="82350" title="Block Mania" label="Block Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905688" start="82424" end="82446" title="Big Finish Productions" label="Big Finish Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="82463" end="82473" title="Radio drama" label="audio play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246907" start="82624" end="82637" title="Strontium Dog" label="Strontium Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811834" start="82680" end="82694" title="Toby Longworth" label="Toby Longworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238464" start="82757" end="82767" title="Simon Pegg" label="Simon Pegg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="82842" end="82877" title="Judge Dredd: Wanted: Dredd or Alive" label="Judge Dredd: Wanted: Dredd or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="82881" end="82893" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="" start="82896" end="82920" title="Judge Dredd: Death Trap" label="Judge Dredd: Death Trap!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="82924" end="82936" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229938" start="82972" end="82982" title="Dave Stone" label="Dave Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="83015" end="83027" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634813" start="83063" end="83080" title="Jonathan Clements" label="Jonathan Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="83111" end="83123" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492001" start="83161" end="83176" title="Jonathan Morris (author)" label="Jonathan Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143871" start="83205" end="83218" title="James Swallow" label="James Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634813" start="83250" end="83267" title="Jonathan Clements" label="Jonathan Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229938" start="83297" end="83307" title="Dave Stone" label="Dave Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143871" start="83332" end="83345" title="James Swallow" label="James Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="83375" end="83387" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054855" start="83427" end="83438" title="Cavan Scott" label="Cavan Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634813" start="83477" end="83494" title="Jonathan Clements" label="Jonathan Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246907" start="83501" end="83514" title="Strontium Dog" label="Strontium Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143871" start="83547" end="83560" title="James Swallow" label="James Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634813" start="83584" end="83601" title="Jonathan Clements" label="Jonathan Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811834" start="83827" end="83841" title="Toby Longworth" label="Toby Longworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="83901" end="83913" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="David Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143871" start="83982" end="83995" title="James Swallow" label="James Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634813" start="84077" end="84094" title="Jonathan Clements" label="Jonathan Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143871" start="84160" end="84173" title="James Swallow" label="James Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q109871" start="84231" end="84238" title="Anthrax (American band)" label="Anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q269594" start="84301" end="84317" title="Among the Living" label="Among the Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790046" start="84340" end="84352" title="I Am the Law (song)" label="I Am the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q587655" start="84652" end="84667" title="Charlie Benante" label="Charlie Benante"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="84678" end="84681" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="84682" end="84685" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q745741" start="84691" end="84698" title="Madness (band)" label="Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066808" start="84834" end="84841" title="Zarjazz" label="Zarjazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q911912" start="84936" end="84949" title="Brian Bolland" label="Brian Bolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q730158" start="84965" end="84981" title="The Human League" label="The Human League"/>
<link wikidata="Q262888" start="85072" end="85076" title="Dare (album)" label="Dare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416018" start="85086" end="85113" title="The Screaming Blue Messiahs" label="The Screaming Blue Messiahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217025" start="85223" end="85245" title="Manic Street Preachers" label="Manic Street Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q436648" start="85452" end="85466" title="Richey Edwards" label="Richey Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q217025" start="85902" end="85908" title="Manics" label="Manics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228737" start="85918" end="85929" title="Dave Eringa" label="Dave Eringa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908074" start="86000" end="86015" title="Lipstick Traces (A Secret History of Manic Street Preachers)" label="Lipstick Traces"/>
<link wikidata="Q238464" start="86469" end="86479" title="Simon Pegg" label="Simon Pegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q114231" start="86620" end="86626" title="Spaced" label="Spaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q485668" start="86702" end="86708" title="Scrubs (TV series)" label="Scrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q323807" start="86727" end="86731" title="J.D. (Scrubs)" label="J.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q3061058" start="86764" end="86776" title="His Story II" label="His Story II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712425" start="86805" end="86811" title="Elliot Reid" label="Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005871" start="86832" end="86844" title="Pitchshifter" label="Pitchshifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="87069" end="87085" title="Warhammer 40,000" label="Warhammer 40,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="87106" end="87121" title="Imperium (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Imperium&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426375" start="87657" end="87664" title="WizKids" label="WizKids"/>
<link wikidata="Q392307" start="87667" end="87671" title="National Entertainment Collectibles Association" label="NECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759204" start="87731" end="87739" title="HeroClix" label="HeroClix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="88395" end="88427" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597112" start="88751" end="88781" title="2000 AD crossovers" label="&amp;quot;2000 AD&amp;quot; crossovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355826" start="88902" end="88915" title="David Bishop (writer)" label="Bishop, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798168" start="88929" end="88950" title="Thrill-Power Overload" label="Thrill-Power Overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030718" start="88958" end="88980" title="Rebellion Developments" label="Rebellion Developments"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="89475" end="89487" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985205" start="89833" end="89848" title="Comics Bulletin" label="Comics Bulletin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16573" wikidata="Q1383120" url="?curid=16573" title="James Flynn (academic)">
<text>James Robert Flynn (28 April 193411 December 2020) was an American-born New Zealand moral philosopher and intelligence researcher. Originally from Washington, D.C., and educated at the University of Chicago, Flynn emigrated to Dunedin in 1963, where he taught political studies at the University of Otago. He was noted for his publications about the continued year-after-year increase of IQ scores throughout the world, which is now referred to as the Flynn effect. In addition to his academic work, he championed social democratic politics throughout his life.

== Early life and education ==

James Robert Flynn was born in an Irish-American community in Washington, D.C., on April 28, 1934. His parents were Irish-Americans from Missouri. His father, Joseph, left formal schooling at age 12 to work in a factory and later became a &quot;hard-drinking&quot; journalist and editor. Flynn described his father as a &quot;keen reader&quot; who took pride in completing the &quot;New York Times&quot; crossword puzzle in pen rather than pencil. Flynn&#x27;s father read classical works to him at a young age, and Flynn said he was &quot;surrounded by good literature&quot; as a child. Flynn became an avid reader as well; later in life, he wrote a book about world literature, and in a 2010 commencement address, he encouraged graduates to learn by reading &quot;works of great literature&quot;. His mother, Mae, was an office worker and homemaker who trained as a teacher. He had a brother, Joseph, who became a non-isothermal kinetics chemist.

Raised Roman Catholic, Flynn was a choir boy at Washington, D.C.&#x27;s Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle and attended the Catholic private schools St. Paul&#x27;s Primary School and St. John&#x27;s Academy. Flynn renounced his Catholic religion at age 12 after winning a full set of &quot;World Book Encyclopedia&quot; in a city-wide competition and reading about scientific explanations for the creation of the universe that contradicted his creationist education. He credited his rejection of Catholicism and his parents&#x27; racial views for forming his secular, socialist views on racial and social equality. Flynn described himself as an &quot;atheist, a scientific realist, a social democrat&quot;.

Flynn was a lifelong competitive runner who ran for his high school and college and earned six US running medals over the course of his life.

In the 1950s, Flynn earned a scholarship to the University of Chicago, where he originally intended to study pure mathematics or theoretical physics &quot;because they seemed to pose the most difficult problems to solve&quot;, but ended up studying moral and political philosophy, a field with more practical applications.
An &quot;ardent democratic socialist&quot; and &quot;man of the left&quot; throughout his life, Flynn joined the Socialist Party of America in college and, after graduating, became a civil rights activist.
While working on his doctorate in politics and moral philosophy, he was political action co-chairman for the university branch of the NAACP, where he worked on its social housing initiatives.
His doctorate dissertation was entitled, &quot;Ethics and the Modern Social Scientist.&quot;

He met his wife, an attorney whose family was active in the Communist Party USA, at a protest against segregation at Glen Echo Park in Maryland.
He was 26 years old at the time, and she was 17. His wife said that Flynn &quot;ticked the entire list of qualities I wanted in a husband and which I had written down in my diary at the age of 15&quot;: he was tall, smart, funny, held left-wing political views, could stand up to her mother, and had a job with a pension. She proposed to him three times: he declined the first two times due to her young age before accepting the third proposal.
They named their eldest son, Oxford University maths professor Victor Flynn, after socialist Eugene Victor Debs.
The couple also had a daughter, who became a clinical psychologist.

== Early career ==

After earning his doctorate in 1958 at age 24, Flynn taught at Eastern Kentucky University in Richmond, Kentucky, where he chaired the local chapter of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), a civil rights organisation in the US South.
He was reprimanded by the mayor of Richmond and the university for his anti-segregation activism, and removed as the university&#x27;s track coach. In 1961, he left Kentucky to teach at the University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, followed by Lake Forest College in Chicago, from which he was fired for giving a lecture on social medicine, working as a peace activist, and being a member of the Socialist Party.

By Flynn&#x27;s own account, in early 1960s America he was consistently fired for his social democratic politics. Accordingly, in 1963, aged 29, he emigrated with his family to New Zealand, where he taught at the University of Canterbury in Christchurch and remained active (from afar) in the American civil rights movement.
In New Zealand Flynn continued to campaign for left-wing causes, and advised Labour Prime Minister Norman Kirk on foreign policy. He was a member of the anti-war Committee on Vietnam and gave lectures against nuclear proliferation.
In 1967, he joined the University of Otago in Dunedin as Foundation Professor of Political Studies and head of the university&#x27;s politics department.
In 1973, Flynn published &quot;Humanism and Ideology: An Aristotelian View&quot;.

== IQ research and the Flynn effect ==

In 1978, while working on a refutation of classical racism for an upcoming book about &quot;humane ideals&quot;, Flynn read University of California, Berkeley educational psychologist Arthur Jensen&#x27;s 1969 article, &quot;How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?&quot;, which argued that black people scored lower than white people on IQ tests because of genetic differences between the races.

Flynn initially planned to spend only a few pages on his book refuting Jensen&#x27;s work. After studying historical IQ tests, Flynn noticed that although the IQ tests were always calibrated so that a score of &quot;100&quot; was average, the actual raw scores showed that people&#x27;s performance on the IQ tests improved over time. Flynn calculated that the average American in the year 1900 would have scored a 67 on the version of IQ tests administered in the year 2000, a score that suggested mental impairment. Because such an increase in IQ scores over only a few generations could not have been caused by genetic evolution, Flynn concluded that the increases must have been caused by changes in environmental factors, meaning that IQ is influenced more by environment than by genetics.

In 1980, Flynn published his research critiquing Jensen&#x27;s work in his seminal book, &quot;Race, IQ and Jensen&quot;, which argued that increases in IQ scores over time, and differences in scores between groups of people such as black people and white people, are caused by environmental rather than genetic factors.

In 1984, he published an article, &quot;The Mean IQ of Americans: Massive Gains 1932 to 1978&quot;, examining Stanford-Binet and Wechsler IQ test results, and reported that Americans&#x27; average scores increased by 13.8 IQ points in 46 years, almost an entire standard deviation.

In response to critics suggesting that the IQ increase could be attributed in increases in education (as opposed to innate intelligence), Flynn examined the results of Raven&#x27;s Progressive Matrices IQ tests, which use visual patterns rather than words to estimate fluid intelligence or &quot;on-the-spot problem solving&quot;, irrespective of educational or cultural differences among test-takers. Such non-verbal tests can be used to compare diverse populations such as San people and Inuktun. In 1987, Flynn published &quot;Massive IQ Gains in 14 Nations: What IQ Tests Really Measure&quot;, which found that IQ points in 14 countries, as measured by Raven tests, increased between five and 25 points.
Test score increases have been continuous and approximately linear from the earliest years of testing to the present. For the Raven&#x27;s Progressive Matrices test, subjects born over a 100-year period were compared in Des Moines, Iowa, and separately in Dumfries, Scotland. Improvements were remarkably consistent across the whole period, in both countries. This effect of an apparent increase in IQ has also been observed in various other parts of the world, though the rates of increase vary.

In 1994, Harvard University psychologist Richard Herrnstein and American Enterprise Institute political scientist Charles Murray published the highly-controversial book &quot;The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life&quot;, which discussed Flynn&#x27;s research and dubbed the increase in IQ scores the &quot;Flynn effect&quot;.
Flynn often debated Jensen and Murray, but there was mutual admiration between them, and he defended them against accusations of racism.

Flynn believed in racial equality. He advocated for open scientific debate about controversial social science claims, and was critical of the suppression of research into race and intelligence. He urged those who believe in racial equality to use solid evidence to advance those beliefs.
Flynn did not believe genetic differences in intelligence between races existed; he argued that intelligence is influenced by environmental factors that correlate with socioeconomic status.

The &quot;Flynn effect&quot; is the substantial and long-sustained increase in intelligence test scores measured in many parts of the world. When intelligence quotient (IQ) tests are initially standardised using a sample of test-takers, by convention the average of the test results is set to 100 and their standard deviation is set to 15 IQ points. When IQ tests are revised they are again standardised using a new sample of test-takers, usually born more recently than the first. Again, the average result is set to 100. However, when the new test subjects take the older tests, in almost every case their average scores are significantly above 100.

Flynn gained international recognition for the Flynn effect, which has become widely accepted by psychologists and has been documented in large portions of the developed world and several developing countries, at rates too fast and dramatic to be caused by changes in genes, and correlating with environmental changes such as modernisation and improvements in education.
Although Flynn was not the first to document increases in IQ or criticise IQ tests, international discussion and acceptance of the Flynn effect sparked a significant reassessment by researchers of IQ tests and the nature of human intelligence.

There are numerous proposed explanations of the Flynn effect, as well as some scepticism about its implications. Similar improvements have been reported for other cognitions such as semantic and episodic memory. Recent research suggests that the Flynn effect may have ended in at least a few developed nations, possibly allowing national differences in IQ scores to diminish if the Flynn effect continues in nations with lower average national IQs.

Flynn himself, with co-worker William Dickens, has suggested an explanatory model which points to two-way causality between IQ and environment: a cognitively challenging environment raises an individual&#x27;s IQ, while in addition, a higher individual IQ makes it more likely that an individual will self-select or be sorted into more cognitively challenging environments.

== Later career ==
He was in favour of homosexual law reform in New Zealand and in 1985 listed his name openly in support.

While teaching at Otago in the 1990s, Flynn became a founding member of the NewLabour and Alliance political parties. He stood unsuccessfully as an Alliance candidate for the New Zealand House of Representatives in general elections in the electorate in , , and elections. In 2008 he acted as the Alliance spokesperson for finance and taxation.

In 1996, Flynn stepped down as head of the University of Otago&#x27;s politics department and in 1997, he became Emeritus Professor in the Politics and Psychology departments.

In 1999, Flynn had surgery for intestinal cancer, which remained in remission for twenty years.

A 1999 article published in &quot;American Psychologist&quot; summarised much of his research up to that point. On the alleged genetic inferiority of Blacks on IQ tests, he lays out the argument and evidence for such a belief and then contests each point. He interprets the direct evidence—when Blacks are raised in settings that are less disadvantageous—as suggesting that environmental factors explain average group differences. And yet, he argues that the environmental explanation gained force after the discovery that IQ scores were rising over time. Inter-generational IQ differences among Whites and across nations were larger than the Black-White IQ Gap and could not be accounted for by genetic factors, which, if anything, should have reduced IQ, according to scholars he references. In that and in later works, he posited that the Black-White IQ score gap can be largely explained by environmental factors if &quot;the average environment for Blacks in 1995 matches the quality of the average environment for Whites in 1945.&quot;

In 2000, Flynn published what he considered his most important book, &quot;How to Defend Humane Ideals&quot;, which he dedicated to his wife and which was a &quot;recalibration&quot; of the &quot;modern Aristotelianism&quot; of his earlier 1973 work, &quot;Humanism and Ideology&quot;.

In 2006, with Brookings Institution economist William T. Dickens, Flynn published &quot;Black Americans reduce the racial IQ gap: evidence from standardization samples&quot;, which suggested that the difference in IQ scores between blacks and whites narrowed by four to seven points between 1972 and 2002, a conclusion contested by Jensen and controversial University of Western Ontario psychologist J. Philippe Rushton.

Flynn&#x27;s 2007 book, &quot;What is Intelligence? Beyond the Flynn Effect&quot;, was dedicated to Jensen and revisited and expanded upon his earlier work from the 1980s.

During 2007, new research from the 2006 New Zealand census showed that women without a tertiary (college) education had produced 2.57 babies each, compared to 1.85 babies for those women with a higher education. During July 2007, &quot;The Sunday Star-Times&quot; quoted Flynn as saying that New Zealand risked having a less intelligent population and that a &quot;persistent genetic trend which lowered the genetic quality for brain physiology would have some effect eventually&quot;. He referred to hypothetical eugenicists&#x27; suggestions for reversing the trend, including some sort of oral contraceptive &quot;in the water supply and … an antidote&quot; to conceive.
Flynn later articulated his own views on the &quot;Close Up&quot; television programme in an interview with Paul Henry, suggesting that the &quot;Sunday Star-Times&quot; had grossly misrepresented his opinions. In the article, Flynn argued that he never intended for his suggestion to be taken seriously, as he only said this to illustrate a particular point.

Flynn continued teaching and was a prolific author in his later life, publishing almost a book every year in his last decade on a number of topics.
Flynn wrote a variety of books. His research interests included humane ideals and ideological debate, classics of political philosophy, and race, class and IQ (see race and intelligence). His books combined political and moral philosophy with psychology to examine problems such as justifying humane ideals and whether it makes sense to rank races and classes by merit.
Despite the success of his work on IQ, Flynn considered himself primarily a philosopher who had simply taken a &quot;holiday&quot; in psychology.

2008&#x27;s &quot;Where have all the liberals gone? Race, class, and ideals in America&quot; argued that American liberalism had lost its way in response to alarmism from American conservatism.

In 2010, Flynn published &quot;The Torchlight List: Around the World in 200 Books&quot;, which analysed world literature and proposed that a person can learn more from reading great works of literature than they can from going to university.

Flynn published three books in 2012. &quot;Are We Getting Smarter? Rising IQ in the Twenty-First Century&quot; summarised his past IQ work and responded to criticisms, particularly regarding environmental causes for race and gender IQ gaps. &quot;Beyond patriotism: From Truman to Obama (2012)&quot; critiqued US foreign policy, and suggested people should put allegiance to the world community above national allegiances. &quot;Fate &amp; philosophy: A journey through life&#x27;s great questions&quot; discussed science, ethics, religion, and free will.

In July 2012, several media outlets reported Flynn as saying that women had, for the first time in a century, surpassed men on IQ tests based on a study he conducted in 2010. However, Flynn announced that the media had seriously distorted his results and went beyond his findings, revealing that he had instead discovered that the differences between men and women on one particular test, the Raven&#x27;s Progressive Matrices, had become minimal in five modernised nations (whereas before 1982 women had scored significantly lower). Women, he argued, caught up with men in these nations as a result of exposure to modernity by entering the professions and being allowed greater educational access. Therefore, he said, when a total account of the Flynn effect is considered, women&#x27;s closing the gap had moved them up in IQ slightly faster than men as a result. Flynn had previously documented this same trend among ethnic minorities and other disadvantaged groups. According to Flynn, the sexes are &quot;dead equal on cognitive factors ... in their ability to deal with using logic on the abstract problems of Raven&#x27;s&quot;, but that temperamental differences in the way boys and girls take the tests likely account for the tiny variations in mean scores, rather than any difference in intellectual ability.

Flynn&#x27;s 2013 TED talk, &quot;Why our IQ levels are higher than our grandparents&#x27;&quot;, has been viewed millions of times.

In 2016, Flynn published &quot;No Place to Hide: Climate Change: A short introduction for New Zealanders&quot;, in which he advocated climate engineering as a way to delay the effects of climate change until renewable energy becomes available.

In 2019, Flynn was told that his latest book, originally titled &quot;In Defense of Free Speech: The University as Censor&quot;, which examined whether modern universities continued to advance free inquiry and critical thinking, would not be published by the English publisher Emerald Group Publishing, who had previously accepted it and scheduled it for publication. Despite Flynn&#x27;s stating that he was only summarising the positions of others with whom he disagreed, the book was originally thought too incendiary to be published. Dozens of academics, including Murray, defended Flynn, and a United States publisher, Academica Press, later published the book under the title &quot;A Book Too Risky to Publish: Free Speech and Universities&quot;. In the preface, Flynn stated that it was thought too controversial by Emerald under the United Kingdom&#x27;s laws about hate speech as the intent is irrelevant if it is thought likely that &quot;racial hatred could be stirred up as a result of the work&quot;.

He became an Honorary Fellow for life of the New Zealand Psychological Society and in 1998 received its Special Award. In 2002, he was awarded the university&#x27;s gold medal for Distinguished Career Research. In 2007, he became a Distinguished Contributor of the International Society for Intelligence Research. He received an honorary Doctorate of Science from the University of Otago in 2010. He was a Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand and in 2011 received its Aronui Medal, Distinguished Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution, Distinguished Visiting Speaker at Cornell University, and Distinguished Associate of The Psychometrics Centre at Cambridge University. Flynn was a member of the editorial board of &quot;Intelligence&quot; and on the Honorary International Advisory Editorial Board of the Mens Sana Monographs.

Flynn retired in 2020. His cancer returned, and he underwent liver surgery that May. Flynn&#x27;s wife described his final year as &quot;difficult&quot;. Flynn died of intestinal cancer at Yvette Williams Retirement Village in Dunedin on 11 December 2020, aged 86.

== Partial bibliography ==
* - Reviews the debate, as of 1980, about the research of Arthur Jensen and his critics.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== References ==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Otago University staff page </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1383120" start="0" end="18" title="James Flynn (academic)" label="James Robert Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="106" end="118" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="147" end="163" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="185" end="206" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="227" end="234" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201513" start="285" end="304" title="University of Otago" label="University of Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="388" end="390" title="IQ" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q508736" start="452" end="464" title="Flynn effect" label="Flynn effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="514" end="531" title="social democratic" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q603535" start="1617" end="1653" title="Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle (Washington, D.C.)" label="Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565203" start="1838" end="1861" title="World Book Encyclopedia" label="World Book Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="1992" end="2003" title="creationist" label="creationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2447" end="2468" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="2738" end="2758" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="2782" end="2790" title="Left-wing politics" label="the left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="2835" end="2861" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist Party of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="2905" end="2926" title="Civil rights movement" label="civil rights activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="3062" end="3067" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="3274" end="3293" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3300" end="3357" title="Glen Echo Park, Maryland#Segregation and integration at the amusement park" label="protest against segregation at Glen Echo Park in Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="3833" end="3850" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10536793" start="3867" end="3879" title="Victor Flynn" label="Victor Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q334993" start="3897" end="3915" title="Eugene Victor Debs" label="Eugene Victor Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278206" start="4069" end="4096" title="Eastern Kentucky University" label="Eastern Kentucky University"/>
<link wikidata="Q757390" start="4100" end="4118" title="Richmond, Kentucky" label="Richmond, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125901" start="4162" end="4189" title="Congress of Racial Equality" label="Congress of Racial Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551772" start="4433" end="4467" title="University of Wisconsin-Whitewater" label="University of Wisconsin-Whitewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475861" start="4481" end="4500" title="Lake Forest College" label="Lake Forest College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="4504" end="4511" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143884" start="4561" end="4576" title="social medicine" label="social medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="4737" end="4754" title="social democratic" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="4864" end="4888" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="4892" end="4904" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="5053" end="5059" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237120" start="5075" end="5086" title="Norman Kirk" label="Norman Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="5090" end="5104" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974373" start="5138" end="5158" title="National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam" label="Committee on Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364891" start="5185" end="5206" title="nuclear proliferation" label="nuclear proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201513" start="5231" end="5250" title="University of Otago" label="University of Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="5254" end="5261" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="5609" end="5643" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q710027" start="5669" end="5682" title="Arthur Jensen" label="Arthur Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918000" start="5710" end="5762" title="How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?" label="How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763297" start="7123" end="7137" title="Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales" label="Stanford-Binet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141779" start="7142" end="7150" title="Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale" label="Wechsler"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="7275" end="7293" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510887" start="7464" end="7497" title="Raven&amp;#x27;s Progressive Matrices" label="Raven&amp;#x27;s Progressive Matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434146" start="7564" end="7582" title="fluid intelligence" label="fluid intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="7771" end="7781" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671647" start="7786" end="7793" title="Inuktun" label="Inuktun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510887" start="8130" end="8163" title="Raven&amp;#x27;s Progressive Matrices" label="Raven&amp;#x27;s Progressive Matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="8224" end="8234" title="Des Moines" label="Des Moines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="8236" end="8240" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="8260" end="8268" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="8270" end="8278" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="8511" end="8529" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689788" start="8543" end="8561" title="Richard Herrnstein" label="Richard Herrnstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="8566" end="8595" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065595" start="8616" end="8630" title="Charles Murray (political scientist)" label="Charles Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q575800" start="8677" end="8742" title="The Bell Curve" label="The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="9618" end="9639" title="intelligence quotient" label="intelligence quotient"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9665" end="9677" title="Standard score#Standardizing in mathematical statistics" label="standardised"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="9686" end="9692" title="Sample (statistics)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="9779" end="9797" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18650" start="10923" end="10931" title="semantic memory" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646" start="10936" end="10951" title="episodic memory" label="episodic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041074" start="11070" end="11103" title="Race and intelligence" label="national differences in IQ scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q30295064" start="11221" end="11236" title="William Dickens" label="William Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891687" start="11605" end="11626" title="Homosexual Law Reform Act 1986" label="homosexual law reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005121" start="11766" end="11775" title="NewLabour Party (New Zealand)" label="NewLabour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732275" start="11780" end="11788" title="Alliance (New Zealand political party)" label="Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034424" start="11865" end="11901" title="New Zealand House of Representatives" label="New Zealand House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q211830" start="12149" end="12167" title="Emeritus Professor" label="Emeritus Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744759" start="12344" end="12365" title="American Psychologist" label="American Psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="13556" end="13571" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="13654" end="13675" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30295064" start="13686" end="13704" title="William T. Dickens" label="William T. Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="13997" end="14026" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362428" start="14040" end="14059" title="J. Philippe Rushton" label="J. Philippe Rushton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="14270" end="14293" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366190" start="14471" end="14492" title="The Sunday Star-Times" label="The Sunday Star-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269262" start="14539" end="14582" title="dysgenics" label="risked having a less intelligent population"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="14749" end="14760" title="eugenicists" label="eugenicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344800" start="14827" end="14845" title="oral contraceptive" label="oral contraceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481385" start="14960" end="14968" title="Close Up (TV programme)" label="Close Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151249" start="15017" end="15027" title="Paul Henry (broadcaster)" label="Paul Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="15532" end="15552" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041074" start="15582" end="15603" title="race and intelligence" label="race and intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="15661" end="15671" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="15760" end="15765" title="Race (classification of human beings)" label="races"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="15770" end="15777" title="Social class" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510887" start="17323" end="17356" title="Raven&amp;#x27;s Progressive Matrices" label="Raven&amp;#x27;s Progressive Matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q189021" start="18268" end="18276" title="TED talk" label="TED talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q921851" start="18518" end="18537" title="climate engineering" label="climate engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="18571" end="18585" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="18592" end="18608" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335379" start="18906" end="18930" title="Emerald Group Publishing" label="Emerald Group Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671312" start="19253" end="19268" title="Academica Press" label="Academica Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681237" start="19466" end="19514" title="hate speech laws in the United Kingdom" label="the United Kingdom&amp;#x27;s laws about hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q45134109" start="19689" end="19722" title="New Zealand Psychological Society" label="New Zealand Psychological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666903" start="19909" end="19956" title="International Society for Intelligence Research" label="International Society for Intelligence Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q609093" start="20050" end="20092" title="Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand" label="Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="20169" end="20187" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="20223" end="20241" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="20302" end="20322" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665657" start="20375" end="20387" title="Intelligence (journal)" label="Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817333" start="20460" end="20480" title="Mens Sana Monographs" label="Mens Sana Monographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q710027" start="20834" end="20847" title="Arthur Jensen" label="Arthur Jensen"/>
</links>
</doc>
