<doc id="17514" wikidata="Q211" url="?curid=17514" title="Latvia">
<text>Latvia ( , ; ), officially the Republic of Latvia, is a country in the Baltic region of Northern Europe. It is one of the three Baltic states, along with Estonia to the north and Lithuania to the south. It borders Russia to the east and Belarus to the southeast, and shares a maritime border with Sweden to the west. Latvia covers an area of , with a population of 1.9 million. The country has a temperate seasonal climate. Its capital and largest city is Riga. Latvians, who are the titular nation and comprise 63.0% of the country&#x27;s population, belong to the ethnolinguistic group of the Balts and speak Latvian. Russians are the most prominent minority in the country, at almost a quarter of the population; 37.7% of the population speak Russian as their native tongue.

After centuries of Teutonic, Swedish, Polish-Lithuanian, and Russian rule, the independent Republic of Latvia was established on 18 November 1918 after breaking away from the German Empire in the aftermath of World War I. The country became increasingly autocratic after the coup in 1934 established the dictatorship of Kārlis Ulmanis. Latvia&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; independence was interrupted at the outset of World War II, beginning with Latvia&#x27;s forcible incorporation into the Soviet Union, followed by the invasion and occupation by Nazi Germany in 1941 and the re-occupation by the Soviets in 1944, which formed the Latvian SSR for the next 45 years. As a result of extensive immigration during the Soviet occupation, ethnic Russians became the most prominent minority in the country. The peaceful Singing Revolution started in 1987 among the Baltic Soviet republics and ended with the restoration of both &quot;de facto&quot; and official independence on 21 August 1991. Latvia has since been a democratic unitary parliamentary republic.

Latvia is a developed country with a high-income, advanced economy ranking 39th in the Human Development Index. It is a member of the European Union, Eurozone, NATO, the Council of Europe, the United Nations, the Council of the Baltic Sea States, the International Monetary Fund, the Nordic-Baltic Eight, the Nordic Investment Bank, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, and the World Trade Organization.

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;Latvija&quot; is derived from the name of the ancient Latgalians, one of four Indo-European Baltic tribes (along with Curonians, Selonians and Semigallians), which formed the ethnic core of modern Latvians together with the Finnic Livonians. Henry of Latvia coined the latinisations of the country&#x27;s name, &quot;Lettigallia&quot; and &quot;Lethia&quot;, both derived from the Latgalians. The terms inspired the variations on the country&#x27;s name in Romance languages from &quot;Letonia&quot; and in several Germanic languages from &quot;Lettland&quot;.

== History ==
Around 3000 BC, the Proto-Baltic ancestors of the Latvian people settled on the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea. The Balts established trade routes to Rome and Byzantium, trading local amber for precious metals. By 900 AD, four distinct Baltic tribes inhabited Latvia: Curonians, Latgalians, Selonians, Semigallians (in Latvian: &quot;kurši&quot;, &quot;latgaļi&quot;, &quot;sēļi&quot; and &quot;zemgaļi&quot;), as well as the Finnic tribe of Livonians (&quot;lībieši&quot;) speaking a Finnic language.

In the 12th century in the territory of Latvia, there were lands with their rulers: Vanema, Ventava, Bandava, Piemare, Duvzare, Sēlija, Koknese, Jersika, Tālava and Adzele.

=== Medieval period ===
Although the local people had contact with the outside world for centuries, they became more fully integrated into the European socio-political system in the 12th century. The first missionaries, sent by the Pope, sailed up the Daugava River in the late 12th century, seeking converts. The local people, however, did not convert to Christianity as readily as the Church had hoped.
German crusaders were sent, or more likely decided to go of their own accord as they were known to do. Saint Meinhard of Segeberg arrived in Ikšķile, in 1184, traveling with merchants to Livonia, on a Catholic mission to convert the population from their original pagan beliefs. Pope Celestine III had called for a crusade against pagans in Northern Europe in 1193. When peaceful means of conversion failed to produce results, Meinhard plotted to convert Livonians by force of arms.

At the beginning of the 13th century, Germans ruled large parts of what is currently Latvia. The influx of German crusaders in the present-day Latvian territory especially increased in the second half of the 13th century following the decline and fall of the Crusader States in the Middle East. Together with southern Estonia, these conquered areas formed the crusader state that became known as Terra Mariana (Medieval Latin for &quot;Land of Mary&quot;) or Livonia. In 1282, Riga, and later the cities of Cēsis, Limbaži, Koknese and Valmiera, became part of the Hanseatic League. Riga became an important point of east–west trading and formed close cultural links with Western Europe. The first German settlers were knights from northern Germany and citizens of northern German towns who brought their Low German language to the region, which shaped many loanwords in the Latvian language.

=== Reformation period and Polish and Swedish rule ===


After the Livonian War (1558–1583), Livonia (Northern Latvia &amp; Southern Estonia) fell under the hegemony of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. The southern part of Estonia and the northern part of Latvia were ceded to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and formed into the Duchy of Livonia (&quot;Ducatus Livoniae Ultradunensis&quot;). Gotthard Kettler, the last Master of the Order of Livonia, formed the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia. Though the duchy was a vassal state to the Lithuanian Grand Duchy and later of Poland–Lithuania, it retained a considerable degree of autonomy and experienced a golden age in the 16th century. Latgalia, the easternmost region of Latvia, became a part of the Inflanty Voivodeship of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

In the 17th and early 18th centuries, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, Sweden, and Russia struggled for supremacy in the eastern Baltic. After the Polish–Swedish War, northern Livonia (including Vidzeme) came under Swedish rule. Riga became the capital of Swedish Livonia and the largest city in the entire Swedish Empire. Fighting continued sporadically between Sweden and Poland until the Truce of Altmark in 1629. In Latvia, the Swedish period is generally remembered as positive; serfdom was eased, a network of schools was established for the peasantry, and the power of the regional barons was diminished.

Several important cultural changes occurred during this time. Under Swedish and largely German rule, western Latvia adopted Lutheranism as its main religion. The ancient tribes of the Couronians, Semigallians, Selonians, Livs, and northern Latgallians assimilated to form the Latvian people, speaking one Latvian language. Throughout all the centuries, however, an actual Latvian state had not been established, so the borders and definitions of who exactly fell within that group are largely subjective. Meanwhile, largely isolated from the rest of Latvia, southern Latgallians adopted Catholicism under Polish/Jesuit influence. The native dialect remained distinct, although it acquired many Polish and Russian loanwords.

=== Livonia and Courland in the Russian Empire (1795–1917) ===
During the Great Northern War (1700–1721), up to 40 percent of Latvians died from famine and plague. Half the residents of Riga were killed by plague in 1710–1711. The capitulation of Estonia and Livonia in 1710 and the Treaty of Nystad, ending the Great Northern War in 1721, gave Vidzeme to Russia (it became part of the Riga Governorate). The Latgale region remained part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth as Inflanty Voivodeship until 1772, when it was incorporated into Russia. The Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, a vassal state of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, was annexed by Russia in 1795 in the Third Partition of Poland, bringing all of what is now Latvia into the Russian Empire. All three Baltic provinces preserved local laws, German as the local official language and their own parliament, the Landtag.

The emancipation of the serfs took place in Courland in 1817 and in Vidzeme in 1819. In practice, however, the emancipation was actually advantageous to the landowners and nobility, as it dispossessed peasants of their land without compensation, forcing them to return to work at the estates &quot;of their own free will&quot;.

During these two centuries Latvia experienced economic and construction boom – ports were expanded (Riga became the largest port in the Russian Empire), railways built; new factories, banks, and a university were established; many residential, public (theatres and museums), and school buildings were erected; new parks formed; and so on. Riga&#x27;s boulevards and some streets outside the Old Town date from this period.

Numeracy was also higher in the Livonian and Courlandian parts of the Russian Empire, which may have been influenced by the Protestant religion of the inhabitants.
During the 19th century, the social structure changed dramatically. A class of independent farmers established itself after reforms allowed the peasants to repurchase their land, but many landless peasants remained, quite a lot Latvians left for the cities and sought for education, industrial jobs. There also developed a growing urban proletariat and an increasingly influential Latvian bourgeoisie. The Young Latvian () movement laid the groundwork for nationalism from the middle of the century, many of its leaders looking to the Slavophiles for support against the prevailing German-dominated social order. The rise in use of the Latvian language in literature and society became known as the First National Awakening. Russification began in Latgale after the Polish led the January Uprising in 1863: this spread to the rest of what is now Latvia by the 1880s. The Young Latvians were largely eclipsed by the New Current, a broad leftist social and political movement, in the 1890s. Popular discontent exploded in the 1905 Russian Revolution, which took a nationalist character in the Baltic provinces.

=== Declaration of independence and interwar period ===

World War I devastated the territory of what became the state of Latvia, and other western parts of the Russian Empire. Demands for self-determination were initially confined to autonomy, until a power vacuum was created by the Russian Revolution in 1917, followed by the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk between Russia and Germany in March 1918, then the Allied armistice with Germany on 11 November 1918. On 18 November 1918, in Riga, the People&#x27;s Council of Latvia proclaimed the independence of the new country and Kārlis Ulmanis was entrusted to set up a government and he took the position of prime minister.

The General representative of Germany August Winnig formally handed over political power to the Latvian Provisional Government on 26 November. On 18 November, the Latvian People&#x27;s Council entrusted him to set up the government. He took the office of Minister of Agriculture from 18 November to 19 December. He took a position of prime minister from 19 November 1918 to 13 July 1919.

The war of independence that followed was part of a general chaotic period of civil and new border wars in Eastern Europe. By the spring of 1919, there were actually three governments: the Provisional government headed by Kārlis Ulmanis, supported by the Tautas padome and the Inter-Allied Commission of Control; the Latvian Soviet government led by Pēteris Stučka, supported by the Red Army; and the Provisional government headed by Andrievs Niedra, supported by Baltic-German forces composed of the &quot;Baltische Landeswehr&quot; (&quot;Baltic Defence Force&quot;) and the Freikorps formation &quot;Eiserne Division&quot; (&quot;Iron Division&quot;).

Estonian and Latvian forces defeated the Germans at the Battle of Wenden in June 1919, and a massive attack by a predominantly German force—the West Russian Volunteer Army—under Pavel Bermondt-Avalov was repelled in November. Eastern Latvia was cleared of Red Army forces by Latvian and Polish troops in early 1920 (from the Polish perspective the Battle of Daugavpils was a part of the Polish–Soviet War).

A freely elected Constituent assembly convened on 1 May 1920, and adopted a liberal constitution, the &quot;Satversme&quot;, in February 1922. The constitution was partly suspended by Kārlis Ulmanis after his coup in 1934 but reaffirmed in 1990. Since then, it has been amended and is still in effect in Latvia today. With most of Latvia&#x27;s industrial base evacuated to the interior of Russia in 1915, radical land reform was the central political question for the young state. In 1897, 61.2% of the rural population had been landless; by 1936, that percentage had been reduced to 18%.

On 15 May 1934, Ulmanis staged a bloodless coup, establishing a nationalist dictatorship that lasted until 1940. After 1934, Ulmanis established government corporations to buy up private firms with the aim of &quot;Latvianising&quot; the economy.

=== Occupations, 1940–1990 ===

Early in the morning of 24 August 1939, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany signed a 10-year non-aggression pact, called the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact. The pact contained a secret protocol, revealed only after Germany&#x27;s defeat in 1945, according to which the states of Northern and Eastern Europe were divided into German and Soviet &quot;spheres of influence&quot;. In the north, Latvia, Finland and Estonia were assigned to the Soviet sphere. 

After the conclusion of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, most of the Baltic Germans left Latvia by agreement between Ulmanis&#x27;s government and Nazi Germany under the Heim ins Reich programme. Most of those who remained left for Germany in summer 1940, when a second resettlement scheme was agreed. The racially approved being resettled mainly in Poland, being given land and businesses in exchange for the money they had received from the sale of their previous assets.

On 5 October 1939, Latvia was forced to accept a &quot;mutual assistance&quot; pact with the Soviet Union, granting the Soviets the right to station between 25,000 and 30,000 troops on Latvian territory.
State administrators were murdered and replaced by Soviet cadres. Elections were held with single pro-Soviet candidates listed for many positions. The resulting people&#x27;s assembly immediately requested admission into the USSR, which the Soviet Union granted. Latvia, then a puppet government, was headed by Augusts Kirhenšteins. The Soviet Union incorporated Latvia on 5 August 1940, as the &quot;Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic.&quot;
The Soviets dealt harshly with their opponents – prior to Operation Barbarossa, in less than a year, at least 34,250 Latvians were deported or killed. Most were deported to Siberia where deaths were estimated at 40 percent.

On 22 June 1941, German troops attacked Soviet forces in Operation Barbarossa. There were some spontaneous uprisings by Latvians against the Red Army which helped the Germans. By 29 June Riga was reached and with Soviet troops killed, captured or retreating, Latvia was left under the control of German forces by early July. 

Under German occupation, Latvia was administered as part of &quot;Reichskommissariat Ostland&quot;. Latvian paramilitary and Auxiliary Police units established by the occupation authority participated in the Holocaust and other atrocities. 30,000 Jews were shot in Latvia in the autumn of 1941. Another 30,000 Jews from the Riga ghetto were killed in the Rumbula Forest in November and December 1941, to reduce overpopulation in the ghetto and make room for more Jews being brought in from Germany and the West. There was a pause in fighting, apart from partisan activity, until after the siege of Leningrad ended in January 1944, and the Soviet troops advanced, entering Latvia in July and eventually capturing Riga on 13 October 1944.

The Soviets reoccupied the country in 1944–1945, and further deportations followed as the country was collectivised
and Sovietised. 

In the post-war period, Latvia was made to adopt Soviet farming methods. Rural areas were forced into collectivization. An extensive program to impose bilingualism was initiated in Latvia, limiting the use of Latvian language in official uses in favor of using Russian as the main language. All of the minority schools (Jewish, Polish, Belarusian, Estonian, Lithuanian) were closed down leaving only two media of instructions in the schools: Latvian and Russian. An influx of new colonists, including laborers, administrators, military personnel and their dependents from Russia and other Soviet republics started. By 1959 about 400,000 Russian settlers arrived and the ethnic Latvian population had fallen to 62%.

Since Latvia had maintained a well-developed infrastructure and educated specialists, Moscow decided to base some of the Soviet Union&#x27;s most advanced manufacturing in Latvia. New industry was created in Latvia, including a major machinery factory RAF in Jelgava, electrotechnical factories in Riga, chemical factories in Daugavpils, Valmiera and Olaine—and some food and oil processing plants. Latvia manufactured trains, ships, minibuses, mopeds, telephones, radios and hi-fi systems, electrical and diesel engines, textiles, furniture, clothing, bags and luggage, shoes, musical instruments, home appliances, watches, tools and equipment, aviation and agricultural equipment and long list of other goods. Latvia had its own film industry and musical records factory (LPs). However, there were not enough people to operate the newly built factories. To maintain and expand industrial production, skilled workers were migrating from all over the Soviet Union, decreasing the proportion of ethnic Latvians in the republic. The population of Latvia reached its peak in 1990 at just under 2.7 million people.

In the second half of the 1980s, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev started to introduce political and economic reforms in the Soviet Union that were called glasnost and perestroika. In the summer of 1987, the first large demonstrations were held in Riga at the Freedom Monument—a symbol of independence. In the summer of 1988, a national movement, coalescing in the Popular Front of Latvia, was opposed by the Interfront. The Latvian SSR, along with the other Baltic Republics was allowed greater autonomy, and in 1988, the old pre-war Flag of Latvia flew again, replacing the Soviet Latvian flag as the official flag in 1990. In 1989, the Supreme Soviet of the USSR adopted a resolution on the &quot;Occupation of the Baltic states&quot;, in which it declared the occupation &quot;not in accordance with law&quot;, and not the &quot;will of the Soviet people&quot;. Pro-independence Popular Front of Latvia candidates gained a two-thirds majority in the Supreme Council in the March 1990 democratic elections.

=== 1990–present ===

On 4 May 1990, the Supreme Council adopted the Declaration on the Restoration of Independence of the Republic of Latvia, and the Latvian SSR was renamed Republic of Latvia.

However, the central power in Moscow continued to regard Latvia as a Soviet republic in 1990 and 1991. In January 1991, Soviet political and military forces unsuccessfully tried to overthrow the Republic of Latvia authorities by occupying the central publishing house in Riga and establishing a Committee of National Salvation to usurp governmental functions. During the transitional period, Moscow maintained many central Soviet state authorities in Latvia.

The Popular Front of Latvia advocated that all permanent residents be eligible for Latvian citizenship, however, universal citizenship for all permanent residents was not adopted. Instead, citizenship was granted to persons who had been citizens of Latvia on the day of loss of independence in 1940 as well as their descendants. As a consequence, the majority of ethnic non-Latvians did not receive Latvian citizenship since neither they nor their parents had ever been citizens of Latvia, becoming non-citizens or citizens of other former Soviet republics. By 2011, more than half of non-citizens had taken naturalization exams and received Latvian citizenship, but in 2015 there were still 290,660 non-citizens in Latvia, which represented 14.1% of the population. They have no citizenship of any country, and cannot participate in the parliamentary elections. Children born to non-nationals after the re-establishment of independence are automatically entitled to citizenship.

The Republic of Latvia declared the end of the transitional period and restored full independence on 21 August 1991, in the aftermath of the failed Soviet coup attempt. Latvia resumed diplomatic relations with Western states, including Sweden. The Saeima, Latvia&#x27;s parliament, was again elected in 1993. Russia ended its military presence by completing its troop withdrawal in 1994 and shutting down the Skrunda-1 radar station in 1998.

The major goals of Latvia in the 1990s, to join NATO and the European Union, were achieved in 2004. The NATO Summit 2006 was held in Riga. Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga was President of Latvia from 1999 until 2007. She was the first female head of state in the former Soviet bloc state and was active in Latvia joining both NATO and the European Union in 2004. Latvia signed the Schengen agreement on 16 April 2003 and started its implementation on 21 December 2007.
Approximately 72% of Latvian citizens are Latvian, while 20% are Russian. The government denationalized private property confiscated by the Soviets, returning it or compensating the owners for it, and privatized most state-owned industries, reintroducing the prewar currency. Albeit having experienced a difficult transition to a liberal economy and its re-orientation toward Western Europe, Latvia is one of the fastest growing economies in the European Union. In November 2013, the roof collapsed at a shopping center in Riga, causing Latvia’s worst post-independence disaster with the deaths of 54 rush hour shoppers and rescue personnel.

In late 2018 the National Archives of Latvia released a full alphabetical index of some 10,000 people recruited as agents or informants by the Soviet KGB. &#x27;The publication, which followed two decades of public debate and the passage of a special law, revealed the names, code names, birthplaces and other data on active and former KGB agents as of 1991, the year Latvia regained its independence from the Soviet Union.&#x27;

In May 2023, the parliament elected Edgars Rinkēvičs as new President of Latvia, making him the European Union’s first openly gay head of state. After years of debates, Latvia ratified the EU &quot;Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence&quot;, otherwise known as the Istanbul Convention in November 2023.

== Geography ==

Latvia lies in Northern Europe, on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea and northwestern part of the East European Craton (EEC), between latitudes 55° and 58° N (a small area is north of 58°), and longitudes 21° and 29° E (a small area is west of 21°). Latvia has a total area of of which land, agricultural land, forest land and inland water.

The total length of Latvia&#x27;s boundary is . The total length of its land boundary is , of which is shared with Estonia to the north, with the Russian Federation to the east, with Belarus to the southeast and with Lithuania to the south. The total length of its maritime boundary is , which is shared with Estonia, Sweden and Lithuania. Extension from north to south is and from west to east .

Most of Latvia&#x27;s territory is less than above sea level. Its largest lake, Lubāns, has an area of , its deepest lake, Drīdzis, is deep. The longest river on Latvian territory is the Gauja, at in length. The longest river flowing through Latvian territory is the Daugava, which has a total length of , of which is on Latvian territory. Latvia&#x27;s highest point is Gaiziņkalns, . The length of Latvia&#x27;s Baltic coastline is . An inlet of the Baltic Sea, the shallow Gulf of Riga is situated in the northwest of the country.

=== Climate ===

Latvia has a temperate climate that has been described in various sources as either humid continental (Köppen &quot;Dfb&quot;) or oceanic/maritime (Köppen &quot;Cfb&quot;).

Coastal regions, especially the western coast of the Courland Peninsula, possess a more maritime climate with cooler summers and milder winters, while eastern parts exhibit a more continental climate with warmer summers and harsher winters. Nevertheless, the temperature variations are little as the territory of Latvia is relatively small. Moreover, Latvia&#x27;s terrain is particularly flat (no more than 350 meters high), thus the Latvian climate is not differentiated by altitude.

Latvia has four pronounced seasons of near-equal length. Winter starts in mid-December and lasts until mid-March. Winters have average temperatures of and are characterized by stable snow cover, bright sunshine, and short days. Severe spells of winter weather with cold winds, extreme temperatures of around and heavy snowfalls are common. Summer starts in June and lasts until August. Summers are usually warm and sunny, with cool evenings and nights. Summers have average temperatures of around , with extremes of . Spring and autumn bring fairly mild weather.

2019 was the warmest year in the history of weather observation in Latvia with an average temperature +8.1 °C higher.

=== Environment ===

Most of the country is composed of fertile lowland plains and moderate hills. In a typical Latvian landscape, a mosaic of vast forests alternates with fields, farmsteads, and pastures. Arable land is spotted with birch groves and wooded clusters, which afford a habitat for numerous plants and animals. Latvia has hundreds of kilometres of undeveloped seashore—lined by pine forests, dunes, and continuous white sand beaches.

Latvia has the fifth highest proportion of land covered by forests in the European Union, after Sweden, Finland, Estonia and Slovenia. Forests account for or 56% of the total land area.

Latvia has over 12,500 rivers, which stretch for . Major rivers include the Daugava River, Lielupe, Gauja, Venta, and Salaca, the largest spawning ground for salmon in the eastern Baltic states. There are 2,256 lakes that are bigger than , with a collective area of . Mires occupy 9.9% of Latvia&#x27;s territory. Of these, 42% are raised bogs; 49% are fens; and 9% are transitional mires. 70% percent of the mires are untouched by civilization, and they are a refuge for many rare species of plants and animals.

Agricultural areas account for or 29% of the total land area. With the dismantling of collective farms, the area devoted to farming decreased dramatically – now farms are predominantly small. Approximately 200 farms, occupying , are engaged in ecologically pure farming (using no artificial fertilizers or pesticides).

Latvia&#x27;s national parks are Gauja National Park in Vidzeme (since 1973), Ķemeri National Park in Zemgale (1997), Slītere National Park in Kurzeme (1999), and Rāzna National Park in Latgale (2007).

Latvia has a long tradition of conservation. The first laws and regulations were promulgated in the 16th and 17th centuries. There are 706 specially state-level protected natural areas in Latvia: four national parks, one biosphere reserve, 42 nature parks, nine areas of protected landscapes, 260 nature reserves, four strict nature reserves, 355 nature monuments, seven protected marine areas and 24 microreserves. Nationally protected areas account for or around 20% of Latvia&#x27;s total land area. Latvia&#x27;s Red Book (Endangered Species List of Latvia), which was established in 1977, contains 112 plant species and 119 animal species. Latvia has ratified the international Washington, Bern, and Ramsare conventions.

The 2012 Environmental Performance Index ranks Latvia second, after Switzerland, based on the environmental performance of the country&#x27;s policies.

Access to biocapacity in Latvia is much higher than world average. In 2016, Latvia had 8.5 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, much more than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person. In 2016 Latvia used 6.4 global hectares of biocapacity per person - their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use less biocapacity than Latvia contains. As a result, Latvia is running a biocapacity reserve.

=== Biodiversity ===

Approximately 30,000 species of flora and fauna have been registered in Latvia. Larger mammalian wildlife in Latvia include deer, wild boar, moose, lynx, bear, fox, beaver and wolves. Non-marine molluscs of Latvia include 170 species.

Species that are endangered in other European countries but common in Latvia include: black stork (&quot;Ciconia nigra&quot;), corncrake (&quot;Crex crex&quot;), lesser spotted eagle (&quot;Aquila pomarina&quot;), white-backed woodpecker (&quot;Picoides leucotos&quot;), Eurasian crane (&quot;Grus grus&quot;), Eurasian beaver (&quot;Castor fiber&quot;), Eurasian otter (&quot;Lutra lutra&quot;), European wolf (&quot;Canis lupus&quot;) and European lynx (&quot;Felis lynx&quot;).

Phytogeographically, Latvia is shared between the Central European and Northern European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the WWF, the territory of Latvia belongs to the ecoregion of Sarmatic mixed forests. 56 percent of Latvia&#x27;s territory is covered by forests, mostly Scots pine, birch, and Norway spruce. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 2.09/10, ranking it 159th globally out of 172 countries.

Several species of flora and fauna are considered national symbols. Oak (&quot;Quercus robur&quot;, ), and linden (&quot;Tilia cordata&quot;, ) are Latvia&#x27;s national trees and the daisy (&quot;Leucanthemum vulgare&quot;, ) its national flower. The white wagtail (&quot;Motacilla alba&quot;, ) is Latvia&#x27;s national bird. Its national insect is the two-spot ladybird (&quot;Adalia bipunctata&quot;, ). Amber, fossilized tree resin, is one of Latvia&#x27;s most important cultural symbols. In ancient times, amber found along the Baltic Sea coast was sought by Vikings as well as traders from Egypt, Greece and the Roman Empire. This led to the development of the Amber Road.

Several nature reserves protect unspoiled landscapes with a variety of large animals. At Pape Nature Reserve, where European bison, wild horses, and recreated aurochs have been reintroduced, there is now an almost complete Holocene megafauna also including moose, deer, and wolf.

== Government and politics ==

Politics in Latvia operate under a framework laid out in the Constitution of Latvia.

=== Government ===


The Latvian parliament is unicameral and called the &quot;Saeima&quot;. It is the legislature of the Republic of Latvia, passing acts that apply in Latvia. The Saeima is also responsible for adopting the state&#x27;s budgets, approving the state&#x27;s accounts, appointing and exercising control of the Government, and taking part in international co-operation. Bills may be initiated by the Government or by members of parliament.

Latvia is a representative democracy with universal suffrage. Membership of the Saeima is based on proportional representation of political parties, with a 5% electoral threshold. Latvia elects 100 members to the Saeima. Parliamentary elections are held at least every four years, but it is within the powers of the prime minister to ask the president to call for an election before the term has elapsed. On a vote of no confidence, the Saeima may force a single minister or an entire government to resign.

The Government of Latvia operates as a cabinet government, where executive authority is exercised by the prime minister and other cabinet ministers, who head ministries. As the executive branch, the Cabinet is responsible for proposing bills and a budget, executing the laws, and guiding the foreign and internal policies of Latvia. The position of prime minister belongs to the person most likely to command the confidence of a majority in the Saeima; this is often the current leader of the largest political party or, more effectively, through a coalition of parties. A single party generally does not have sufficient political power in terms of the number of seats to form a cabinet on its own; Saeima has often been ruled by coalition governments, themselves usually minority governments dependent on non-government parties.

The president is elected by the &quot;Saeima&quot; in a separate election, also held every four years. The president appoints a prime minister who, together with his cabinet, forms the executive branch of the government, which has to receive a confidence vote by the &quot;Saeima&quot;. This system also existed before World War II. The most senior civil servants are the thirteen Secretaries of State.

Following the October 2022 Latvian parliamentary election, Prime Minister Krišjānis Kariņš formed the Second Kariņš cabinet in December 2022, a coalition of New Unity, National Alliance, and United List. On 14 August 2023, Kariņš resigned, citing National Alliance&#x27;s opposition to expanding the coalition to include The Progressives and the Union of Greens and Farmers. The Siliņa cabinet, comprising New Unity, Union of Greens and Farmers, and The Progressives, was sworn in on 15 September 2023.

=== Administrative divisions ===


Latvia is a unitary state, currently divided into 43 local government units consisting of 36 municipalities () and 7 state cities () with their own city council and administration: Daugavpils, Jelgava, Jūrmala, Liepāja, Rēzekne, Riga, and Ventspils. There are four historical and cultural regions in Latvia – Courland, Latgale, Vidzeme, Zemgale, which are recognised in the Constitution of Latvia. Selonia, a part of Zemgale, is sometimes considered culturally distinct region, but it is not part of any formal division. The borders of historical and cultural regions usually are not explicitly defined and in several sources may vary. In formal divisions, Riga region, which includes the capital and parts of other regions that have a strong relationship with the capital, is also often included in regional divisions; e.g., there are five planning regions of Latvia (), which were created in 2009 to promote balanced development of all regions. Under this division Riga region includes large parts of what traditionally is considered Vidzeme, Courland, and Zemgale. Statistical regions of Latvia, established in accordance with the EU Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics, duplicate this division.

The largest city in Latvia is Riga, the second largest city is Daugavpils and the third largest city is Liepaja.

=== Political culture ===

In 2010 parliamentary election ruling centre-right coalition won 63 out of 100 parliamentary seats. Left-wing opposition Harmony Centre supported by Latvia&#x27;s Russian-speaking minority got 29 seats. In November 2013, Latvian Prime Minister Valdis Dombrovskis, in office since 2009, resigned after at least 54 people were killed and dozens injured in the collapse at a supermarket in Riga.

In 2014 parliamentary election was won again by the ruling centre-right coalition formed by the Unity Party, the National Alliance and the Union of Greens and Farmers. They got 61 seats and Harmony got 24. In December 2015, country&#x27;s first female prime minister, in office since January 2014, Laimdota Straujuma resigned. In February 2016, a coalition of Union of Greens and Farmers, The Unity and National Alliance was formed by new Prime Minister Maris Kucinskis.

In 2018 parliamentary election pro-Russian Harmony was again the biggest party securing 23 out of 100 seats, the second and third were the new populist parties KPV LV and New Conservative Party. Ruling coalition, comprising the Union of Greens and Farmers, the National Alliance and the Unity party, lost. In January 2019, Latvia got a government led by new Prime Minister Krisjanis Karins of the centre-right New Unity. Karins&#x27; coalition was formed by five of the seven parties in parliament, excluding only the pro-Russia Harmony party and the Union of Greens and Farmers. On 15 September 2023, Evika Siliņa became the new prime minister of Latvia, following resignation of former Prime Minister Krišjānis Kariņš previous month. Siliņa’s government is a three-party coalition between her own New Unity (JV) party, the Greens and Farmers Union (ZZS), and the social-democratic Progressives (PRO) with total 52 of 100 seats in the parliament.

=== Foreign relations ===

Latvia is a member of the United Nations, European Union, Council of Europe, NATO, OECD, OSCE, IMF, and WTO. It is also a member of the Council of the Baltic Sea States and Nordic Investment Bank. It was a member of the League of Nations (1921–1946). Latvia is part of the Schengen Area and joined the Eurozone on 1 January 2014.

Latvia has established diplomatic relations with 158 countries. It has 44 diplomatic and consular missions and maintains 34 embassies and 9 permanent representations abroad. There are 37 foreign embassies and 11 international organisations in Latvia&#x27;s capital Riga. Latvia hosts one European Union institution, the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications (BEREC).

Latvia&#x27;s foreign policy priorities include co-operation in the Baltic Sea region, European integration, active involvement in international organisations, contribution to European and transatlantic security and defence structures, participation in international civilian and military peacekeeping operations, and development co-operation, particularly the strengthening of stability and democracy in the EU&#x27;s Eastern Partnership countries.
Since the early 1990s, Latvia has been involved in active trilateral Baltic states co-operation with its neighbours Estonia and Lithuania, and Nordic-Baltic co-operation with the Nordic countries. Latvia is a member of the interparliamentary Baltic Assembly, the intergovernmental Baltic Council of Ministers and the Council of the Baltic Sea States. Nordic-Baltic Eight (NB-8) is the joint co-operation of the governments of Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, and Sweden. Nordic-Baltic Six (NB-6), comprising Nordic-Baltic countries that are European Union member states, is a framework for meetings on EU-related issues. Interparliamentary co-operation between the Baltic Assembly and Nordic Council was signed in 1992 and since 2006 annual meetings are held as well as regular meetings on other levels. Joint Nordic-Baltic co-operation initiatives include the education programme NordPlus and mobility programmes for public administration, business and industry and culture. The Nordic Council of Ministers has an office in Riga.

Latvia participates in the Northern Dimension and Baltic Sea Region Programme, European Union initiatives to foster cross-border co-operation in the Baltic Sea region and Northern Europe. The secretariat of the Northern Dimension Partnership on Culture (NDPC) will be located in Riga. In 2013 Riga hosted the annual Northern Future Forum, a two-day informal meeting of the prime ministers of the Nordic-Baltic countries and the UK. The Enhanced Partnership in Northern Europe or &quot;e-Pine&quot; is the U.S. Department of State diplomatic framework for co-operation with the Nordic-Baltic countries.

Latvia hosted the 2006 NATO Summit and since then the annual Riga Conference has become a leading foreign and security policy forum in Northern Europe. Latvia held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union in the first half of 2015.

Since February 2022 Latvia&#x27;s relations with Russia have deteriorated to the extent that Latvia withdrew its ambassador from Russia and expelled Russia&#x27;s ambassador to Latvia in January 2023 and banned Russians from entering Latvia.

=== Military ===

The National Armed Forces (Latvian: &quot;Nacionālie bruņotie spēki (NAF)&quot;) of Latvia consists of the Land Forces, Naval Forces, Air Force, National Guard, Special Tasks Unit, Military Police, NAF staff Battalion, Training and Doctrine Command, and Logistics Command. Latvia&#x27;s defence concept is based upon the Swedish-Finnish model of a rapid response force composed of a mobilisation base and a small group of career professionals. From 1 January 2007, Latvia switched to a professional fully contract-based army.

Latvia participates in international peacekeeping and security operations. Latvian armed forces have contributed to NATO and EU military operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina (1996–2009), Albania (1999), Kosovo (2000–2009), Macedonia (2003), Iraq (2005–2006), Afghanistan (since 2003), Somalia (since 2011) and Mali (since 2013). Latvia also took part in the US-led Multi-National Force operation in Iraq (2003–2008) and OSCE missions in Georgia, Kosovo and Macedonia. Latvian armed forces contributed to a UK-led Battlegroup in 2013 and the Nordic Battlegroup in 2015 under the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) of the European Union. Latvia acts as the lead nation in the coordination of the Northern Distribution Network for transportation of non-lethal ISAF cargo by air and rail to Afghanistan. It is part of the Nordic Transition Support Unit (NTSU), which renders joint force contributions in support of Afghan security structures ahead of the withdrawal of Nordic and Baltic ISAF forces in 2014. Since 1996 more than 3600 military personnel have participated in international operations, of whom 7 soldiers perished. Per capita, Latvia is one of the largest contributors to international military operations.

Latvian civilian experts have contributed to EU civilian missions: border assistance mission to Moldova and Ukraine (2005–2009), rule of law missions in Iraq (2006 and 2007) and Kosovo (since 2008), police mission in Afghanistan (since 2007) and monitoring mission in Georgia (since 2008).

Since March 2004, when the Baltic states joined NATO, fighter jets of NATO members have been deployed on a rotational basis for the Baltic Air Policing mission at Šiauliai Airport in Lithuania to guard the Baltic airspace. Latvia participates in several NATO Centres of Excellence: Civil-Military Co-operation in the Netherlands, Cooperative Cyber Defence in Estonia and Energy Security in Lithuania. It plans to establish the NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence in Riga.

Latvia co-operates with Estonia and Lithuania in several trilateral Baltic defence co-operation initiatives:
* Baltic Battalion &quot;(BALTBAT)&quot; – infantry battalion for participation in international peace support operations, headquartered near Riga, Latvia;
* Baltic Naval Squadron &quot;(BALTRON)&quot; – naval force with mine countermeasures capabilities, headquartered near Tallinn, Estonia;
* Baltic Air Surveillance Network &quot;(BALTNET)&quot; – air surveillance information system, headquartered near Kaunas, Lithuania;
* Joint military educational institutions: Baltic Defence College in Tartu, Estonia, Baltic Diving Training Centre in Liepāja, Latvia and Baltic Naval Communications Training Centre in Tallinn, Estonia.

Future co-operation will include sharing of national infrastructures for training purposes and specialisation of training areas &quot;(BALTTRAIN)&quot; and collective formation of battalion-sized contingents for use in the NATO rapid-response force. In January 2011, the Baltic states were invited to join Nordic Defence Cooperation, the defence framework of the Nordic countries. In November 2012, the three countries agreed to create a joint military staff in 2013.

On 21 April 2022, Latvian Saeima passed amendments developed by the Ministry of Defence for the legislative draft Amendments to the Law on Financing of National Defence, which provide for gradual increase in the defence budget to 2.5% of the country&#x27;s GDP over the course of the next three year.

=== Human rights ===

According to the reports by Freedom House and the US Department of State, human rights in Latvia are generally respected by the government: Latvia is ranked above-average among the world&#x27;s sovereign states in democracy, press freedom, privacy and human development.

More than 56% of leading positions are held by women in Latvia, which ranks first in Europe; Latvia ranks first in the world in women&#x27;s rights sharing the position with five other European countries according to World Bank.

The country has a large ethnic Russian community, which was guaranteed basic rights under the constitution and international human rights laws ratified by the Latvian government.

Approximately 206,000 non-citizens – including stateless persons – have limited access to some political rights – only citizens are allowed to participate in parliamentary or municipal elections, although there are no limitations in regards to joining political parties or other political organizations. In 2011, the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities &quot;urged Latvia to allow non-citizens to vote in municipal elections.&quot; Additionally, there have been reports of police abuse of detainees and arrestees, poor prison conditions and overcrowding, judicial corruption, incidents of violence against ethnic minorities, and societal violence and incidents of government discrimination against homosexuals. Same-sex marriage is constitutionally prohibited in Latvia.

== Economy ==

Latvia is a member of the World Trade Organization (1999) and the European Union (2004). On 1 January 2014, the euro became the country&#x27;s currency, superseding the Lats. According to statistics in late 2013, 45% of the population supported the introduction of the euro, while 52% opposed it. Following the introduction of the Euro, Eurobarometer surveys in January 2014 showed support for the euro to be around 53%, close to the European average.

Since the year 2000, Latvia has had one of the highest (GDP) growth rates in Europe. However, the chiefly consumption-driven growth in Latvia resulted in the collapse of Latvian GDP in late 2008 and early 2009, exacerbated by the global economic crisis, shortage of credit and huge money resources used for the bailout of Parex Bank. The Latvian economy fell 18% in the first three months of 2009, the biggest fall in the European Union.

The economic crisis of 2009 proved earlier assumptions that the fast-growing economy was heading for implosion of the economic bubble, because it was driven mainly by growth of domestic consumption, financed by a serious increase of private debt, as well as a negative foreign trade balance. The prices of real estate, which rose 150% from 2004 to 2006, was a significant contributor to the economic bubble.

Privatisation in Latvia is almost complete. Virtually all of the previously state-owned small and medium companies have been privatised, leaving only a small number of politically sensitive large state companies. The private sector accounted for 70% of the country&#x27;s GDP in 2006. 
Foreign investment in Latvia is still modest compared with the levels in north-central Europe. A law expanding the scope for selling land, including to foreigners, was passed in 1997. Representing 10.2% of Latvia&#x27;s total foreign direct investment, American companies invested $127 million in 1999. In the same year, the United States of America exported $58.2 million of goods and services to Latvia and imported $87.9 million. Eager to join Western economic institutions like the World Trade Organization, OECD, and the European Union, Latvia signed a Europe Agreement with the EU in 1995—with a 4-year transition period. Latvia and the United States have signed treaties on investment, trade, and intellectual property protection and avoidance of double taxation.

In 2010, Latvia launched a Residence by Investment program (Golden Visa) in order to attract foreign investors and make local economy benefit from it. This program allows investors to get a Latvian residence permit by investing at least €250,000 in property or in an enterprise with at least 50 employees and an annual turnover of at least €10M.

; Economic contraction and recovery (2008–12)
The Latvian economy entered a phase of fiscal contraction during the second half of 2008 after an extended period of credit-based speculation and unrealistic appreciation in real estate values. The national account deficit for 2007, for example, represented more than 22% of the GDP for the year while inflation was running at 10%.

Latvia&#x27;s unemployment rate rose sharply in this period from a low of 5.4% in November 2007 to over 22%. In April 2010 Latvia had the highest unemployment rate in the EU, at 22.5%, ahead of Spain, which had 19.7%.

Paul Krugman, the Nobel Laureate in economics for 2008, wrote in his New York Times Op-Ed column on 15 December 2008:

The most acute problems are on Europe&#x27;s periphery, where many smaller economies are experiencing crises strongly reminiscent of past crises in Latin America and Asia: Latvia is the new Argentina

However, by 2010, commentators noted signs of stabilisation in the Latvian economy. Rating agency Standard &amp; Poor&#x27;s raised its outlook on Latvia&#x27;s debt from negative to stable. Latvia&#x27;s current account, which had been in deficit by 27% in late 2006 was in surplus in February 2010. Kenneth Orchard, senior analyst at Moody&#x27;s Investors Service argued that:

The strengthening regional economy is supporting Latvian production and exports, while the sharp swing in the current account balance suggests that the country&#x27;s &#x27;internal devaluation&#x27; is working.

The IMF concluded the First Post-Program Monitoring Discussions with the Republic of Latvia in July 2012 announcing that Latvia&#x27;s economy has been recovering strongly since 2010, following the deep downturn in 2008–09. Real GDP growth of 5.5 percent in 2011 was underpinned by export growth and a recovery in domestic demand. The growth momentum has continued into 2012 and 2013 despite deteriorating external conditions, and the economy is expected to expand by 4.1 percent in 2014. The unemployment rate has receded from its peak of more than 20 percent in 2010 to around 9.3 percent in 2014.

; Economic recovery
GDP at current prices rose from €23.7 billion in 2014 to €30.5 billion in 2019. The employment rate rose in the same period from 59.1% to 65% with unemployment falling from 10.8% to 6.5%.

=== Infrastructure ===
==== Transport ====
The transport sector is around 14% of GDP. Transit between Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan as well as other Asian countries and the West used to be large.

The four biggest ports of Latvia are located in Riga, Ventspils, Liepāja and Skulte. Most transit traffic uses these and half the cargo is crude oil and oil products. Free port of Ventspils is one of the busiest ports in the Baltic states. Apart from road and railway connections, Ventspils is also linked to oil extraction fields and prior to 2022, transportation routes of Russian Federation via system of two pipelines from Polotsk, Belarus.

Riga International Airport is the busiest airport in the Baltic states with 7.8 million passengers in 2019. It has direct flight to over 80 destinations in 30 countries. The only other airport handling regular commercial flights is Liepāja International Airport.
airBaltic is the Latvian flag carrier airline and a low-cost carrier with hubs in all three Baltic States, but main base in Riga, Latvia.

Latvian Railway&#x27;s main network consists of 1,860 km of which 1,826 km is 1,520 mm Russian gauge railway of which 251 km are electrified, making it the longest railway network in the Baltic States. Latvia&#x27;s railway network is currently incompatible with European standard gauge lines. However, Rail Baltica railway, linking Helsinki-Tallinn-Riga-Kaunas-Warsaw is under construction and is set to be completed in 2026.

National road network in Latvia totals 1675 km of main roads, 5473 km of regional roads and 13 064 km of local roads. Municipal roads in Latvia totals 30 439 km of roads and 8039 km of streets. The best known roads are A1 (European route E67), connecting Warsaw and Tallinn, as well as European route E22, connecting Ventspils and Terehova. In 2017 there were a total of 803,546 licensed vehicles in Latvia.

==== Energy ====
Latvia has three large hydroelectric power stations in Pļaviņu HES (908 MW), Rīgas HES (402 MW) and Ķeguma HES-2 (248 MW). In recent years a couple of dozen of wind farms as well as biogas or biomass power stations of different scale have been built in Latvia. In 2022, the Latvian Prime Minister announced about the planned investments of 1 billion euros in the new wind farms and the completed project will expectedly provide additional 800 MW of capacity.

Latvia operates &quot;Inčukalns underground gas storage facility&quot;, one of the largest underground gas storage facilities in Europe and the only one in the Baltic states. Unique geological conditions at Inčukalns and other locations in Latvia are particularly suitable for underground gas storage.

== Demographics ==


The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2018 was estimated to be 1.61 children born/woman, which is lower than the replacement rate of 2.1. In 2012, 45.0% of births were to unmarried women. The life expectancy in 2013 was estimated at 73.2 years (68.1 years male, 78.5 years female). As of 2015, Latvia is estimated to have the lowest male-to-female ratio in the world, at 0.85 males per female. In 2017, there were 1,054,433 females and 895,683 males living in Latvian territory. Every year, more boys are born than girls. Up to the age of 39, there are more males than females. Above the age of 70, there are 2.3 times as many females as males.

=== Ethnic groups ===
In 2023, Latvians formed about 62.4% of the population, while 23.7% were Russians, Belarusians 3%, Ukrainians 3%, Poles 2%, Lithuanians 1%.

In some cities, including Daugavpils and Rēzekne, ethnic Latvians constitute a minority of the total population. Despite a steadily increasing proportion of ethnic Latvians for more than a decade, ethnic Latvians also still make up slightly less than a half of the population of the capital city of Latvia – Riga.

The share of ethnic Latvians declined from 77% (1,467,035) in 1935 to 52% (1,387,757) in 1989. In the context of a decreasing overall population, there were fewer Latvians in 2011 than in 1989, but their share of the population was larger – 1,285,136 (62.1% of the population).

The majority of Latvia&#x27;s population are Latvians, who are an ethnic Baltic people. The country also has a significant Russian minority, as well as smaller populations of Ukrainians, Belarusians, and other Slavic peoples. These ethnic groups are all descended from peoples who settled in Latvia during the centuries of Russian and Soviet rule.

Latvia&#x27;s ethnic diversity is a result of a number of factors, including a long history of foreign rule, its location on the Baltic Sea trade route, and its proximity to other Slavic countries. The Russian Empire conquered Latvia in the 18th century and ruled the country for over 200 years. During this time, the Russian authorities encouraged the settlement of Russian colonists in Latvia. After the collapse of the Russian Empire in 1918, Latvia became an independent country. However, the country was occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940 and remained under Soviet rule until 1991. The Soviets expelled some groups and resettled others in Latvia, especially Russians. After 1991 many of the expellees returned to Latvia.

As a result of deteriorating relations with Russia, Latvia has decided it does not want Russian citizens in Latvia who will not integrate. In late 2023 it is expected that around 5-6,000 Russians will be returned to Russia as they have made little effort to learn the Latvian language, integrate with Latvia, or apply to become Latvian citizens.

=== Language ===

The sole official language of Latvia is Latvian, which belongs to the Baltic language sub-group of the Balto-Slavic branch of the Indo-European language family. Another notable language of Latvia is the nearly extinct Livonian language of the Finnic branch of the Uralic language family, which enjoys protection by law; Latgalian – as a dialect of Latvian is also protected by Latvian law but as a historical variation of the Latvian language. Russian, which was widely spoken during the Soviet period, is still the most widely used minority language by far (in 2023, 37.7% spoke it as their mother tongue and 34.6% spoke it at home, including people who were not ethnically Russian).
While it is now required that all school students learn Latvian, schools also include English, German, French and Russian in their curricula. English is also widely accepted in Latvia in business and tourism. there were 109 schools for minorities that use Russian as the language of instruction (27% of all students) for 40% of subjects (the remaining 60% of subjects are taught in Latvian).

On 18 February 2012, Latvia held a constitutional referendum on whether to adopt Russian as a second official language. According to the Central Election Commission, 74.8% voted against, 24.9% voted for and the voter turnout was 71.1%.

From 2019, instruction in the Russian language was gradually discontinued in private colleges and universities in Latvia, as well as general instruction in Latvian public high schools, except for subjects related to culture and history of the Russian minority, such as Russian language and literature classes. 
All schools, including pre-schools, still using the Russian language in 2023 need to transition to using Latvian in all classes within 3 years.

=== Religion ===

The largest religion in Latvia is Christianity (79%). The largest groups were:
* Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia – 708,773
* Roman Catholic – 500,000
* Orthodox Christian – 370,000

In the Eurobarometer Poll 2010, 38% of Latvian citizens responded that &quot;they believe there is a God&quot;, while 48% answered that &quot;they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force&quot; and 11% stated that &quot;they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force&quot;.

Lutheranism was more prominent before the Soviet occupation, when it was adhered to by about 60% of the population, a reflection of the country&#x27;s strong historical links with the Nordic countries, and to the influence of the Hansa in particular and Germany in general. Since then, Lutheranism has declined to a slightly greater extent than Roman Catholicism in all three Baltic states. The Evangelical Lutheran Church, with an estimated 600,000 members in 1956, was affected most adversely. An internal document of 18 March 1987, near the end of communist rule, spoke of an active membership that had shrunk to only 25,000 in Latvia, but the faith has since experienced a revival.

The country&#x27;s Orthodox Christians belong to the Latvian Orthodox Church, a semi-autonomous body within the Russian Orthodox Church. In 2011, there were 416 religious Jews in Latvia and 319 Muslims in Latvia. As of 2004, there were more than 600 Latvian neopagans, &quot;Dievturi&quot; (The Godskeepers), whose religion is based on Latvian mythology. About 21% of the total population is not affiliated with a specific religion.

Latvia has been seeking for a number of years to separate the Latvian Orthodox Church from Moscow, stating that longstanding ties to Russia pose “national security concerns”. This was achieved in September 2022 with a law removing all influence or power over the Orthodox Church from non-Latvians, which would include the patriarch of Moscow.

=== Education and science ===

The University of Latvia and Riga Technical University are two major universities in the country, both successors to Riga Polytechnical Institute, and located in Riga. Other important universities, which were established on the base of State University of Latvia, include the Latvia University of Life Sciences and Technologies (established in 1939 on the basis of the Faculty of Agriculture) and Riga Stradiņš University (established in 1950 on the basis of the Faculty of Medicine). Both nowadays cover a variety of different fields. The University of Daugavpils is another significant centre of education.

Latvia closed 131 schools between 2006 and 2010, which is a 12.9% decline, and in the same period enrolment in educational institutions has fallen by over 54,000 people, a 10.3% decline.

Latvian policy in science and technology has set out the long-term goal of transitioning from labor-consuming economy to knowledge-based economy. By 2020 the government aims to spend 1.5% of GDP on research and development, with half of the investments coming from the private sector. Latvia plans to base the development of its scientific potential on existing scientific traditions, particularly in organic chemistry, medical chemistry, genetic engineering, physics, materials science and information technologies. The greatest number of patents, both nationwide and abroad, are in medical chemistry. Latvia was ranked 42nd in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

=== Health ===
The Latvian healthcare system is a universal programme, largely funded through government taxation. It is among the lowest-ranked healthcare systems in Europe, due to excessive waiting times for treatment, insufficient access to the latest medicines, and other factors. There were 59 hospitals in Latvia in 2009, down from 94 in 2007 and 121 in 2006.

== Culture ==
Traditional Latvian folklore, especially the dance of the folk songs, dates back well over a thousand years. More than 1.2 million texts and 30,000 melodies of folk songs have been identified.

In the 19th century, Latvian nationalist movements emerged. They promoted Latvian culture and encouraged Latvians to take part in cultural activities. The 19th century and beginning of the 20th century is often regarded by Latvians as a classical era of Latvian culture. Posters show the influence of other European cultures, for example, works of artists such as the Baltic-German artist Bernhard Borchert and the French Raoul Dufy. With the onset of World War II, many Latvian artists and other members of the cultural elite fled the country yet continued to produce their work, largely for a Latvian émigré audience.
The Latvian Song and Dance Festival is an important event in Latvian culture and social life. It has been held since 1873, normally every five years. Approximately 30,000 performers altogether participate in the event. Folk songs and classical choir songs are sung, with emphasis on a cappella singing, though modern popular songs have recently been incorporated into the repertoire as well.

After incorporation into the Soviet Union, Latvian artists and writers were forced to follow the socialist realism style of art. During the Soviet era, music became increasingly popular, with the most popular being songs from the 1980s. At this time, songs often made fun of the characteristics of Soviet life and were concerned about preserving Latvian identity. This aroused popular protests against the USSR and also gave rise to an increasing popularity of poetry. Since independence, theatre, scenography, choir music, and classical music have become the most notable branches of Latvian culture.

During July 2014, Riga hosted the eighth World Choir Games as it played host to over 27,000 choristers representing over 450 choirs and over 70 countries. The festival is the biggest of its kind in the world and is held every two years in a different host city.

Starting in 2019 Latvia hosts the inaugural Riga Jurmala Music Festival , a new festival in which world-famous orchestras and conductors perform across four weekends during the summer. The festival takes place at the Latvian National Opera, the Great Guild, and the Great and Small Halls of the Dzintari Concert Hall. This year features the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra, the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, the London Symphony Orchestra and the Russian National Orchestra.

=== Cuisine ===

Latvian cuisine typically consists of agricultural products, with meat featuring in most main meal dishes. Fish is commonly consumed due to Latvia&#x27;s location on the Baltic Sea. Latvian cuisine has been influenced by neighbouring countries. Common ingredients in Latvian recipes are found locally, such as potatoes, wheat, barley, cabbage, onions, eggs, and pork. Latvian food is generally quite fatty and uses few spices.

Grey peas with speck are generally considered as staple foods of Latvians. Sorrel soup (&quot;skābeņu zupa&quot;) is also consumed by Latvians. Rye bread is considered the national staple.

=== Sport ===
Ice hockey is usually considered the most popular sport in Latvia. Latvia has had many famous hockey stars like Helmuts Balderis, Artūrs Irbe, Kārlis Skrastiņš and Sandis Ozoliņš and more recently Zemgus Girgensons, whom the Latvian people have strongly supported in international and NHL play, expressed through the dedication of using the NHL&#x27;s All Star Voting to bring Zemgus to number one in voting. Dinamo Riga is the country&#x27;s strongest hockey club, playing in the Latvian Hockey Higher League. The national tournament is the Latvian Hockey Higher League, held since 1931. The 2006 IIHF World Championship was held in Riga.

The second most popular sport is basketball. Latvia has a long basketball tradition, as the Latvian national basketball team won the first ever EuroBasket in 1935 and silver medals in 1939, after losing the final to Lithuania by one point. Latvia has had many European basketball stars like Jānis Krūmiņš, Maigonis Valdmanis, Valdis Muižnieks, Valdis Valters, Igors Miglinieks, as well as the first Latvian NBA player Gundars Vētra. Andris Biedriņš is one of the most well-known Latvian basketball players, who played in the NBA for the Golden State Warriors and the Utah Jazz. Current NBA players include Kristaps Porziņģis, who plays for the Boston Celtics, Dāvis Bertāns, who plays for the Oklahoma City Thunder, and Rodions Kurucs, who last played for the Milwaukee Bucks. Former Latvian basketball club Rīgas ASK won the Euroleague tournament three times in a row before becoming defunct. Currently, VEF Rīga, which competes in EuroCup, is the strongest professional basketball club in Latvia. BK Ventspils, which participates in EuroChallenge, is the second strongest basketball club in Latvia, previously winning LBL eight times and BBL in 2013. Latvia was one of the EuroBasket 2015 hosts and will be one of the hosts once again in 2025.

Other popular sports include football, floorball, tennis, volleyball, cycling, bobsleigh and skeleton. The Latvian national football team&#x27;s only major FIFA tournament participation has been the 2004 UEFA European Championship.

Latvia has participated successfully in both Winter and Summer Olympics. The most successful Olympic athlete in the history of independent Latvia has been Māris Štrombergs, who became a two-time Olympic champion in 2008 and 2012 at Men&#x27;s BMX.

In Boxing, Mairis Briedis is the first and only Latvian to date, to win a boxing world title, having held the WBC cruiserweight title from 2017 to 2018, the WBO cruiserweight title in 2019, and the IBF / The Ring magazine cruiserweight titles in 2020.

In 2017, Latvian tennis player Jeļena Ostapenko won the 2017 French Open Women&#x27;s singles title, being the first unseeded player to do so in the open era.

In Futsal, Latvia will host the UEFA Futsal Euro 2026 alongside Lithuania, their national team will make their debut as co-host.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
=== Latvia===
* 
* 
* Dzenovska, Dace. &quot;School of Europeanness: Tolerance and other lessons in political liberalism in Latvia&quot; (Cornell University Press, 2018).
* Hazans, Mihails. &quot;Emigration from Latvia: Recent trends and economic impact.&quot; in &quot;Coping with emigration in Baltic and East European countries&quot; (2013) pp: 65–110. online 
* 
* 
* Pabriks, Artis, and Aldis Purs. &quot;Latvia: the challenges of change&quot; (Routledge, 2013).
* 

===Baltic states===
* Auers, Daunis. &quot;Comparative politics and government of the Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in the 21st century&quot; (Springer, 2015).
* 
* 
* Lane, Thomas, et al. &quot;The Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania&quot; (Routledge, 2013).
* 
* 
* Steen, Anton. &quot;Between past and future: elites, democracy and the state in post-communist countries: a comparison of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania&quot; (Routledge, 2019).

===Russia connection===
* Cheskin, Ammon. &quot;Exploring Russian-speaking identity from below: The case of Latvia.&quot; &quot;Journal of Baltic Studies&quot; 44.3 (2013): 287–312. online 
* Cheskin, Ammon. &quot;Russian-Speakers in Post-Soviet Latvia: Discursive Identity Strategies&quot; (Edinburgh University Press, 2016).
* 
== External links ==

; Government
* President of Latvia 
* Parliament of Latvia 
* Government of Latvia 
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Latvia 
* Statistical Office of Latvia 
* Latvian Institute 
* Bank of Latvia 

; General information
* Latvia Online 
* European Union country profile 
* Britannica Online Encyclopedia 
* BBC News country profile 
* Latvia . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Latvia from UCB Libraries GovPubs (archived 11 October 2008)
* Key Development Forecasts for Latvia from International Futures

; Culture
* Latvian Cultural Canon 
* Latvian Culture Map 
* Latvian Culture Portal (archived 18 January 2013)
* Livonian Culture Portal 
* State Agency of Cultural Heritage 
* National Library of Latvia 
* Latvian Heritage 
* Latvian Music Information Centre 

; Travel
* Official Latvian Tourism Portal 

; Maps
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="0" end="6" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="31" end="49" title="Latvia" label="Republic of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="71" end="84" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="88" end="103" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="128" end="141" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="154" end="161" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="179" end="188" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="214" end="220" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="237" end="244" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="276" end="291" title="Maritime boundary" label="maritime border"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="396" end="422" title="Temperate climate" label="temperate seasonal climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q106978" start="440" end="452" title="List of cities and towns in Latvia" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="456" end="460" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="462" end="470" title="Latvians" label="Latvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533081" start="566" end="587" title="ethnolinguistic group" label="ethnolinguistic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="595" end="600" title="Balts" label="Balts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="611" end="618" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012419" start="620" end="628" title="Russians in Latvia" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="746" end="753" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="798" end="806" title="State of the Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q739032" start="808" end="815" title="Swedish Livonia" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464784" start="817" end="834" title="Inflanty Voivodeship" label="Polish-Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="840" end="847" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="954" end="967" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="988" end="999" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="1033" end="1043" title="autocratic" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182543" start="1054" end="1066" title="1934 Latvian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup in 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q298041" start="1099" end="1113" title="Kārlis Ulmanis" label="Kārlis Ulmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1196" end="1208" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q718738" start="1239" end="1261" title="Soviet occupation of Latvia in 1940" label="forcible incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1271" end="1283" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348117" start="1301" end="1324" title="German occupation of Latvia during World War II" label="invasion and occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1328" end="1340" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932381" start="1357" end="1385" title="Soviet re-occupation of Latvia in 1944" label="re-occupation by the Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q192180" start="1412" end="1423" title="Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Latvian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012419" start="1521" end="1529" title="Russians in Latvia" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q595321" start="1594" end="1612" title="Singing Revolution" label="Singing Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603672" start="1736" end="1748" title="State continuity of the Baltic states" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="1803" end="1810" title="unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="1811" end="1833" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="1848" end="1865" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="1873" end="1884" title="World Bank high-income economy" label="high-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902255" start="1886" end="1902" title="Economy of Latvia" label="advanced economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="1923" end="1946" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1970" end="1984" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="1986" end="1994" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1996" end="2000" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="2006" end="2023" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2029" end="2043" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q789769" start="2049" end="2081" title="Council of the Baltic Sea States" label="Council of the Baltic Sea States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2087" end="2114" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379870" start="2120" end="2139" title="Nordic-Baltic Eight" label="Nordic-Baltic Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020649" start="2145" end="2167" title="Nordic Investment Bank" label="Nordic Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2173" end="2227" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="2233" end="2285" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2295" end="2319" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060538" start="2407" end="2417" title="Latgalians" label="Latgalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="2431" end="2444" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="2445" end="2458" title="Balts" label="Baltic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q756922" start="2471" end="2480" title="Curonians" label="Curonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q856784" start="2482" end="2491" title="Selonians" label="Selonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q287800" start="2496" end="2508" title="Semigallians" label="Semigallians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="2550" end="2558" title="Latvian people" label="Latvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745748" start="2577" end="2583" title="Baltic Finns" label="Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q690126" start="2584" end="2593" title="Livonian people" label="Livonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q25070" start="2595" end="2610" title="Henry of Latvia" label="Henry of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="2622" end="2635" title="latinisation of names" label="latinisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="2810" end="2827" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="2868" end="2886" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="3030" end="3040" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="3046" end="3051" title="Balts" label="Balts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="3089" end="3098" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="3114" end="3119" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q756922" start="3198" end="3207" title="Curonians" label="Curonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060538" start="3209" end="3219" title="Latgalians" label="Latgalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q856784" start="3221" end="3230" title="Selonians" label="Selonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q287800" start="3232" end="3244" title="Semigallians" label="Semigallians"/>
<link wikidata="Q690126" start="3372" end="3381" title="Livonian people" label="Livonians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3517" end="3523" title="Vanema" label="Vanema"/>
<link wikidata="Q104036" start="3525" end="3532" title="Ventava" label="Ventava"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854468" start="3534" end="3541" title="Bandava" label="Bandava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191665" start="3543" end="3550" title="Piemare" label="Piemare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3552" end="3559" title="Duvzare" label="Duvzare"/>
<link wikidata="Q913914" start="3561" end="3567" title="Sēlija" label="Sēlija"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502248" start="3569" end="3576" title="Principality of Koknese" label="Koknese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687929" start="3578" end="3585" title="Jersika" label="Jersika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568690" start="3587" end="3593" title="Tālava" label="Tālava"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3598" end="3604" title="Adzele" label="Adzele"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="3859" end="3872" title="Daugava River" label="Daugava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="4012" end="4028" title="Teutonic Knights" label="German crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q697892" start="4115" end="4129" title="Saint Meinhard" label="Saint Meinhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q753029" start="4153" end="4160" title="Ikšķile" label="Ikšķile"/>
<link wikidata="Q183464" start="4199" end="4206" title="Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="4276" end="4281" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4325" end="4368" title="Livonian Crusade#Wars against Estonians (1208–27)" label="a crusade against pagans in Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4731" end="4770" title="Crusades#Crusades and the Holy Land, 1095–1291" label="decline and fall of the Crusader States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4778" end="4789" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="4856" end="4870" title="crusader state" label="crusader state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458532" start="4892" end="4905" title="Terra Mariana" label="Terra Mariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="4907" end="4921" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="4940" end="4944" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q107582" start="5003" end="5008" title="Cēsis" label="Cēsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166684" start="5010" end="5017" title="Limbaži" label="Limbaži"/>
<link wikidata="Q504681" start="5019" end="5026" title="Koknese" label="Koknese"/>
<link wikidata="Q108037" start="5031" end="5039" title="Valmiera" label="Valmiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="5060" end="5076" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="5167" end="5181" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="5300" end="5310" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q246863" start="5456" end="5468" title="Livonian War" label="Livonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="5562" end="5592" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="5673" end="5697" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352878" start="5718" end="5734" title="Duchy of Livonia" label="Duchy of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q379558" start="5781" end="5797" title="Gotthard Kettler" label="Gotthard Kettler"/>
<link wikidata="Q29140" start="5822" end="5838" title="Livonian Order" label="Order of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156038" start="5851" end="5883" title="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia" label="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208113" start="6078" end="6086" title="Latgalia" label="Latgalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464784" start="6143" end="6163" title="Inflanty Voivodeship" label="Inflanty Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="6278" end="6284" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="6290" end="6296" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q598774" start="6354" end="6372" title="Polish–Swedish War (1600–1611)" label="Polish–Swedish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q739032" start="6463" end="6478" title="Swedish Livonia" label="Swedish Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347605" start="6598" end="6614" title="Truce of Altmark" label="Truce of Altmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="6691" end="6698" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="6796" end="6802" title="baltic Germans" label="barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="6944" end="6955" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="7096" end="7110" title="Latvian people" label="Latvian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="7125" end="7141" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7407" end="7418" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="7432" end="7438" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="7619" end="7637" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599700" start="7751" end="7770" title="Great Northern War plague outbreak" label="plague in 1710–1711"/>
<link wikidata="Q611682" start="7776" end="7811" title="capitulation of Estonia and Livonia" label="capitulation of Estonia and Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153286" start="7828" end="7844" title="Treaty of Nystad" label="Treaty of Nystad"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="7857" end="7875" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419584" start="7931" end="7947" title="Governorate of Livonia" label="Riga Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="7990" end="8020" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464784" start="8024" end="8044" title="Inflanty Voivodeship" label="Inflanty Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q156038" start="8099" end="8131" title="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia" label="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="8224" end="8249" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="8295" end="8309" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="8380" end="8397" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="8428" end="8435" title="Landtag" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q140637" start="9191" end="9199" title="Numeracy" label="Numeracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="9583" end="9591" title="Latvians" label="Latvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="9692" end="9703" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="9744" end="9755" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q131826" start="9761" end="9774" title="Young Latvians" label="Young Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46699" start="9890" end="9900" title="Slavophile" label="Slavophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="9991" end="10007" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484354" start="10054" end="10078" title="Latvian National Awakening" label="First National Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="10080" end="10093" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="10136" end="10152" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979793" start="10270" end="10281" title="New Current" label="New Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="10379" end="10402" title="1905 Russian Revolution" label="1905 Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="10446" end="10462" title="Baltics" label="Baltic provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10522" end="10533" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="10654" end="10672" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="10700" end="10708" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="10750" end="10768" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="10794" end="10817" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (Russia–Central Powers)" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="10869" end="10875" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q259417" start="10954" end="10985" title="Tautas padome" label="People&amp;#x27;s Council of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298041" start="11037" end="11051" title="Kārlis Ulmanis" label="Kārlis Ulmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106354" start="11172" end="11185" title="August Winnig" label="August Winnig"/>
<link wikidata="Q543042" start="11527" end="11546" title="Latvian War of Independence" label="war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q298041" start="11745" end="11759" title="Kārlis Ulmanis" label="Kārlis Ulmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q259417" start="11778" end="11791" title="Tautas padome" label="Tautas padome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665892" start="11800" end="11834" title="Military Inter-Allied Commission of Control" label="Inter-Allied Commission of Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300296" start="11840" end="11865" title="Latvian Socialist Soviet Republic" label="Latvian Soviet government"/>
<link wikidata="Q960521" start="11873" end="11887" title="Pēteris Stučka" label="Pēteris Stučka"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="11906" end="11914" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q510764" start="11957" end="11972" title="Andrievs Niedra" label="Andrievs Niedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="11987" end="12000" title="Baltic Germans" label="Baltic-German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137510" start="12001" end="12007" title="Freikorps in the Baltic" label="forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q708111" start="12030" end="12050" title="Baltische Landeswehr" label="Baltische Landeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="12100" end="12109" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q645859" start="12126" end="12142" title="Eiserne Division" label="Eiserne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q183286" start="12235" end="12251" title="Battle of Cēsis (1919)" label="Battle of Wenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810257" start="12323" end="12350" title="West Russian Volunteer Army" label="West Russian Volunteer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q459424" start="12357" end="12378" title="Pavel Bermondt-Avalov" label="Pavel Bermondt-Avalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135598" start="12527" end="12547" title="Battle of Daugavpils" label="Battle of Daugavpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="12566" end="12583" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="12604" end="12624" title="Constituent assembly" label="Constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143464" start="12695" end="12704" title="Constitution of Latvia" label="Satversme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182543" start="12792" end="12808" title="1934 Latvian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="his coup in 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="13001" end="13012" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182543" start="13194" end="13225" title="1934 Latvian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Ulmanis staged a bloodless coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="13323" end="13345" title="government corporation" label="government corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13502" end="13514" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="13519" end="13531" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="13581" end="13604" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="13798" end="13818" title="sphere of influence" label="spheres of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="13971" end="13985" title="Baltic Germans" label="Baltic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q636261" start="14072" end="14086" title="Heim ins Reich" label="Heim ins Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q769953" start="14892" end="14912" title="Augusts Kirhenšteins" label="Augusts Kirhenšteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q192180" start="14982" end="15015" title="Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q741775" start="15060" end="15069" title="Enemy of the people" label="opponents"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="15081" end="15101" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="15435" end="15439" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q156031" start="15641" end="15667" title="Reichskommissariat Ostland" label="Reichskommissariat Ostland"/>
<link wikidata="Q249128" start="15700" end="15716" title="Arajs Kommando" label="Auxiliary Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="15779" end="15792" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="16164" end="16182" title="Battle of Leningrad" label="siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="16415" end="16428" title="collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="collectivised"/>
<link wikidata="Q601151" start="16433" end="16443" title="Sovietisation" label="Sovietised"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="16549" end="16565" title="Collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="16598" end="16610" title="bilingualism" label="bilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81243" start="17397" end="17418" title="Riga Autobus Factory" label="machinery factory RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q179830" start="17422" end="17429" title="Jelgava" label="Jelgava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="17461" end="17465" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q80021" start="17489" end="17499" title="Daugavpils" label="Daugavpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q108037" start="17501" end="17509" title="Valmiera" label="Valmiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q249715" start="17514" end="17520" title="Olaine" label="Olaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="18322" end="18339" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="18429" end="18437" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="18442" end="18453" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q337179" start="18534" end="18550" title="Freedom Monument" label="Freedom Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807095" start="18639" end="18662" title="Popular Front of Latvia" label="Popular Front of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385994" start="18683" end="18693" title="International Front of the Working People of Latvia" label="Interfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="18733" end="18749" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130449" start="18809" end="18823" title="Flag of Latvia" label="Flag of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q326465" start="18913" end="18939" title="Supreme Soviet of the USSR" label="Supreme Soviet of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q58473" start="18974" end="19005" title="Occupation of the Baltic states" label="Occupation of the Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109069" start="19228" end="19243" title="Supreme Council of the Republic of Latvia" label="Supreme Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q133770" start="19251" end="19282" title="1990 Latvian Supreme Soviet election" label="March 1990 democratic elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091483" start="19354" end="19426" title="Declaration on the Restoration of Independence of the Republic of Latvia" label="Declaration on the Restoration of Independence of the Republic of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807095" start="19941" end="19968" title="Popular Front of Latvia" label="The Popular Front of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718221" start="20440" end="20452" title="Non-citizens (Latvia)" label="non-citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="20549" end="20563" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q223050" start="20718" end="20747" title="Statelessness" label="no citizenship of any country"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="21070" end="21089" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="Soviet coup attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q822919" start="21170" end="21176" title="Saeima" label="Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q807670" start="21331" end="21340" title="Skrunda-1" label="Skrunda-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="21413" end="21417" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="21426" end="21440" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122077" start="21469" end="21485" title="NATO Summit 2006" label="NATO Summit 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q151301" start="21504" end="21524" title="Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga" label="Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q218014" start="21529" end="21548" title="President of Latvia" label="President of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="21735" end="21753" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="22024" end="22034" title="privatization" label="privatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q133011" start="22082" end="22097" title="Latvian lats" label="prewar currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220536" start="22303" end="22321" title="Zolitūde shopping centre roof collapse" label="the roof collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047551" start="22933" end="22949" title="Edgars Rinkēvičs" label="Edgars Rinkēvičs"/>
<link wikidata="Q218014" start="22957" end="22976" title="President of Latvia" label="President of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="23209" end="23228" title="Istanbul Convention" label="Istanbul Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="23326" end="23336" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460816" start="23366" end="23386" title="East European craton" label="East European Craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q609813" start="23412" end="23415" title="55th parallel north" label="55°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256533" start="23420" end="23425" title="58th parallel north" label="58° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715793" start="23473" end="23476" title="21st meridian east" label="21°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135264" start="23481" end="23486" title="29th meridian east" label="29° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="23725" end="23732" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="23756" end="23774" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="23793" end="23800" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="23827" end="23836" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="23875" end="23892" title="maritime boundary" label="maritime boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="23939" end="23948" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="24053" end="24068" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282738" start="24088" end="24094" title="Lubāns" label="Lubāns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258906" start="24131" end="24138" title="Drīdzis" label="Drīdzis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207928" start="24195" end="24200" title="Gauja" label="Gauja"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="24275" end="24282" title="Daugava River" label="Daugava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122342" start="24379" end="24390" title="Gaiziņkalns" label="Gaiziņkalns"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="24422" end="24428" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174731" start="24484" end="24496" title="Gulf of Riga" label="Gulf of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="24573" end="24582" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="24644" end="24661" title="humid continental" label="humid continental"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24663" end="24685" title="Humid continental climate#Dfb/Dwb/Dsb: Warm summer subtype" label="Köppen &amp;quot;Dfb&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="24690" end="24706" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic/maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178149" start="24787" end="24805" title="Courland Peninsula" label="Courland Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="26615" end="26628" title="Daugava River" label="Daugava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q215395" start="26630" end="26637" title="Lielupe" label="Lielupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q207928" start="26639" end="26644" title="Gauja" label="Gauja"/>
<link wikidata="Q215397" start="26646" end="26651" title="Venta (river)" label="Venta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426007" start="26657" end="26663" title="Salaca" label="Salaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="26697" end="26703" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36449705" start="26807" end="26811" title="Mire" label="Mire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="27387" end="27400" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q743754" start="27406" end="27425" title="Gauja National Park" label="Gauja National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q745303" start="27429" end="27436" title="Vidzeme" label="Vidzeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395739" start="27451" end="27471" title="Ķemeri National Park" label="Ķemeri National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q215389" start="27475" end="27482" title="Zemgale" label="Zemgale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643261" start="27491" end="27512" title="Slītere National Park" label="Slītere National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="27516" end="27523" title="Courland" label="Kurzeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q549295" start="27536" end="27555" title="Rāzna National Park" label="Rāzna National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q208113" start="27559" end="27566" title="Latgale" label="Latgale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="28312" end="28343" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q864404" start="28466" end="28477" title="biocapacity" label="biocapacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="28753" end="28773" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="29050" end="29054" title="Roe deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="29056" end="29065" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="29067" end="29072" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375" start="29074" end="29078" title="Eurasian lynx" label="lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="29080" end="29084" title="Brown bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="29086" end="29089" title="Red fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="29091" end="29097" title="Eurasian beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="29102" end="29108" title="Gray wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630764" start="29110" end="29139" title="List of non-marine molluscs of Latvia" label="Non-marine molluscs of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398" start="29267" end="29280" title="Ciconia nigra" label="Ciconia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26017" start="29306" end="29315" title="Crex crex" label="Crex crex"/>
<link wikidata="Q232523" start="29352" end="29367" title="Aquila pomarina" label="Aquila pomarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q207290" start="29407" end="29424" title="Picoides leucotos" label="Picoides leucotos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764" start="29455" end="29464" title="Grus grus" label="Grus grus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="29496" end="29508" title="Castor fiber" label="Castor fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="29539" end="29550" title="Lutra lutra" label="Lutra lutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="29580" end="29591" title="Canis lupus" label="Canis lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375" start="29624" end="29634" title="Eurasian lynx" label="Felis lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q771220" start="29644" end="29663" title="Phytogeography" label="Phytogeographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q968104" start="29750" end="29769" title="Circumboreal Region" label="Circumboreal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092732" start="29781" end="29795" title="Boreal Kingdom" label="Boreal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="29814" end="29817" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="29858" end="29867" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604517" start="29871" end="29893" title="Sarmatic mixed forests" label="Sarmatic mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="29963" end="29973" title="Scots pine" label="Scots pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="29975" end="29980" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q145992" start="29986" end="29999" title="Norway spruce" label="Norway spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="30015" end="30047" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="30188" end="30191" title="Oak" label="Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q165145" start="30199" end="30212" title="Quercus robur" label="Quercus robur"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="30227" end="30233" title="Tilia" label="linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q158746" start="30241" end="30254" title="Tilia cordata" label="Tilia cordata"/>
<link wikidata="Q27164" start="30305" end="30310" title="Leucanthemum vulgare" label="daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27164" start="30318" end="30338" title="Leucanthemum vulgare" label="Leucanthemum vulgare"/>
<link wikidata="Q25399" start="30394" end="30408" title="White wagtail" label="Motacilla alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q233024" start="30477" end="30494" title="Adalia bipunctata" label="two-spot ladybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q233024" start="30502" end="30519" title="Adalia bipunctata" label="Adalia bipunctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="30530" end="30535" title="Amber" label="Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q239574" start="30791" end="30801" title="Amber Road" label="Amber Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971217" start="30893" end="30912" title="Pape Nature Reserve" label="Pape Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q81091" start="30920" end="30934" title="European bison" label="European bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q475329" start="30953" end="30970" title="heck cattle" label="recreated aurochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="31027" end="31035" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="31036" end="31045" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143464" start="31177" end="31199" title="Constitution of Latvia" label="Constitution of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="31249" end="31259" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q822919" start="31281" end="31287" title="Saeima" label="Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="31305" end="31316" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="31352" end="31356" title="Act of Parliament" label="acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q271855" start="31427" end="31447" title="government budget" label="state&amp;#x27;s budgets"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="31586" end="31591" title="Bill (proposed law)" label="Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="31633" end="31654" title="Member of parliament" label="members of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="31669" end="31693" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="31699" end="31717" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="31756" end="31783" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="32067" end="32088" title="Motion of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="32204" end="32222" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet government"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="32295" end="32311" title="cabinet minister" label="cabinet minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="32578" end="32588" title="confidence and supply" label="confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="32666" end="32681" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="32714" end="32734" title="political alliance" label="coalition of parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="32895" end="32916" title="coalition governments" label="coalition governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="32937" end="32956" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q218014" start="33000" end="33009" title="President of Latvia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="33181" end="33197" title="executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="33315" end="33327" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q736559" start="33377" end="33397" title="Secretary of State" label="Secretaries of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528251" start="33422" end="33457" title="2022 Latvian parliamentary election" label="2022 Latvian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736499" start="33474" end="33490" title="Krišjānis Kariņš" label="Krišjānis Kariņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q115349247" start="33502" end="33523" title="Second Kariņš cabinet" label="Second Kariņš cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q98104169" start="33557" end="33566" title="New Unity" label="New Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576026" start="33568" end="33585" title="National Alliance (Latvia)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q113163582" start="33591" end="33602" title="United List (Latvia)" label="United List"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966907" start="33721" end="33737" title="The Progressives (Latvia)" label="The Progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q167928" start="33746" end="33773" title="Union of Greens and Farmers" label="Union of Greens and Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q122585769" start="33779" end="33793" title="Siliņa cabinet" label="Siliņa cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="33951" end="33964" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q80021" start="34120" end="34130" title="Daugavpils" label="Daugavpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q179830" start="34132" end="34139" title="Jelgava" label="Jelgava"/>
<link wikidata="Q178382" start="34141" end="34148" title="Jūrmala" label="Jūrmala"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="34150" end="34157" title="Liepāja" label="Liepāja"/>
<link wikidata="Q180379" start="34159" end="34166" title="Rēzekne" label="Rēzekne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="34168" end="34172" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q104036" start="34178" end="34187" title="Ventspils" label="Ventspils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619487" start="34204" end="34245" title="Cultural regions of Latvia" label="historical and cultural regions in Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="34248" end="34256" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208113" start="34258" end="34265" title="Latgale" label="Latgale"/>
<link wikidata="Q745303" start="34267" end="34274" title="Vidzeme" label="Vidzeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q215389" start="34276" end="34283" title="Zemgale" label="Zemgale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143464" start="34313" end="34335" title="Constitution of Latvia" label="Constitution of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913914" start="34337" end="34344" title="Selonia" label="Selonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085683" start="34780" end="34806" title="planning regions of Latvia" label="planning regions of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604410" start="35007" end="35036" title="Statistical regions of Latvia" label="Statistical regions of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193083" start="35076" end="35124" title="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics" label="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183580" start="35315" end="35323" title="2010 Latvian parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q903671" start="35414" end="35428" title="Harmony Centre" label="Harmony Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q57630" start="35537" end="35555" title="Valdis Dombrovskis" label="Valdis Dombrovskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220536" start="35651" end="35676" title="Zolitūde shopping centre roof collapse" label="collapse at a supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799321" start="35709" end="35717" title="2014 Latvian parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q992046" start="35783" end="35788" title="Unity (Latvia)" label="Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576026" start="35800" end="35817" title="National Alliance (Latvia)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q167928" start="35826" end="35853" title="Union of Greens and Farmers" label="Union of Greens and Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089345" start="35985" end="36003" title="Laimdota Straujuma" label="Laimdota Straujuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112509" start="36141" end="36156" title="Maris Kucinskis" label="Maris Kucinskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22665767" start="36181" end="36189" title="2018 Latvian parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28023857" start="36319" end="36325" title="KPV LV" label="KPV LV"/>
<link wikidata="Q20575851" start="36330" end="36352" title="New Conservative Party (Latvia)" label="New Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736499" start="36532" end="36548" title="Krisjanis Karins" label="Krisjanis Karins"/>
<link wikidata="Q98104169" start="36569" end="36578" title="New Unity (Latvian political party)" label="New Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q61121565" start="36761" end="36773" title="Evika Siliņa" label="Evika Siliņa"/>
<link wikidata="Q98104169" start="36958" end="36967" title="New Unity" label="New Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="37177" end="37191" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="37193" end="37210" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="37212" end="37216" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="37218" end="37222" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="37224" end="37228" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="37230" end="37233" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="37239" end="37242" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q789769" start="37271" end="37303" title="Council of the Baltic Sea States" label="Council of the Baltic Sea States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020649" start="37308" end="37330" title="Nordic Investment Bank" label="Nordic Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="37355" end="37372" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="37408" end="37421" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="37437" end="37445" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="37731" end="37735" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297311" start="37786" end="37843" title="Body of European Regulators of Electronic Communications" label="Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q208019" start="38273" end="38292" title="Eastern Partnership" label="Eastern Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="38373" end="38386" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="38420" end="38427" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="38432" end="38441" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="38483" end="38499" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q670356" start="38546" end="38561" title="Baltic Assembly" label="Baltic Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12360166" start="38585" end="38612" title="Baltic Council of Ministers" label="Baltic Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q789769" start="38621" end="38653" title="Council of the Baltic Sea States" label="Council of the Baltic Sea States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379870" start="38655" end="38674" title="Nordic-Baltic Eight" label="Nordic-Baltic Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q146165" start="39019" end="39033" title="Nordic Council" label="Nordic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q182379" start="39314" end="39341" title="Nordic Council of Ministers" label="Nordic Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665381" start="39393" end="39411" title="Northern Dimension" label="Northern Dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852723" start="39416" end="39443" title="Baltic Sea Region Programme" label="Baltic Sea Region Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058362" start="39682" end="39703" title="Northern Future Forum" label="Northern Future Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="39871" end="39895" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122077" start="39987" end="40003" title="2006 Riga summit" label="2006 NATO Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q308905" start="40137" end="40184" title="Presidency of the Council of the European Union" label="Presidency of the Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q662311" start="40478" end="40499" title="Latvian National Armed Forces" label="National Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074039" start="40581" end="40592" title="Latvian Land Forces" label="Land Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537847" start="40594" end="40606" title="Latvian Naval Forces" label="Naval Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076324" start="40608" end="40617" title="Latvian Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112266" start="40619" end="40633" title="Latvian National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497421" start="40635" end="40653" title="Latvian Special Tasks Unit" label="Special Tasks Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497373" start="40655" end="40670" title="Latvian Military Police" label="Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497385" start="40672" end="40691" title="Latvian National Armed Forces Staff Battalion" label="NAF staff Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="41117" end="41121" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="41366" end="41386" title="Multi-National Force – Iraq" label="Multi-National Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="41421" end="41425" title="OSCE" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276346" start="41514" end="41525" title="EU Battlegroup" label="Battlegroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998131" start="41542" end="41560" title="Nordic Battle Group" label="Nordic Battlegroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q511733" start="41579" end="41613" title="Common Security and Defence Policy" label="Common Security and Defence Policy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41702" end="41731" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)#Northern Distribution Network" label="Northern Distribution Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="41765" end="41769" title="ISAF" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="42544" end="42557" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q407737" start="42649" end="42668" title="Baltic Air Policing" label="Baltic Air Policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433338" start="42680" end="42696" title="Šiauliai International Airport" label="Šiauliai Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001035" start="42771" end="42797" title="NATO Centres of Excellence" label="NATO Centres of Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047926" start="42847" end="42872" title="Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence" label="Cooperative Cyber Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="43256" end="43260" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q745662" start="43272" end="43293" title="Baltic Naval Squadron" label="Baltic Naval Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="43389" end="43396" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="43398" end="43405" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805541" start="43409" end="43440" title="Baltic Air Surveillance Network" label="Baltic Air Surveillance Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115712" start="43521" end="43527" title="Kaunas" label="Kaunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="43529" end="43538" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q805790" start="43583" end="43605" title="Baltic Defence College" label="Baltic Defence College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13972" start="43609" end="43614" title="Tartu" label="Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="43616" end="43623" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="43658" end="43665" title="Liepāja" label="Liepāja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="43725" end="43732" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10601978" start="44050" end="44076" title="Nordic Defence Cooperation" label="Nordic Defence Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="44107" end="44123" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="44565" end="44578" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="44587" end="44609" title="United States Department of State" label="US Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="44762" end="44775" title="press freedom" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="44777" end="44784" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883388" start="44789" end="44806" title="Human development (humanity)" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="45026" end="45036" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012419" start="45063" end="45077" title="Russians in Latvia" label="ethnic Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143464" start="45133" end="45145" title="Constitution of Latvia" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147615" start="45150" end="45180" title="international human rights law" label="international human rights law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718221" start="45241" end="45253" title="Non-citizens (Latvia)" label="non-citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q223050" start="45266" end="45283" title="stateless persons" label="stateless persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="45536" end="45540" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472167" start="45541" end="45581" title="High Commissioner on National Minorities" label="High Commissioner on National Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071447" start="45718" end="45726" title="detainee" label="detainee"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="45835" end="45852" title="ethnic minorities" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="45940" end="45957" title="Same-sex marriage" label="Same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="46042" end="46066" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46082" end="46096" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="46128" end="46132" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q133011" start="46185" end="46189" title="Latvian lats" label="Lats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033921" start="46791" end="46801" title="Parex Bank" label="Parex Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="47026" end="47041" title="economic bubble" label="economic bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q192270" start="47094" end="47105" title="consumption (economics)" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="47149" end="47153" title="debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="47185" end="47198" title="balance of trade" label="trade balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="47317" end="47330" title="Privatisation" label="Privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="48089" end="48113" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="48115" end="48119" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="48129" end="48143" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="49320" end="49332" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="49389" end="49403" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q106158" start="49738" end="49764" title="Standard &amp;amp; Poor&amp;#x27;s" label="Standard &amp;amp; Poor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159021" start="49976" end="50006" title="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service" label="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="50238" end="50241" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="51287" end="51291" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q104036" start="51293" end="51302" title="Ventspils" label="Ventspils"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="51304" end="51311" title="Liepāja" label="Liepāja"/>
<link wikidata="Q840823" start="51316" end="51322" title="Saulkrasti" label="Skulte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454249" start="51406" end="51428" title="Free port of Ventspils" label="Free port of Ventspils"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="51464" end="51477" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q200797" start="51666" end="51673" title="Polotsk" label="Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q505421" start="51685" end="51711" title="Riga International Airport" label="Riga International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="51742" end="51755" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q517037" start="51917" end="51946" title="Liepāja International Airport" label="Liepāja International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q300924" start="51948" end="51957" title="airBaltic" label="airBaltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="52040" end="52053" title="Baltic States" label="Baltic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="52072" end="52076" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q327094" start="52087" end="52102" title="Latvian Railways" label="Latvian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197451" start="52174" end="52187" title="Russian gauge" label="Russian gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="52274" end="52287" title="Baltic States" label="Baltic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="52359" end="52373" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q581518" start="52390" end="52402" title="Rail Baltica" label="Rail Baltica"/>
<link wikidata="Q754430" start="52734" end="52736" title="Via Baltica" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q754430" start="52738" end="52756" title="European route E67" label="European route E67"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="52770" end="52776" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="52781" end="52788" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q322164" start="52801" end="52819" title="European route E22" label="European route E22"/>
<link wikidata="Q104036" start="52832" end="52841" title="Ventspils" label="Ventspils"/>
<link wikidata="Q15219885" start="52846" end="52854" title="Terehova, Latvia" label="Terehova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984983" start="52996" end="53007" title="Pļaviņu HES" label="Pļaviņu HES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377548" start="53018" end="53027" title="Rīgas HES" label="Rīgas HES"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662755" start="53041" end="53053" title="Ķeguma HES-2" label="Ķeguma HES-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="53308" end="53317" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349212" start="53492" end="53526" title="natural gas storage" label="underground gas storage facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="53729" end="53749" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="54398" end="54406" title="Latvian people" label="Latvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453511" start="54462" end="54470" title="Russians in the Baltic states" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="54472" end="54483" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="54488" end="54498" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="54503" end="54508" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="54513" end="54524" title="Lithuanians" label="Lithuanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q80021" start="54556" end="54566" title="Daugavpils" label="Daugavpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q180379" start="54571" end="54578" title="Rēzekne" label="Rēzekne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="54838" end="54842" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="56607" end="56614" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33136" start="56637" end="56662" title="Baltic languages" label="Baltic language sub-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q147356" start="56670" end="56689" title="Balto-Slavic languages" label="Balto-Slavic branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="56697" end="56726" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q33698" start="56785" end="56802" title="Livonian language" label="Livonian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="56810" end="56816" title="Finnic languages" label="Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="56831" end="56853" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q36212" start="56887" end="56896" title="Latgalian language" label="Latgalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="57011" end="57018" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302002" start="57680" end="57705" title="2012 Latvian constitutional referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q393144" start="57912" end="57928" title="Russian language in Latvia" label="Russian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="57980" end="57992" title="private university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="58053" end="58064" title="high school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="58390" end="58402" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q739910" start="58437" end="58474" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316556" start="58487" end="58501" title="Roman Catholicism in Latvia" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="58514" end="58532" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q748216" start="58551" end="58564" title="Eurobarometer" label="Eurobarometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="59034" end="59050" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="59080" end="59085" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="59226" end="59239" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129463" start="59590" end="59613" title="Latvian Orthodox Church" label="Latvian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="59649" end="59672" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516807" start="59708" end="59722" title="History of the Jews in Latvia" label="Jews in Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501181" start="59731" end="59748" title="Islam in Latvia" label="Muslims in Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="59795" end="59804" title="neopaganism" label="neopagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q94704" start="59812" end="59820" title="Dievturība" label="Dievturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187448" start="59873" end="59890" title="Latvian mythology" label="Latvian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q498407" start="60350" end="60370" title="University of Latvia" label="University of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q411895" start="60375" end="60400" title="Riga Technical University" label="Riga Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="60508" end="60512" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342858" start="60622" end="60673" title="Latvia University of Life Sciences and Technologies" label="Latvia University of Life Sciences and Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007643" start="60743" end="60767" title="Riga Stradiņš University" label="Riga Stradiņš University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854796" start="60886" end="60910" title="University of Daugavpils" label="University of Daugavpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="61777" end="61800" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="61861" end="61880" title="universal health care" label="universal programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="62212" end="62220" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="62250" end="62260" title="folk music" label="folk songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995664" start="62775" end="62792" title="Bernhard Borchert" label="Bernhard Borchert"/>
<link wikidata="Q45205" start="62808" end="62818" title="Raoul Dufy" label="Raoul Dufy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298953" start="63010" end="63041" title="Latvian Song and Dance Festival" label="Latvian Song and Dance Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="63067" end="63074" title="Latvians" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="63289" end="63299" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="63428" end="63440" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="63496" end="63513" title="socialist realism" label="socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q737201" start="63897" end="63908" title="scenography" label="scenography"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="63910" end="63915" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="64020" end="64024" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q903452" start="64043" end="64060" title="World Choir Games" label="World Choir Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q555773" start="64482" end="64504" title="Latvian National Opera" label="Latvian National Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q636159" start="64606" end="64639" title="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062617" start="64645" end="64674" title="Israel Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Israel Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="64680" end="64705" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635144" start="65263" end="65274" title="Sorrel soup" label="Sorrel soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="65369" end="65375" title="Staple food" label="staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q553261" start="65504" end="65520" title="Helmuts Balderis" label="Helmuts Balderis"/>
<link wikidata="Q449582" start="65522" end="65533" title="Artūrs Irbe" label="Artūrs Irbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q352151" start="65535" end="65551" title="Kārlis Skrastiņš" label="Kārlis Skrastiņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q463191" start="65556" end="65570" title="Sandis Ozoliņš" label="Sandis Ozoliņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078663" start="65589" end="65606" title="Zemgus Girgensons" label="Zemgus Girgensons"/>
<link wikidata="Q261142" start="65801" end="65812" title="Dinamo Riga" label="Dinamo Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821219" start="65873" end="65901" title="Latvian Hockey Higher League" label="Latvian Hockey Higher League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821219" start="65934" end="65962" title="Latvian Hockey Higher League" label="Latvian Hockey Higher League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11783173" start="65985" end="66013" title="2006 IIHF World Championship" label="2006 IIHF World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q945459" start="66125" end="66157" title="Latvia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Latvian national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q193141" start="66177" end="66187" title="EuroBasket" label="EuroBasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q659148" start="66191" end="66195" title="EuroBasket 1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q305456" start="66217" end="66221" title="EuroBasket 1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q326843" start="66249" end="66258" title="Lithuania men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566702" start="66324" end="66337" title="Jānis Krūmiņš" label="Jānis Krūmiņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553189" start="66339" end="66357" title="Maigonis Valdmanis" label="Maigonis Valdmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q959794" start="66359" end="66375" title="Valdis Muižnieks" label="Valdis Muižnieks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566671" start="66377" end="66391" title="Valdis Valters" label="Valdis Valters"/>
<link wikidata="Q267338" start="66393" end="66409" title="Igors Miglinieks" label="Igors Miglinieks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="66440" end="66443" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732920" start="66451" end="66464" title="Gundars Vētra" label="Gundars Vētra"/>
<link wikidata="Q380812" start="66466" end="66481" title="Andris Biedriņš" label="Andris Biedriņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="66558" end="66561" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="66570" end="66591" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q170649" start="66600" end="66609" title="Utah Jazz" label="Utah Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="66619" end="66622" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14834367" start="66639" end="66657" title="Kristaps Porziņģis" label="Kristaps Porziņģis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="66677" end="66691" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q744920" start="66693" end="66706" title="Dāvis Bertāns" label="Dāvis Bertāns"/>
<link wikidata="Q180950" start="66726" end="66747" title="Oklahoma City Thunder" label="Oklahoma City Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730894" start="66753" end="66767" title="Rodions Kurucs" label="Rodions Kurucs"/>
<link wikidata="Q169637" start="66793" end="66808" title="Milwaukee Bucks" label="Milwaukee Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16351339" start="66841" end="66850" title="Rīgas ASK" label="Rīgas ASK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411943" start="66859" end="66869" title="Euroleague Basketball" label="Euroleague"/>
<link wikidata="Q796201" start="66938" end="66946" title="BK VEF Rīga" label="VEF Rīga"/>
<link wikidata="Q456092" start="66966" end="66973" title="Eurocup Basketball" label="EuroCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q796217" start="67032" end="67044" title="BK Ventspils" label="BK Ventspils"/>
<link wikidata="Q910431" start="67068" end="67081" title="EuroChallenge" label="EuroChallenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640536" start="67153" end="67156" title="Latvijas Basketbola līga" label="LBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q805695" start="67173" end="67176" title="Baltic Basketball League" label="BBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360003" start="67208" end="67223" title="EuroBasket 2015" label="EuroBasket 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q111432276" start="67273" end="67277" title="EuroBasket 2025" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="67309" end="67317" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q206763" start="67319" end="67328" title="floorball" label="floorball"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="67359" end="67368" title="bobsleigh" label="bobsleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q186190" start="67373" end="67381" title="skeleton (sport)" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q189322" start="67387" end="67417" title="Latvia national football team" label="Latvian national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="67436" end="67440" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="67479" end="67510" title="UEFA Euro 2004" label="2004 UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q740051" start="67513" end="67519" title="Latvia at the Olympics" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="67558" end="67564" title="Winter Olympics" label="Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="67569" end="67584" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q441870" start="67668" end="67684" title="Māris Štrombergs" label="Māris Štrombergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101673" start="67773" end="67787" title="Mairis Briedis" label="Mairis Briedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551564" start="68046" end="68062" title="Jeļena Ostapenko" label="Jeļena Ostapenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q24387157" start="68071" end="68114" title="2017 French Open – Women&amp;#x27;s Singles" label="2017 French Open Women&amp;#x27;s singles title"/>
<link wikidata="Q121307925" start="68207" end="68228" title="UEFA Futsal Euro 2026" label="UEFA Futsal Euro 2026"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="69996" end="70014" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="70022" end="70049" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="70158" end="70179" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17515" wikidata="Q32" url="?curid=17515" title="Luxembourg">
<text>Luxembourg ( ; ; ; ), officially named the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, is a landlocked country in Western Europe. It is bordered by Belgium to the west and north, Germany to the east, and France on the south. Its capital and most populous city, Luxembourg City, is one of the four institutional seats of the European Union and hosts several EU institutions, notably the Court of Justice of the European Union, the highest judicial authority in the EU. 

As part of the Low Countries, Luxembourg has close historic, political, and cultural ties to Belgium and the Netherlands. Luxembourg&#x27;s culture, people, and languages are greatly influenced by France and Germany: Luxembourgish, a Germanic language, is the only recognized national language of the Luxembourgish people and of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg; French is the sole language for legislation; and both languages along with German are used for administrative matters.

With an area of , Luxembourg is Europe&#x27;s seventh-smallest country. In 2024, it had a population of 672,050, which makes it one of the least-populated countries in Europe, albeit with the highest population growth rate; foreigners account for almost half the population. Luxembourg is a representative democracy headed by a constitutional monarch, Grand Duke Henri, making it the world&#x27;s only remaining sovereign grand duchy.

The County of Luxembourg was established in the 11th century as a state within the Holy Roman Empire. Its ascension culminated in its monarch, Henry VII, becoming the Holy Roman Emperor in the 14th century. Luxembourg came under Habsburg rule in the 15th century, and was annexed by France in the 18th century. Luxembourg was partitioned three times, reducing its size. Having been restored in 1815 after the defeat of Napoleon, it regained independence in 1867 after the Luxembourg Crisis.

Luxembourg is a developed country with an advanced economy and one of the world&#x27;s highest PPP-adjusted GDPs per capita, per the IMF and World Bank. It also ranks highly in terms of life expectancy, human development, and human rights. The historic city of Luxembourg was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994 due to the exceptional preservation of its vast fortifications and historic quarters. Luxembourg is a founding member of the European Union, OECD, the United Nations, NATO, and the Benelux. It served on the United Nations Security Council for the first time in 2013 and 2014.

== History ==
=== Before AD 963 ===


The first traces of settlement in what is now Luxembourg are dated back to the Paleolithic Age, about 35,000 years ago. From the 2nd century BC, Celtic tribes settled in the region between the rivers Rhine and Meuse.

Six centuries later the Romans named the Celtic tribes inhabiting these exact regions collectively as the &quot;Treveri&quot;. Many examples of archaeological evidence proving their existence in Luxembourg have been discovered, the most famous being the Oppidum of Titelberg.

In around 58 to 51 BC, the Romans invaded the country when Julius Caesar conquered Gaul and part of Germania up to the Rhine border, thus the area of what is now Luxembourg became part of the Roman Empire for the next 450 years, living in relative peace under the Pax Romana.

Similar to those in Gaul, the Celts of Luxembourg adopted Roman culture, language, morals and a way of life, effectively becoming what historians later described as Gallo-Roman civilization. Evidence from that period includes the Dalheim Ricciacum and the Vichten mosaic, on display at the National Museum of History and Art in Luxembourg City.

The territory was infiltrated by the Germanic Franks from the 4th century, and was abandoned by Rome in AD 406, after which it became part of the Kingdom of the Franks. The Salian Franks who settled in the area are often described as the ones having brought the Germanic language to present-day Luxembourg, since the old Frankish language spoken by them is considered by linguists to be a direct forerunner of the Moselle Franconian dialect, which later evolved into, among others, the modern-day Luxembourgish language.

The Christianization of Luxembourg is usually dated back to the end of the 7th century. The most famous figure in this context is Willibrord, a Northumbrian missionary saint, who together with other monks established the Abbey of Echternach in AD 698, and is celebrated annually in the dancing procession of Echternach. For a few centuries the abbey would become one of northern Europe&#x27;s most influential abbeys. The Codex Aureus of Echternach, an important surviving codex written entirely in gold ink, was produced here in the 11th century. The so-called Emperor&#x27;s Bible and the Golden Gospels of Henry III were also produced in Echternach at this time.

=== Emergence and expansion (963–1312) ===


When the Carolingian Empire was divided many times starting with the Treaty of Verdun in 843, today&#x27;s Luxembourgish territory became successively part of the Kingdom of Middle Francia (843–855), the Kingdom of Lotharingia (855–959) and finally of the Duchy of Lorraine (959–1059), which itself had become a state of the Holy Roman Empire.

The recorded history of Luxembourg begins with the acquisition of &quot;Lucilinburhuc&quot; (today Luxembourg Castle) situated on the Bock rock by Siegfried, Count of the Ardennes, in 963 through an exchange act with St. Maximin&#x27;s Abbey, Trier. Around this fort, a town gradually developed, which became the center of a state of great strategic value within the Duchy of Lorraine. Over the years, the fortress was extended by Siegfried&#x27;s descendants and by 1083, one of them, Conrad I, was the first to call himself a &quot;Count of Luxembourg&quot;, and with it effectively creating the independent County of Luxembourg (which was still a state within the Holy Roman Empire).

By the middle of the 13th century, the counts of Luxembourg had managed to gain considerable wealth and power and had expanded their territory from the river Meuse to the Moselle. By the time of the reign of Henry V the Blonde, Bitburg, La Roche-en-Ardenne, Durbuy, Arlon, Thionville, Marville, Longwy, and in 1264 the competing County of Vianden (and with it St Vith and Schleiden) had either been incorporated directly or become vassal states to the County of Luxembourg. The only major setback during their rise in power came in 1288, when Henry VI and his three brothers died at the Battle of Worringen while trying unsuccessfully to add the Duchy of Limburg to their realm. But despite the defeat, the Battle of Worringen helped the Counts of Luxembourg to achieve military glory, which they had previously lacked, as they had mostly enlarged their territory by means of inheritances, marriages and fiefdoms.

The ascension of the Counts of Luxembourg culminated when Henry VII became King of the Romans, King of Italy and finally, in 1312, Holy Roman Emperor.

=== Golden Age (1312–1443) ===

With the ascension of Henry VII as Emperor, the dynasty of the House of Luxembourg not only began to rule the Holy Roman Empire, but rapidly began to exercise growing influence over other parts of Central Europe as well.

Henry&#x27;s son, John the Blind, in addition to being Count of Luxembourg, also became King of Bohemia. He remains a major figure in Luxembourgish history and folklore and is considered by many historians the epitome of chivalry in medieval times. He is also known for having founded the Schueberfouer in 1340 and for his heroic death at the Battle of Crécy in 1346. John the Blind is considered a national hero in Luxembourg.

In the 14th and early 15th centuries, three more members of the House of Luxembourg reigned as Holy Roman Emperors and Bohemian Kings: John&#x27;s descendants Charles IV, Sigismund (who also was King of Hungary and Croatia), and Wenceslaus IV. Charles IV created the long-lasting Golden Bull of 1356, a decree which fixed important aspects of the constitutional structure of the Empire. Luxembourg remained an independent fief (county) of the Holy Roman Empire, and in 1354, Charles IV elevated it to the status of a duchy with his half-brother Wenceslaus I becoming the first Duke of Luxembourg. While his kin were occupied ruling and expanding their power within the Holy Roman Empire and elsewhere, Wenceslaus, annexed the County of Chiny in 1364, and with it, the territories of the new Duchy of Luxembourg reached its greatest extent.

During these 130 years, the House of Luxembourg was contending with the House of Habsburg for supremacy within the Holy Roman Empire and Central Europe. It all came to end in 1443, when the House of Luxembourg suffered a succession crisis, precipitated by the lack of a male heir to assume the throne. Since Sigismund and Elizabeth of Görlitz were both heirless, all possessions of the Luxembourg Dynasty were redistributed among the European aristocracy. The Duchy of Luxembourg become a possession of Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy.

As the House of Luxembourg had become extinct and Luxembourg now became part of the Burgundian Netherlands, this would mark the start of nearly 400 years of foreign rule over Luxembourg.

=== Habsburg rule and French invasions (1444–1794) ===
In 1482, Philip the Handsome inherited all of what became then known as the Habsburg Netherlands, and with it the Duchy of Luxembourg. For nearly 320 years Luxembourg would remain a possession of the mighty House of Habsburg, at first under Austrian rule (1506–1556), then under Spanish rule (1556–1714), before going back again to Austrian rule (1714–1794).
With having become a Habsburg possession, the Duchy of Luxembourg became, like many countries in Europe at the time, heavily involved in the many conflicts for dominance of Europe between the Habsburg-held countries and the Kingdom of France.

In 1542, the King of France, François I, invaded Luxembourg twice, but the Habsburgs under Charles V managed to reconquer the Duchy each time.

Luxembourg became part of the Spanish Netherlands in 1556, and when France and Spain went to war in 1635 it resulted in the Treaty of the Pyrenees, in which the first partition of Luxembourg was decided. Under the Treaty, Spain ceded the Luxembourgish fortresses of Stenay, Thionville, and Montmédy, and the surrounding territory to France, effectively reducing the size of Luxembourg for the first time in centuries.

In context of the Nine Years&#x27; War in 1684, France invaded Luxembourg again, conquering and occupying the Duchy until 1697 when it was returned to the Spanish to garner support for the Bourbon cause during the prelude to the War of the Spanish Succession. When the war broke out in 1701 Luxembourg and the Spanish Netherlands were administered by the pro-French faction under the governor Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria and sided with the Bourbons. The duchy was subsequently occupied by the pro-Austrian allied forces during the conflict and was awarded to Austria at its conclusion in 1714.

As the Duchy of Luxembourg repeatedly passed back and forth from Spanish and Austrian to French rule, each of the conquering nations contributed to strengthening and expanding the Fortress that the Castle of Luxembourg had become over the years. One example of this includes French military engineer Marquis de Vauban who advanced the fortifications around and on the heights of the city, fortification walls that are still visible today.

=== French rule (1794–1815) ===
During the War of the First Coalition, Revolutionary France invaded the Austrian Netherlands, and with it, Luxembourg. In the years 1793 and 1794 most of the Duchy was conquered relatively quickly and the French Revolutionary Army committed many atrocities and pillages against the Luxembourgish civilian population and abbeys, the most infamous being the massacres of Differdange and Dudelange, as well as the destruction of the abbeys of Clairefontaine, Echternach and Orval. However the Fortress of Luxembourg resisted for nearly 7 months before the Austrian forces holding it surrendered. Luxembourg&#x27;s long defence led Lazare Carnot to call Luxembourg &quot;the best fortress in the world, except Gibraltar&quot;, giving rise to the city&#x27;s nickname &quot;the Gibraltar of the North&quot;.

Luxembourg was annexed by France, becoming the &quot;département des forêts&quot; (department of forests), and the incorporation of the former Duchy as a &quot;département&quot; into France was formalized at the Treaty of Campo Formio in 1797.
From the start of the occupation the new French officials in Luxembourg, who spoke only French, implemented many republican reforms, among them the principle of laicism, which led to an outcry in strongly Catholic Luxembourg. Additionally French was implemented as the only official language and Luxembourgish people were barred access to all civil services. When the French Army introduced military duty for the local population, riots broke out which culminated in 1798 when Luxembourgish peasants started a rebellion. Even though the French managed to rapidly suppress this revolt called &quot;Klëppelkrich&quot;, it had a profound effect on the historical memory of the country and its citizens.

However, many republican ideas of this era continue to have a lasting effect on Luxembourg; one of the many examples features the implementation of the Napoleonic Code Civil which was introduced in 1804 and is still valid today.

=== National awakening (1815–1890) ===

After the defeat of Napoleon in 1815, the Duchy of Luxembourg was restored. However, as the territory had been part of the Holy Roman Empire as well as the Habsburgian Netherlands in the past, both the Kingdom of Prussia and the United Kingdom of the Netherlands now claimed possession of the territory. At the Congress of Vienna the great powers decided that Luxembourg would become a member state of the newly formed German Confederation, but at the same time William I of the Netherlands, the King of the Netherlands, would become, in personal union, the head of state. To satisfy Prussia, it was decided that not only the Fortress of Luxembourg be manned by Prussian troops, but also that large parts of Luxembourgish territory (mainly the areas around Bitburg and St. Vith) become Prussian possessions. This marked the second time that the Duchy of Luxembourg was reduced in size, and is generally known as the Second Partition of Luxembourg. To compensate the Duchy for this loss, it was decided to elevate the Duchy to a Grand-Duchy, thus giving the Dutch monarchs the additional title of Grand-Duke of Luxembourg. However, from 1816 to 1830, William I ignored the Duchy&#x27;s sovereignty, treating Luxembourg as a conquered nation while subjecting Luxembourg to high taxes.

After Belgium became an independent country following the victorious Belgian Revolution of 1830–1831, it claimed the entire Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg as being part of Belgium, however, the Dutch King who was also Grand Duke of Luxembourg, as well as Prussia, did not want to lose their grip on the mighty fortress of Luxembourg and did not agree with the Belgian claims. The dispute would be solved at the 1839 Treaty of London where the decision of the Third Partition of Luxembourg was taken. This time the territory was reduced by more than half, as the predominantly francophone western part of the country (but also the then Luxembourgish-speaking part of Arelerland) was transferred to the new state of Belgium, thereby giving Luxembourg its modern-day borders. The treaty of 1839 also established full independence of the remaining Germanic-speaking Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg.

In 1842, Luxembourg joined the German Customs Union (&quot;Zollverein&quot;). This resulted in the opening of the German market, the development of Luxembourg&#x27;s steel industry, and expansion of Luxembourg&#x27;s railway network from 1855 to 1875.

After the Luxembourg Crisis of 1866 nearly led to war between Prussia and France, as both were unwilling to see the other taking influence over Luxembourg and its mighty fortress, the Grand Duchy&#x27;s independence and neutrality were reaffirmed by the Second Treaty of London and Prussia was finally willing to withdraw its troops from the Fortress of Luxembourg under the condition that the fortifications would be dismantled. That happened the same year. At the time of the Franco-Prussian war in 1870, Luxembourg&#x27;s neutrality was respected, and neither France nor Germany invaded the country.

As a result of the recurring disputes between the major European powers, the people of Luxembourg gradually developed a consciousness of independence and a national awakening took place in the 19th century. The people of Luxembourg began referring to themselves as &quot;Luxembourgers&quot;, rather than being part of one of the larger surrounding nations. This consciousness of &quot;Mir wëlle bleiwe wat mir sinn&quot; (&quot;&quot;We want to remain what we are &quot;)&quot; culminated in 1890, when the last step towards full independence was finally taken: due to a succession crisis the Dutch monarchy ceased to hold the title Grand-Duke of Luxembourg. Beginning with Adolph of Nassau-Weilburg, the Grand-Duchy would have its own monarchy, thus reaffirming its full independence.

=== German occupations and interwar political crisis (1890–1945) ===

In August 1914, during World War I, Imperial Germany violated Luxembourg&#x27;s neutrality by invading it to defeat France. Nevertheless, despite the German occupation, Luxembourg was allowed to maintain much of its independence and political mechanisms. Unaware of the fact that Germany secretly planned to annex the Grand-Duchy in case of a German victory (the Septemberprogramm), the Luxembourgish government continued to pursue a policy of strict neutrality. However, the Luxembourgish population did not believe Germany had good intentions, fearing that it would annex Luxembourg. Around 1,000 Luxembourgers served in the French army; their sacrifices have been commemorated at the Gëlle Fra.

After the war, Grand-Duchess Marie-Adélaïde was seen by many people (including the French and Belgian governments) as having collaborated with the Germans and calls for her abdication and the establishment of a Republic became louder. After the retreat of the German army, communists in Luxembourg City and Esch-sur-Alzette tried to establish a soviet worker&#x27;s republic similar to the ones emerging in Germany, but these attempts lasted only 2 days.
In November 1918, a motion in the Chamber of Deputies demanding the abolition of the monarchy was defeated narrowly by 21 votes to 19 (with three abstentions).

France questioned the Luxembourgish government&#x27;s, and especially Marie-Adélaïde&#x27;s, neutrality during the war, and calls for an annexation of Luxembourg to either France or Belgium grew louder in both countries. In January 1919, a company of the Luxembourgish Army rebelled, declaring itself to be the army of the new republic, but French troops intervened and put an end to the rebellion. Nonetheless, the disloyalty shown by her own armed forces was too much for Marie-Adélaïde, who abdicated in favour of her sister Charlotte 5 days later. The same year, in a popular referendum, 77.8% of the Luxembourgish population declared in favour of maintaining monarchy and rejected the establishment of a republic. During this time, Belgium pushed for an annexation of Luxembourg. However, all such claims were ultimately dismissed at the Paris Peace Conference, thus securing Luxembourg&#x27;s independence.

In 1939, the Luxembourg army increased to 425 due to Nazi Germany presence. On May 9, 1940 Luxembourg closed the defensive Schuster line with Germany; one day later, Luxembourg&#x27;s neutrality was violated again when Nazi Germany&#x27;s &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; entered the country &quot;entirely without justification&quot;. In contrast to the First World War, under the German occupation of Luxembourg during World War II, the country was treated as German territory and informally annexed to the adjacent province of Nazi Germany, Gau Moselland. This time, Luxembourg did not remain neutral as Luxembourg&#x27;s government in exile based in London supported the Allies, sending a small group of volunteers who participated in the Normandy invasion, and multiple resistance groups formed inside the occupied country.

With 2.45% of its prewar population killed, and a third of all buildings in Luxembourg being destroyed or heavily damaged (mainly due to the Battle of the Bulge), Luxembourg suffered the highest such loss in Western Europe, but its commitment to the Allied war effort was never questioned. Around 1,000–2,500 of Luxembourg&#x27;s Jews were murdered in the Holocaust.

=== Integration into NATO and European Union (1945–) ===

The Grand Duchy became a founding member of the United Nations in 1945. Luxembourg&#x27;s neutral status under the constitution formally ended in 1948, and in April 1949 it also became a founding member of NATO. During the Cold War, Luxembourg continued its involvements on the side of the Western Bloc. In the early fifties a small contingent of troops fought in the Korean War.
Luxembourg troops have also deployed to Afghanistan, to support ISAF. Luxembourg won its first gold medal at the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki when Josy Barthel won the 1500 metres.

In the 1950s, Luxembourg became one of the six founding countries of the European Communities, following the 1952 establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community, and subsequent 1958 creations of the European Economic Community and European Atomic Energy Community. In 1993, the former two of these were incorporated into the European Union. With Robert Schuman (one of the founding fathers of the EU), Pierre Werner (considered the father of the Euro), Gaston Thorn, Jacques Santer and Jean-Claude Juncker (all former presidents of the European Commission), Luxembourgish politicians contributed substantially to the EU&#x27;s formation and establishment. In 1999, Luxembourg joined the eurozone. Thereafter, the country was elected non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council (2013–14).

The steel industry exploiting the Red Lands&#x27; rich iron-ore grounds in the beginning of the 20th century drove Luxembourg&#x27;s industrialization. After the decline of the steel industry in the 1970s, the country focused on establishing itself as a global financial center and developed into the banking hub it is reputed to be. Since the beginning of the 21st century, its governments have focused on developing the country into a knowledge economy, with the founding of the University of Luxembourg and a national space program. In 2020, Luxembourg became the first country in the world to provide free public transport at a national scale.

On 19 December 2023, Luxembourg&#x27;s Chamber of Deputies adopted a law to modernize the current investment tax credit. It took effect less than two weeks later on 1 January 2024.

== Government and politics ==
Luxembourg is described as a &quot;full democracy&quot;, with a parliamentary democracy headed by a constitutional monarch. Executive power is exercised by the grand duke and the cabinet, which consists of several members with the titles of minister, minister delegate or secretary of state, who are headed by a Prime Minister. The current Constitution of Luxembourg, the supreme law of Luxembourg, was originally adopted on 17 October 1868. The Constitution was last updated on 1 July 2023.

The grand duke has the power to dissolve the legislature, in which case new elections must be held within three months. But since 1919, sovereignty has resided with the nation, exercised by the grand duke in accordance with the Constitution and the law.
Legislative power is vested in the Chamber of Deputies, a unicameral legislature of sixty members, who are directly elected to five-year terms from four constituencies. A second body, the Council of State (&quot;Conseil d&#x27;État&quot;), composed of 21 ordinary citizens appointed by the grand duke, advises the Chamber of Deputies in the drafting of legislation.

Luxembourg has three lower tribunals (&quot;justices de paix&quot;; in Esch-sur-Alzette, the city of Luxembourg, and Diekirch), two district tribunals (Luxembourg and Diekirch), and a Superior Court of Justice (Luxembourg), which includes the Court of Appeal and the Court of Cassation. There is also an Administrative Tribunal and an Administrative Court, as well as a Constitutional Court, all of which are located in the capital.

=== Administrative divisions ===
Luxembourg is divided into 12 cantons, which are further divided into 100 communes. Twelve of the communes have city status; the city of Luxembourg is the largest.
=== Foreign relations ===
Luxembourg has long been a prominent supporter of European political and economic integration. In 1921, Luxembourg and Belgium formed the Belgium–Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) to create a regime of inter-exchangeable currency and a common customs. Luxembourg is a member of the Benelux Economic Union and was one of the founding members of the European Economic Community (now the European Union). It also participates in the Schengen Group (named after the Luxembourg village of Schengen where the agreements were signed). At the same time, the majority of Luxembourgers have consistently believed that European unity makes sense only in the context of a dynamic transatlantic relationship, and thus have traditionally pursued a pro-NATO, pro-US foreign policy.

Luxembourg is considered a European capital, and is the site of the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Court of Auditors, the European Investment Bank, the Statistical Office of the European Union (Eurostat) and other vital EU organs. The Secretariat of the European Parliament is located in Luxembourg, but the Parliament usually meets in Brussels and sometimes in Strasbourg. Luxembourg is also site of the EFTA Court, which is responsible for the three EFTA members who are part of the European Single Market through the EEA Agreement.

=== Military ===
The Luxembourgish army is mostly based in its casern, the &quot;Centre militaire Caserne Grand-Duc Jean&quot; on the &quot;Härebierg&quot; in Diekirch. The general staff is based in the capital, the &quot;État-Major&quot;. The army is under civilian control, with the grand duke as Commander-in-Chief. The Minister for Defense, Yuriko Backes, oversees army operations. The professional head of the army is the Chief of Defense, who answers to the minister and holds the rank of general.

Being landlocked, Luxembourg has no navy. Seventeen NATO AWACS aeroplanes are registered as aircraft of Luxembourg. In accordance with a joint agreement with Belgium, both countries have put forth funding for one A400M military cargo plane.

Luxembourg has participated in the Eurocorps, has contributed troops to the UNPROFOR and IFOR missions in former Yugoslavia, and has participated with a small contingent in the NATO SFOR mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Luxembourg troops have also deployed to Afghanistan, to support ISAF. The army has also participated in humanitarian relief missions such as setting up refugee camps for Kurds and providing emergency supplies to Albania.

== Geography ==
Luxembourg is one of Europe&#x27;s smallest countries, ranking 168th in size of the 194 independent countries of the world; it is about in size, measuring long and wide. It lies between latitudes 49° and 51° N, and longitudes 5° and 7° E.

To the east, Luxembourg borders the German &quot;Bundesländer&quot; of Rhineland-Palatinate and Saarland, and to the south, it borders the French &quot;région&quot; of Grand Est (Lorraine). The Grand Duchy borders Belgium&#x27;s Wallonia, in particular the Belgian provinces of Luxembourg and Liège, part of which comprises the German-speaking Community of Belgium, to the west and to the north, respectively.

The northern third of the country is known as the Éislek or &quot;Oesling&quot;, and forms part of the Ardennes. It is dominated by hills and low mountains, including the Kneiff near Wilwerdange, which is the highest point, at . Other mountains are the Buurgplaatz at near Huldange and the Napoléonsgaard at near Rambrouch. The region is sparsely populated, with only one town (Wiltz) with a population of more than five thousand people.

The southern two-thirds of the country is called the Guttland, and is more densely populated than the Éislek. It is also more diverse and can be divided into five geographic sub-regions. The Luxembourg plateau, in south-central Luxembourg, is a large, flat, sandstone formation, and the site of the city of Luxembourg. Little Switzerland, in the east of Luxembourg, has craggy terrain and thick forests. The Moselle valley is the lowest-lying region, running along the southeastern border. The Red Lands, in the far south and southwest, are Luxembourg&#x27;s industrial heartland and home to many of Luxembourg&#x27;s largest towns.

The border between Luxembourg and Germany is formed by three rivers: the Moselle, the Sauer, and the Our. Other major rivers are the Alzette, the Attert, the Clerve, and the Wiltz. The valleys of the mid-Sauer and Attert form the border between the Gutland and the Éislek.

=== Environment ===
According to the 2012 Environmental Performance Index, Luxembourg is one of the world&#x27;s best performers in environmental protection, ranking fourth out of 132 assessed countries. In 2020, it ranked second out of 180 countries. Luxembourg also ranks sixth among the top ten most liveable cities in the world by Mercer&#x27;s. The country wants to cut GHG emissions by 55% in 10 years and reach zero emissions by 2050. Luxembourg wants to increase its organic farming fivefold. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 1.12/10, ranking it 164th globally out of 172 countries. 

In 2024, Luxembourg is ranked 2nd in Environmental Performance Index globally.

=== Climate ===
Luxembourg has an oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;), marked by high levels of precipitation, particularly in late summer. The summers are warm and winters cool.

== Economy ==

Luxembourg&#x27;s stable and high-income market economy features moderate growth, low inflation, and a high level of innovation. Unemployment is traditionally low, though it reached 6.1% by May 2012 after the Great Recession. In 2011, according to the IMF, Luxembourg was the world&#x27;s second-richest country, with a per capita GDP on a purchasing-power parity (PPP) basis of $80,119. Its GDP per capita in purchasing power standards was 261% of the EU average (100%) in 2019. Luxembourg ranks 13th in The Heritage Foundation&#x27;s Index of Economic Freedom, 26th in the United Nations&#x27; Human Development Index, and fourth in the Economist Intelligence Unit&#x27;s quality of life index. It ranked 20th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

The industrial sector, dominated by steel until the 1960s, has since diversified to include chemicals, rubber, and other products. During recent decades, growth in the financial sector has more than compensated for the decline in steel production. Services, especially banking and finance, account for the majority of the economic output. Luxembourg is the world&#x27;s second-largest investment fund center (after the United States), the most important private banking center in the eurozone and Europe&#x27;s leading center for reinsurance companies. Moreover, Luxembourg&#x27;s government has aimed to attract Internet startups, with Skype and Amazon being two of the many Internet companies that have shifted their regional headquarters to Luxembourg. Other high-tech companies have established themselves in Luxembourg, including 3d scanner developer/manufacturer Artec 3D.

In April 2009, concern about Luxembourg&#x27;s banking secrecy laws, as well as its reputation as a tax haven, led to its being added to a &quot;gray list&quot; of nations with questionable banking arrangements by the G20. In response, the country soon adopted OECD standards on exchange of information and was subsequently added into the category of &quot;jurisdictions that have substantially implemented the internationally agreed tax standard&quot;. In March 2010, the &quot;Sunday Telegraph&quot; reported that most of Kim Jong Il&#x27;s $4 billion in secret accounts was in Luxembourg banks. Amazon.co.uk also benefits from Luxembourg tax loopholes by channelling substantial UK revenues, as reported by &quot;The Guardian&quot; in April 2012. Luxembourg ranked third on the Tax Justice Network&#x27;s 2011 Financial Secrecy Index of the world&#x27;s major tax havens, scoring only slightly behind the Cayman Islands. In 2013, Luxembourg was ranked the second safest tax haven in the world, behind Switzerland.

In early November 2014, just days after becoming head of the European Commission, Luxembourg&#x27;s former Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker was hit by media disclosures—derived from a document leak known as Luxembourg Leaks—that Luxembourg had turned into a major European center of corporate tax avoidance under his premiership.

Agriculture employed about 2.1% of Luxembourg&#x27;s active population in 2010, when there were 2,200 agricultural holdings with an average area per holding of 60 hectares.

Luxembourg has especially close trade and financial ties to Belgium and the Netherlands (see Benelux), and as a member of the EU it enjoys the advantages of the open European market.

With $171 billion in May 2015, the country ranked 11th in the world in holdings of U.S. Treasury securities. However, securities owned by non-Luxembourg residents, but held in custodial accounts in Luxembourg, are included in this figure.

, Luxembourg&#x27;s public debt totalled $15,687,000,000, or $25,554 per capita. The debt to GDP was 22.10%.

The Luxembourg labour market represents 445,000 jobs occupied by 120,000 Luxembourgers, 120,000 foreign residents and 205,000 cross-border commuters. The latter pay their taxes in Luxembourg, but their education is partially financed by their country of residence. Luxembourg&#x27;s government has never shared its tax revenues with the local authorities on the French border. This system is seen by some as one of the keys to Luxembourg&#x27;s economic growth, but at the expense of the border countries.

=== Transport ===


Luxembourg has road, rail and air transport facilities and services. The road network has been significantly modernized in recent years with of motorways connecting the capital to adjacent countries. The advent of the high-speed TGV link to Paris has led to renovation of the city&#x27;s railway station and a new passenger terminal at Luxembourg Airport was opened in 2008. Luxembourg City reintroduced trams in December 2017 and there are plans to open light-rail lines in adjacent areas within the next few years.

There are 681 cars per 1000 persons in Luxembourg—higher than most of other states, and surpassed by the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Iceland, and other small states like Principality of Monaco, San Marino, Liechtenstein, the British overseas territory of Gibraltar, and Brunei.

On 29 February 2020, Luxembourg became the first country to introduce no-charge public transportation, which is almost completely funded by public taxation.

=== Communications ===

The telecommunications industry in Luxembourg is liberalized and the electronic communications networks are significantly developed. Competition between the different operators is guaranteed by the legislative framework Paquet Telecom of the Government of 2011 which transposes the European Telecom Directives into Luxembourgish law. This encourages the investment in networks and services. The regulator ILR – Institut Luxembourgeois de Régulation ensures the compliance to these legal rules.

Luxembourg has modern and widely deployed optical fibre and cable networks throughout the country. In 2010, the Luxembourg Government launched its National strategy for very high-speed networks with the aim to become a global leader in terms of very high-speed broadband by achieving full 1 Gbit/s coverage of the country by 2020. In 2011, Luxembourg had an NGA coverage of 75%. In April 2013, Luxembourg featured the sixth highest download speed worldwide and the second highest in Europe: 32,46 Mbit/s. The country&#x27;s location in Central Europe, stable economy and low taxes favour the telecommunication industry.

It ranks second in the world in the development of the Information and Communication Technologies in the ITU ICT Development Index and 8th in the Global Broadband Quality Study 2009 by the University of Oxford and the University of Oviedo.
Luxembourg is connected to all major European Internet Exchanges (AMS-IX Amsterdam, DE-CIX Frankfurt, LINX London), datacenters and POPs through redundant optical networks. In addition, the country is connected to the virtual meetme room services (vmmr) of the international data hub operator Ancotel. This enables Luxembourg to interconnect with all major telecommunication operators and data carriers worldwide. The interconnection points are in Frankfurt, London, New York and Hong Kong. Luxembourg has established itself as one of the leading financial technology (FinTech) hubs in Europe, with the Luxembourg government supporting initiatives like the Luxembourg House of Financial Technology.

Some 20 data centers are operating in Luxembourg. Six data centers are Tier IV Design certified: three of ebrc, two of LuxConnect and one of European Data Hub. In a survey on nine international data centers carried out in December 2012 and January 2013 and measuring availability (up-time) and performance (delay by which the data from the requested website was received), the top three positions were held by Luxembourg data centers.

== Demographics ==
=== Largest towns ===

=== Ethnicity ===

The people of Luxembourg are called Luxembourgers. The immigrant population increased in the 20th century due to the arrival of immigrants from Belgium, France, Italy, Germany, and Portugal; the last comprised the largest group. In 2013 about 88,000 Luxembourg inhabitants possessed Portuguese nationality. In 2013, there were 537,039 permanent residents, 44.5% of which were of foreign background or foreign nationals; the largest foreign ethnic groups were the Portuguese, comprising 16.4% of the total population, followed by the French (6.6%), Italians (3.4%), Belgians (3.3%) and Germans (2.3%). Another 6.4% were of other EU background, while the remaining 6.1% were of other non-EU, but largely other European, background.

Since the beginning of the Yugoslav wars, Luxembourg has seen many immigrants from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Serbia. Annually, over 10,000 new immigrants arrive in Luxembourg, mostly from the EU states, as well as Eastern Europe. In 2000 there were 162,000 immigrants in Luxembourg, accounting for 37% of the total population. There were an estimated 5,000 illegal immigrants in Luxembourg in 1999.

=== Language ===

Luxembourg does not have any &quot;official&quot; languages per se. As determined by the 1984 Language Regimen Act (French: &quot;Loi sur le régime des langues&quot;), Luxembourgish is the sole national language of the Luxembourgish people. It is considered the mother tongue or &quot;language of the heart&quot; for Luxembourgers and the language they generally use to speak or write to each other. Luxembourgish as well as the dialects in adjacent Germany belong to the Moselle Franconian subgroup of the main West Central German dialect group, which are largely mutually intelligible across the border, but Luxembourgish also has more than 5,000 words of French origin. Knowledge of Luxembourgish is a criterion for naturalization.

In addition to Luxembourgish, French and German are used in administrative and judicial matters, making all three administrative languages of Luxembourg. Per article 4 of the law promulgated in 1984, if a citizen asks a question in Luxembourgish, German or French, the administration must reply, as far as possible, in the language in which the question was asked.
Luxembourg is largely multilingual. In 2012, 52% of citizens claimed Luxembourgish as their native language, 16.4% Portuguese, 16% French, 2% German and 13.6% different languages (mostly English, Italian or Spanish). Though not the most common mother tongue in Luxembourg, French is the most widely-known language in the country: in 2021, 98% of citizens were able to speak it to a high level. The vast majority of Luxembourg residents are able to speak it as a second or third language. , much of the population was able to speak multiple other languages: 80% of citizens reported being able to hold a conversation in English, 78% in German and 77% in Luxembourgish, claiming these languages as their respective second, third or fourth language.

Each of the three official languages is used as a primary language in certain spheres of everyday life, without being exclusive. Luxembourgish is the language that Luxembourgers generally use to speak and write to each other, and there has been a recent increase in the production of novels and movies in the language. At the same time, the numerous expatriate workers (approximately 44% of the population) generally do not use it to speak to each other.

Most official business and written communication is carried out in French, which is also the language mostly used for public communication, with written official statements, advertising displays and road signs generally in French. Due to the historical influence of the Napoleonic Code on the legal system of the Grand Duchy, French is also the sole language of the legislation and generally the preferred language of the government, administration and justice. Parliamentary debates are mostly conducted in Luxembourgish, whereas written government communications and official documents (e.g. administrative or judicial decisions, passports, etc.) are drafted mostly in French and sometimes additionally in German.

Although professional life is largely multilingual, French is described by private sector business leaders as the main working language of their companies (56%), followed by Luxembourgish (20%), English (18%), and German (6%).

German is very often used in much of the media along with French and is considered by most Luxembourgers their second language. This is mostly due to the high similarity of German to Luxembourgish but also because it is the first language taught to children in primary school (language of literacy acquisition).

Due to the large community of Portuguese origin, the Portuguese language is fairly prevalent in Luxembourg, though it remains limited to the relationships inside this community. Portuguese has no official status, but the administration sometimes makes certain informative documents available in Portuguese.

Even though Luxembourg is largely multilingual today, some people claim that Luxembourg is subject of intense francization and that Luxembourgish and German are in danger of disappearing in the country. This would make Luxembourg either a unilingual Francophone country, or at best a bilingual French- and English-speaking country sometime in the far future.

===Religion===

Luxembourg is a secular state, but the state recognizes certain religions as officially mandated religions. This gives the state a hand in religious administration and appointment of clergy, in exchange for which the state pays certain running costs and wages. Religions covered by such arrangements are Catholicism, Judaism, Greek Orthodoxy, Anglicanism, Russian Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, Calvinism, Mennonitism, and Islam.

Since 1980, it has been illegal for the government to collect statistics on religious beliefs or practices. A 2000 estimate by the CIA Factbook is that 87% of Luxembourgers are Catholic, including the grand ducal family, with the remaining 13% being Protestants, Orthodox Christians, Jews, Muslims, and those of other or no religion. According to a 2010 Pew Research Center study, 70.4% are Christian, 2.3% Muslim, 26.8% unaffiliated, and 0.5% other religions.

According to a 2005 Eurobarometer poll, 44% of Luxembourg citizens responded that &quot;they believe there is a God&quot;, whereas 28% answered that &quot;they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force&quot;, and 22% that &quot;they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force&quot;.

=== Education ===
Luxembourg&#x27;s education system is trilingual: the first years of primary school are in Luxembourgish, before changing to German; while in secondary school, the language of instruction changes to French. Proficiency in all three languages is required for graduation from secondary school. In addition to the three national languages, English is taught in compulsory schooling and much of the population of Luxembourg can speak English. The past two decades have highlighted the growing importance of English in several sectors, in particular the financial sector. Portuguese, the language of the largest immigrant community, is also spoken by large segments of the population, but by relatively few from outside the Portuguese-speaking community.

The University of Luxembourg is the only university based in Luxembourg. In 2014, Luxembourg School of Business, a graduate business school, was created through private initiative and received the accreditation from the Ministry of Higher Education and Research of Luxembourg in 2017. Miami University, an American university, maintains the Dolibois European Center satellite campus in Differdange.

=== Healthcare ===

According to data from the World Health Organization, healthcare spending on behalf of the government of Luxembourg topped $4.1 Billion, amounting to about $8,182 for each citizen in the nation..Luxembourg allows residents to choose their own doctor. While also having public healthcare cover 80% to 90% of all healthcare costs. The nation of Luxembourg collectively spent nearly 7% of its Gross domestic product on health, placing it among the highest spending countries on health services and related programs in 2010, and 6th place in highest health index of countries in Europe in 2023.

== Culture ==

Luxembourg has been heavily influenced by the culture of its neighbours. It retains a number of folk traditions, having been for much of its history a profoundly rural country. There are several notable museums, located mostly in the capital. These include the National Museum of History and Art (NMHA), the Luxembourg City History Museum, and the new Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art (Mudam). The National Museum of Military History (MNHM) in Diekirch is especially known for its representations of the Battle of the Bulge. The Historic city of Luxembourg city including its fortification is part of the UNESCO World Heritage List, on account of the historical importance of its fortifications.

The country has produced some internationally known artists, including the painters Théo Kerg, Joseph Kutter and Michel Majerus, and photographer Edward Steichen, whose &quot;The Family of Man&quot; exhibition has been placed on UNESCO&#x27;s Memory of the World register, and is now permanently housed in Clervaux. Editor and author Hugo Gernsback, whose publications crystallized the concept of science fiction, was born in Luxembourg City. Movie star Loretta Young was of Luxembourgish descent.

Luxembourg was a founding participant of the Eurovision Song Contest, and participated every year between 1956 and before it was relegated after the 1993 competition, with the exception of 1959. Although Luxembourg was free to participate again in 1995, it chose not to return to the competition before 2024. It has won the competition a total of five times, 1961, 1965, 1972, 1973 and 1983 and hosted the contest in 1962, 1966, 1973, and 1984. Only nine of its 38 entries before 2024, and none of its five winning entries, were performed by Luxembourgish artists. On its 2024 return, this was, however, with a particular emphasis on promoting music and artists from Luxembourg.

Luxembourg was the first city to be named European Capital of Culture twice. The first time was in 1995. In 2007, the European Capital of Culture was to be a cross-border area consisting of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Rheinland-Pfalz and Saarland in Germany, the Walloon Region and the German-speaking part of Belgium, and the Lorraine area in France. The event was an attempt to promote mobility and the exchange of ideas, crossing borders physically, psychologically, artistically and emotionally.

Luxembourg was represented at the World Expo 2010 in Shanghai, China, from 1 May to 31 October 2010 with its own pavilion. The pavilion, designed as a forest and fortress, was based on the transliteration of the word Luxembourg into Chinese, &quot;Lúsēnbǎo&quot;, which when directly translated, means &quot;forest and fortress&quot;. It represented Luxembourg as the &quot;Green Heart in Europe&quot;.
=== Sports ===


Unlike most countries in Europe, sports in Luxembourg are not concentrated upon a particular national sport, but instead encompass a number of sports, both team and individual. Despite the lack of a central sporting focus, over 100,000 people in Luxembourg, out of a total population of 660,000, are licensed members of one sports federation or another. The Stade de Luxembourg, situated in Gasperich, southern Luxembourg City, is the country&#x27;s national stadium and largest sports venue in the country with a capacity of 9,386 for sporting events, including football and rugby union, and 15,000 for concerts. The largest indoor venue in the country is d&#x27;Coque, Kirchberg, north-eastern Luxembourg City, which has a capacity of 8,300. The arena is used for basketball, handball, gymnastics, and volleyball, including the final of the 2007 Women&#x27;s European Volleyball Championship. Hess Cycling Team is a Luxembourgish women&#x27;s road cycling team.

=== Cuisine ===
Luxembourg cuisine reflects its position on the border between the Latin and Germanic worlds, being heavily influenced by the cuisines of neighbouring France and Germany. More recently, it has been enriched by its many Italian and Portuguese immigrants.

Most native Luxembourg dishes, consumed as the traditional daily fare, share roots in the country&#x27;s folk dishes, the same as in neighbouring Germany.

Luxembourg sells the most alcohol in Europe per capita. However, the large proportion of alcohol purchased by customers from neighbouring countries contributes to the statistically high level of alcohol sales per capita; this level of alcohol sales is thus not representative of the actual alcohol consumption of the Luxembourg population.

Luxembourg has the second highest number of Michelin-starred restaurants per capita with Japan ranked at number one and Switzerland following Luxembourg at number three.

=== Media ===
The main languages of media in Luxembourg are French and German. The newspaper with the largest circulation is the German-language daily &quot;Luxemburger Wort&quot;. Because of the strong multilingualism in Luxembourg, newspapers often alternate articles in French and articles in German, without translation. In addition, there are both English and Portuguese radio and national print publications, but accurate audience figures are difficult to gauge since the national media survey by ILRES is conducted in French.

Luxembourg is known in Europe for its radio and television stations (Radio Luxembourg and RTL Group). It is also the uplink home of SES, carrier of major European satellite services for Germany and Britain.

Due to a 1988 law that established a special tax scheme for audiovisual investment, the film and co-production in Luxembourg has grown steadily. There are some 30 registered production companies in Luxembourg.

Luxembourg won an Oscar in 2014 in the Animated Short Films category with &quot;Mr Hublot&quot;.

=== Luxembourgers ===
== See also ==

* Outline of Luxembourg
* Disability in Luxembourg

==References==
=== Informational notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 


== Further reading ==

* Plan d&#x27;action national luxembourgeois en matière de TIC et de haut-débit* 
* Inauguration of LU-CIX
* Art and Culture in Luxembourg 
== External links ==

* The Official Portal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg 
* Luxembourg from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Luxembourg . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Luxembourg profile from the BBC News
* &quot;Luxembourg&#x27;s Constitution of 1868 with Amendments through 2009&quot;, English Translation 2012 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="0" end="10" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="43" end="68" title="Luxembourg" label="Grand Duchy of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="75" end="93" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="97" end="111" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="131" end="138" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="162" end="169" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="187" end="193" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="244" end="259" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034221" start="271" end="321" title="Institutional seats of the European Union" label="the four institutional seats of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="340" end="342" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="369" end="407" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="468" end="481" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="498" end="542" title="Benelux" label="close historic, political, and cultural ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q535710" start="575" end="600" title="Culture of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg&amp;#x27;s culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166752" start="614" end="623" title="Languages of Luxembourg" label="languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="670" end="683" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="729" end="746" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092641" start="754" end="774" title="Luxembourgers" label="Luxembourgish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q222938" start="965" end="1003" title="List of European countries by area" label="Europe&amp;#x27;s seventh-smallest country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606487" start="1072" end="1107" title="List of European countries by population" label="least-populated countries in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570370" start="1125" end="1155" title="List of European countries by population growth rate" label="highest population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="1224" end="1248" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1261" end="1283" title="constitutional monarch" label="constitutional monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004" start="1285" end="1301" title="Grand Duke Henri" label="Grand Duke Henri"/>
<link wikidata="Q165116" start="1355" end="1366" title="grand duchy" label="grand duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177890" start="1373" end="1393" title="County of Luxembourg" label="County of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1452" end="1469" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="1512" end="1521" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="1536" end="1554" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="1598" end="1611" title="Habsburg Netherlands" label="Habsburg rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1788" end="1796" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q699765" start="1841" end="1858" title="Luxembourg Crisis" label="Luxembourg Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="1877" end="1894" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650714" start="1900" end="1919" title="Economy of Luxembourg" label="an advanced economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="1956" end="1984" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="PPP-adjusted GDPs per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1994" end="1997" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2002" end="2012" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q124547697" start="2105" end="2132" title="Old City of Luxembourg" label="historic city of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="2148" end="2174" title="World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2324" end="2328" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2350" end="2354" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="2364" end="2371" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="2390" end="2421" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="2577" end="2592" title="Paleolithic Age" label="Paleolithic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401464" start="2643" end="2656" title="Celtic tribes" label="Celtic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="2698" end="2703" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="2708" end="2713" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2740" end="2746" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q322168" start="2828" end="2835" title="Treveri" label="Treveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463952" start="2981" end="2990" title="Titelberg" label="Titelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="3052" end="3065" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="3066" end="3080" title="Gallic Wars" label="conquered Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="3093" end="3101" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3185" end="3197" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q75207" start="3257" end="3267" title="Pax Romana" label="Pax Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364601" start="3435" end="3459" title="Gallo-Roman culture" label="Gallo-Roman civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210859" start="3500" end="3517" title="Dalheim Ricciacum" label="Dalheim Ricciacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q985473" start="3526" end="3540" title="Vichten" label="Vichten mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585886" start="3560" end="3594" title="National Museum of History and Art" label="National Museum of History and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="3653" end="3661" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="3662" end="3668" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="3762" end="3783" title="Kingdom of the Franks" label="Kingdom of the Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860505" start="3933" end="3945" title="Frankish language" label="old Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q503906" start="4030" end="4056" title="Moselle Franconian language" label="Moselle Franconian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="4113" end="4135" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="4142" end="4158" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q160714" start="4268" end="4278" title="Willibrord" label="Willibrord"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="4282" end="4293" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702704" start="4359" end="4378" title="Abbey of Echternach" label="Abbey of Echternach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247385" start="4424" end="4456" title="dancing procession of Echternach" label="dancing procession of Echternach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106387" start="4560" end="4586" title="Codex Aureus of Echternach" label="Codex Aureus of Echternach"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920796" start="4700" end="4720" title="Emperor&amp;#x27;s Bible" label="Emperor&amp;#x27;s Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309429" start="4729" end="4756" title="Golden Gospels of Henry III" label="Golden Gospels of Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="4859" end="4877" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q134840" start="4919" end="4935" title="Treaty of Verdun" label="Treaty of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q468902" start="5013" end="5038" title="Kingdom of Middle Francia" label="Kingdom of Middle Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="5054" end="5076" title="Kingdom of Lotharingia" label="Kingdom of Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="5106" end="5123" title="Duchy of Lorraine" label="Duchy of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="5175" end="5192" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714250" start="5294" end="5311" title="Luxembourg Castle" label="Luxembourg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714250" start="5329" end="5333" title="Bock (Luxembourg)" label="Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q469856" start="5342" end="5374" title="Siegfried of Luxembourg" label="Siegfried, Count of the Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q118786" start="5412" end="5443" title="St. Maximin&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Trier" label="St. Maximin&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="5457" end="5461" title="Fortifications" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q749731" start="5681" end="5689" title="Conrad I, Count of Luxembourg" label="Conrad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q878177" start="5729" end="5748" title="Count of Luxembourg" label="Count of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177890" start="5805" end="5825" title="County of Luxembourg" label="County of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="6041" end="6046" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="6054" end="6061" title="Moselle" label="Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q72364" start="6091" end="6109" title="Henry V, Count of Luxembourg" label="Henry V the Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q258974" start="6111" end="6118" title="Bitburg" label="Bitburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159974" start="6120" end="6139" title="La Roche-en-Ardenne" label="La Roche-en-Ardenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q497697" start="6141" end="6147" title="Durbuy" label="Durbuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q675960" start="6149" end="6154" title="Arlon" label="Arlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="6156" end="6166" title="Thionville" label="Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q59176" start="6168" end="6176" title="Marville, Meuse" label="Marville"/>
<link wikidata="Q318535" start="6178" end="6184" title="Longwy" label="Longwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319057" start="6212" end="6229" title="County of Vianden" label="County of Vianden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6243" end="6250" title="St Vith" label="St Vith"/>
<link wikidata="Q241358" start="6255" end="6264" title="Schleiden" label="Schleiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="6314" end="6327" title="vassal states" label="vassal states"/>
<link wikidata="Q83678" start="6426" end="6434" title="Henry VI, Count of Luxembourg" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q152295" start="6470" end="6489" title="Battle of Worringen" label="Battle of Worringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q697787" start="6529" end="6545" title="Duchy of Limburg" label="Duchy of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="6856" end="6865" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="6873" end="6891" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="6893" end="6906" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="6929" end="6947" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q122293" start="7045" end="7064" title="House of Luxembourg" label="House of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="7092" end="7109" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="7222" end="7236" title="John the Blind" label="John the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q44330" start="7292" end="7307" title="King of Bohemia" label="King of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="7364" end="7372" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="7425" end="7433" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q350787" start="7493" end="7506" title="Schueberfouer" label="Schueberfouer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="7547" end="7562" title="Battle of Crécy" label="Battle of Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="7603" end="7616" title="Folk hero" label="national hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="7792" end="7802" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="7804" end="7813" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="7828" end="7855" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary and Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152148" start="7862" end="7875" title="Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q567601" start="7913" end="7932" title="Golden Bull of 1356" label="Golden Bull of 1356"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="8150" end="8155" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q658785" start="8178" end="8190" title="Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg" label="Wenceslaus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q878177" start="8210" end="8228" title="Duke of Luxembourg" label="Duke of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q849833" start="8359" end="8374" title="County of Chiny" label="County of Chiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719360" start="8424" end="8443" title="Duchy of Luxembourg" label="Duchy of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="8546" end="8563" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q266265" start="8796" end="8816" title="Elizabeth of Görlitz" label="Elizabeth of Görlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="8977" end="8992" title="Philip the Good" label="Philip the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="8994" end="9010" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157109" start="9097" end="9119" title="Burgundian Netherlands" label="Burgundian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q157098" start="9265" end="9284" title="Philip the Handsome" label="Philip the Handsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="9332" end="9352" title="Habsburg Netherlands" label="Habsburg Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="9535" end="9559" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish rule (1556–1714)"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="9588" end="9613" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian rule (1714–1794)"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="9839" end="9856" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="9872" end="9886" title="King of France" label="King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="9888" end="9898" title="Francis I of France" label="François I"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="9950" end="9959" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="10033" end="10052" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q617333" start="10088" end="10107" title="Franco-Spanish War (1635–1659)" label="went to war in 1635"/>
<link wikidata="Q221670" start="10127" end="10149" title="Treaty of the Pyrenees" label="Treaty of the Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060585" start="10160" end="10193" title="Partitions of Luxembourg" label="the first partition of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q846090" start="10269" end="10275" title="Stenay" label="Stenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q229792" start="10293" end="10301" title="Montmédy" label="Montmédy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="10440" end="10460" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q815171" start="10470" end="10501" title="Siege of Luxembourg (1684)" label="France invaded Luxembourg again"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="10611" end="10618" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="10651" end="10680" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q57628" start="10815" end="10856" title="Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria" label="Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q278386" start="11211" end="11219" title="Fortress of Luxembourg" label="Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q192839" start="11331" end="11348" title="Marquis de Vauban" label="Marquis de Vauban"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817" start="11514" end="11540" title="War of the First Coalition" label="War of the First Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="11542" end="11562" title="First French Republic" label="Revolutionary France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192988" start="11708" end="11733" title="French Revolutionary Army" label="French Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012" start="11872" end="11883" title="Differdange" label="Differdange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014" start="11888" end="11897" title="Dudelange" label="Dudelange"/>
<link wikidata="Q333874" start="11943" end="11957" title="Clairefontaine Abbey" label="Clairefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q702704" start="11959" end="11969" title="Abbey of Echternach" label="Echternach"/>
<link wikidata="Q334099" start="11974" end="11979" title="Orval Abbey" label="Orval"/>
<link wikidata="Q904495" start="12016" end="12044" title="Siege of Luxembourg (1794–95)" label="resisted for nearly 7 months"/>
<link wikidata="Q310767" start="12131" end="12144" title="Lazare Carnot" label="Lazare Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q378004" start="12354" end="12388" title="Forêts" label="&amp;quot;département des forêts&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q206752" start="12519" end="12541" title="Treaty of Campo Formio" label="Treaty of Campo Formio"/>
<link wikidata="Q728697" start="12712" end="12719" title="laicism" label="laicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q568387" start="13148" end="13160" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; War (1798)" label="Klëppelkrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="13415" end="13425" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Code Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q233688" start="13532" end="13538" title="Treaty of Paris (1815)" label="defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="13542" end="13550" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="13724" end="13742" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864" start="13751" end="13784" title="United Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="United Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="13833" end="13851" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="13941" end="13961" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="13984" end="14012" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="William I of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="14018" end="14041" title="Monarchy of the Netherlands" label="King of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="14060" end="14074" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q278386" start="14148" end="14170" title="Fortress of Luxembourg" label="Fortress of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="14184" end="14199" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060585" start="14438" end="14468" title="Partitions of Luxembourg" label="Second Partition of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165116" start="14550" end="14561" title="Grand duchy" label="Grand-Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276071" start="14618" end="14642" title="Grand-Duke of Luxembourg" label="Grand-Duke of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="14672" end="14681" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q223933" start="14875" end="14906" title="Belgian Revolution" label="Belgian Revolution of 1830–1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160895" start="15212" end="15233" title="Treaty of London (1839)" label="1839 Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060585" start="15260" end="15289" title="Partitions of Luxembourg" label="Third Partition of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="15377" end="15388" title="francophone" label="francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126" start="15389" end="15416" title="Luxembourg (Belgium)" label="western part of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q778118" start="15467" end="15477" title="Arelerland" label="Arelerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q155707" start="15750" end="15760" title="Zollverein" label="Zollverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13105032" start="15839" end="15871" title="Steel industry in Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg&amp;#x27;s steel industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q525359" start="15890" end="15923" title="Société Nationale des Chemins de Fer Luxembourgeois" label="Luxembourg&amp;#x27;s railway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q699765" start="15954" end="15971" title="Luxembourg Crisis" label="Luxembourg Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345269" start="16198" end="16221" title="Treaty of London, 1867" label="Second Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="16422" end="16441" title="Franco-Prussian war" label="Franco-Prussian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092641" start="16819" end="16832" title="Luxembourgers" label="Luxembourgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315762" start="16933" end="16962" title="Mir wëlle bleiwe wat mir sinn" label="Mir wëlle bleiwe wat mir sinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="17141" end="17155" title="Dutch monarchy" label="Dutch monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57302" start="17222" end="17247" title="Adolphe, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="Adolph of Nassau-Weilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q697685" start="17276" end="17292" title="Nassau-Weilburg" label="its own monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17428" end="17439" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="17441" end="17457" title="Imperial Germany" label="Imperial Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="17485" end="17495" title="Neutral country" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q153214" start="17555" end="17572" title="German occupation of Luxembourg during World War I" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q510684" start="17768" end="17785" title="Septemberprogramm" label="Septemberprogramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102519" start="18092" end="18101" title="Gëlle Fra" label="Gëlle Fra"/>
<link wikidata="Q159075" start="18133" end="18147" title="Marie-Adélaïde, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg" label="Marie-Adélaïde"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="18364" end="18375" title="German Imperial Army" label="German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010" start="18411" end="18427" title="Esch-sur-Alzette" label="Esch-sur-Alzette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075404" start="18449" end="18478" title="Soviet republic (system of government)" label="soviet worker&amp;#x27;s republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="18494" end="18518" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="ones emerging in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q517449" start="18593" end="18612" title="Chamber of Deputies (Luxembourg)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995869" start="18627" end="18652" title="Abolition of monarchy" label="abolition of the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q246813" start="18975" end="18993" title="Luxembourgish Army" label="Luxembourgish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q155608" start="19248" end="19257" title="Grand Duchess Charlotte" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384831" start="19292" end="19310" title="1919 Luxembourg referendum" label="popular referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="19563" end="19585" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057604" start="19757" end="19770" title="Schuster Line" label="Schuster line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="19853" end="19865" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="19879" end="19888" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q13435464" start="19895" end="19914" title="Invasion of Luxembourg" label="entered the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q708193" start="20005" end="20056" title="German occupation of Luxembourg during World War II" label="German occupation of Luxembourg during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="20153" end="20165" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q23638551" start="20167" end="20180" title="Gau Moselland" label="Gau Moselland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645385" start="20248" end="20267" title="Luxembourg government-in-exile" label="government in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="20298" end="20304" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="20366" end="20383" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Normandy invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q286451" start="20398" end="20415" title="Luxembourgish Resistance" label="resistance groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="20594" end="20613" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499394" start="20805" end="20818" title="the Holocaust in Luxembourg" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671014" start="20994" end="21006" title="Constitution of Luxembourg" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="21085" end="21089" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="21102" end="21110" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="21169" end="21181" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="21247" end="21257" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="21323" end="21327" title="ISAF" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="21372" end="21392" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q434012" start="21410" end="21422" title="Josy Barthel" label="Josy Barthel"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="21518" end="21538" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="21580" end="21613" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="21652" end="21679" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="21684" end="21716" title="European Atomic Energy Community" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981" start="21799" end="21813" title="Robert Schuman" label="Robert Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q315661" start="21855" end="21868" title="Pierre Werner" label="Pierre Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="21899" end="21903" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q295128" start="21906" end="21918" title="Gaston Thorn" label="Gaston Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q39659" start="21920" end="21934" title="Jacques Santer" label="Jacques Santer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57661" start="21939" end="21958" title="Jean-Claude Juncker" label="Jean-Claude Juncker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="21989" end="22008" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="22140" end="22148" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="22214" end="22245" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="22262" end="22276" title="steel industry" label="steel industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078592" start="22292" end="22301" title="Red Lands" label="Red Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650714" start="22510" end="22535" title="Economy of Luxembourg" label="a global financial center"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="22695" end="22712" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59668" start="22739" end="22763" title="University of Luxembourg" label="University of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q56669793" start="22770" end="22792" title="Luxembourg Space Agency" label="national space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105834" start="22863" end="22884" title="free public transport" label="free public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q517449" start="22946" end="22965" title="Chamber of Deputies (Luxembourg)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23154" end="23168" title="Democracy Index#Definitions" label="full democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="23183" end="23206" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="23219" end="23241" title="constitutional monarch" label="constitutional monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276071" start="23279" end="23289" title="Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="grand duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671014" start="23459" end="23485" title="Constitution of Luxembourg" label="Constitution of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q517449" start="23657" end="23668" title="Chamber of Deputies (Luxembourg)" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q517449" start="23901" end="23920" title="Chamber of Deputies of Luxembourg" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="23924" end="23934" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246934" start="24019" end="24033" title="Legislative circonscriptions (Luxembourg)" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q246111" start="24054" end="24070" title="Council of State of Luxembourg" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010" start="24304" end="24320" title="Esch-sur-Alzette" label="Esch-sur-Alzette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="24334" end="24344" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16050" start="24350" end="24358" title="Diekirch" label="Diekirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q283360" start="24417" end="24442" title="Superior court of justice (Luxembourg)" label="Superior Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146429" start="24730" end="24737" title="Cantons of Luxembourg" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919801" start="24774" end="24782" title="Communes of Luxembourg" label="communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211142" start="24812" end="24823" title="List of cities in Luxembourg" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="24837" end="24847" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q729438" start="24963" end="24983" title="economic integration" label="economic integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542735" start="25028" end="25061" title="Belgium–Luxembourg Economic Union" label="Belgium–Luxembourg Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="25132" end="25139" title="Customs (tax)" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="25171" end="25193" title="Benelux Economic Union" label="Benelux Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="25319" end="25333" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q183841" start="25347" end="25381" title="Schengen, Luxembourg" label="the Luxembourg village of Schengen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="25627" end="25631" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="25725" end="25763" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8900" start="25769" end="25795" title="European Court of Auditors" label="European Court of Auditors"/>
<link wikidata="Q192247" start="25801" end="25825" title="European Investment Bank" label="European Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="25873" end="25881" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398720" start="25914" end="25952" title="Secretariat of the European Parliament" label="Secretariat of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="26015" end="26023" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="26041" end="26051" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q610886" start="26084" end="26094" title="EFTA Court" label="EFTA Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="26131" end="26135" title="EFTA" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="26199" end="26212" title="EEA Agreement" label="EEA Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185046" start="26473" end="26489" title="civilian control of the military" label="civilian control"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="26514" end="26532" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853466" start="26538" end="26558" title="Minister for Defence of Luxembourg" label="Minister for Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q92437804" start="26560" end="26573" title="Yuriko Backes" label="Yuriko Backes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097015" start="26642" end="26658" title="Chief of Defence (Luxembourg)" label="Chief of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q161341" start="26777" end="26782" title="Airborne Warning And Control System" label="AWACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496" start="26933" end="26938" title="Airbus A400M" label="A400M"/>
<link wikidata="Q276538" start="26997" end="27006" title="Eurocorps" label="Eurocorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="27038" end="27046" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="UNPROFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="27051" end="27055" title="IFOR" label="IFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="27075" end="27085" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="27139" end="27143" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="27144" end="27148" title="SFOR" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="27248" end="27252" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="27354" end="27359" title="Kurdish people" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="27485" end="27490" title="List of countries by area" label="168th"/>
<link wikidata="Q11750" start="27506" end="27544" title="List of sovereign states" label="194 independent countries of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="27618" end="27621" title="49th parallel north" label="49°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485227" start="27626" end="27631" title="51st parallel north" label="51° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q788564" start="27648" end="27650" title="5th meridian east" label="5°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703760" start="27655" end="27659" title="7th meridian east" label="7° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="27711" end="27723" title="States of Germany" label="Bundesländer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="27733" end="27753" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201" start="27758" end="27766" title="Saarland" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="27814" end="27820" title="Regions of France" label="région"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677983" start="27830" end="27839" title="Grand Est" label="Grand Est"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="27841" end="27849" title="Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="27891" end="27899" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83116" start="27927" end="27936" title="Provinces of Belgium" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126" start="27940" end="27950" title="Luxembourg (Belgium)" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127" start="27955" end="27960" title="Liège Province" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q90027" start="27990" end="28026" title="German-speaking Community of Belgium" label="German-speaking Community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q298176" start="28123" end="28129" title="Éislek" label="Éislek"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="28176" end="28184" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24457" start="28244" end="28250" title="Kneiff" label="Kneiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123050" start="28256" end="28267" title="Wilwerdange" label="Wilwerdange"/>
<link wikidata="Q993417" start="28326" end="28337" title="Buurgplaatz" label="Buurgplaatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636270" start="28346" end="28354" title="Huldange" label="Huldange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965109" start="28363" end="28377" title="Napoléonsgaard" label="Napoléonsgaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q986396" start="28386" end="28395" title="Rambrouch" label="Rambrouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q741589" start="28451" end="28456" title="Wiltz" label="Wiltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q705075" start="28565" end="28573" title="Guttland" label="Guttland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272182" start="28703" end="28721" title="Luxembourg plateau" label="Luxembourg plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="28770" end="28779" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762154" start="28831" end="28849" title="Little Switzerland (Luxembourg)" label="Little Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="28920" end="28927" title="Moselle (river)" label="Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078592" start="29006" end="29015" title="Red Lands" label="Red Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="29219" end="29226" title="Moselle" label="Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q158847" start="29232" end="29237" title="Sauer" label="Sauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q318762" start="29247" end="29250" title="Our River" label="Our"/>
<link wikidata="Q450722" start="29279" end="29286" title="Alzette" label="Alzette"/>
<link wikidata="Q836787" start="29292" end="29298" title="Attert River" label="Attert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719767" start="29304" end="29310" title="Clerve" label="Clerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708483" start="29320" end="29325" title="Wiltz River" label="Wiltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="29331" end="29337" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="29462" end="29493" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="29795" end="29808" title="GHG emissions" label="GHG emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="29935" end="29967" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="30078" end="30109" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="30155" end="30170" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="30172" end="30178" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="30363" end="30377" title="economic system" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="30531" end="30546" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="30574" end="30577" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="30827" end="30850" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="The Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="30858" end="30883" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="30918" end="30941" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q375508" start="30996" end="31017" title="Quality-of-life index" label="quality of life index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="31041" end="31064" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q13105032" start="31305" end="31321" title="Steel industry in Luxembourg" label="steel production"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="31356" end="31363" title="financial export" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="31559" end="31567" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="31712" end="31717" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="31722" end="31728" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q94701573" start="31910" end="31920" title="3d scanner" label="3d scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111888" start="31944" end="31952" title="Artec 3D" label="Artec 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="32055" end="32064" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="32173" end="32176" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="32479" end="32490" title="Kim Jong Il" label="Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q638213" start="32736" end="32755" title="Tax Justice Network" label="Tax Justice Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449645" start="32768" end="32791" title="Financial Secrecy Index" label="Financial Secrecy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="32863" end="32877" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="33034" end="33053" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q57661" start="33095" end="33114" title="Jean-Claude Juncker" label="Jean-Claude Juncker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18509259" start="33182" end="33198" title="Luxembourg Leaks" label="Luxembourg Leaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q329303" start="33268" end="33281" title="tax avoidance" label="tax avoidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="33573" end="33580" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="33655" end="33661" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561771" start="33747" end="33771" title="U.S. Treasury security" label="U.S. Treasury securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088912" start="34376" end="34389" title="France–Luxembourg border" label="French border"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="34770" end="34773" title="TGV" label="TGV"/>
<link wikidata="Q801140" start="34829" end="34844" title="Luxembourg railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q872186" start="34877" end="34895" title="Luxembourg Airport" label="Luxembourg Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q33228583" start="34945" end="34950" title="Trams in Luxembourg" label="trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="34996" end="35006" title="light-rail" label="light-rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="35135" end="35141" title="State (polity)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="35303" end="35342" title="Gibraltar" label="British overseas territory of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105834" start="35427" end="35458" title="Free public transport" label="no-charge public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401742" start="35543" end="35570" title="telecommunications industry" label="telecommunications industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="36392" end="36395" title="Next-generation access" label="NGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="36844" end="36864" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303432" start="36873" end="36893" title="University of Oviedo" label="University of Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16319025" start="37442" end="37462" title="financial technology" label="financial technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092641" start="38128" end="38141" title="Luxembourgers" label="Luxembourgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373405" start="38375" end="38385" title="Portuguese Luxembourger" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="38850" end="38863" title="Yugoslav wars" label="Yugoslav wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="39423" end="39436" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="39449" end="39466" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q503906" start="39727" end="39745" title="Moselle Franconian" label="Moselle Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q690982" start="39767" end="39786" title="West Central German" label="West Central German"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="39974" end="39988" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="40105" end="40128" title="administrative language" label="administrative language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373405" start="42835" end="42865" title="Portuguese in Luxembourg" label="community of Portuguese origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236213" start="43236" end="43248" title="francization" label="francization"/>
<link wikidata="Q859563" start="43518" end="43531" title="secular state" label="secular state"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="43806" end="43817" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="43819" end="43826" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="43828" end="43843" title="Greek Orthodoxy" label="Greek Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="43845" end="43856" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="43858" end="43875" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="43877" end="43888" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="43890" end="43899" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="43901" end="43912" title="Mennonitism" label="Mennonitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="43918" end="43923" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="44057" end="44069" title="The World Factbook" label="CIA Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="44280" end="44299" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q748216" start="44408" end="44421" title="Eurobarometer" label="Eurobarometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4329738" start="44719" end="44753" title="Education in Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg&amp;#x27;s education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q59668" start="45474" end="45498" title="University of Luxembourg" label="University of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230957" start="45552" end="45581" title="Luxembourg School of Business" label="Luxembourg School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q590643" start="45755" end="45771" title="Miami University" label="Miami University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247727" start="45811" end="45835" title="Miami University Dolibois European Center" label="Dolibois European Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012" start="45856" end="45867" title="Differdange" label="Differdange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="45917" end="45942" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="46280" end="46302" title="Gross domestic product" label="Gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="46365" end="46380" title="Health care" label="health services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585886" start="46758" end="46792" title="National Museum of History and Art" label="National Museum of History and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555232" start="46805" end="46835" title="Luxembourg City History Museum" label="Luxembourg City History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955758" start="46849" end="46885" title="Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art" label="Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q478061" start="46899" end="46941" title="National Museum of Military History (Luxembourg)" label="National Museum of Military History (MNHM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="47005" end="47024" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q124547697" start="47030" end="47090" title="Historic city of Luxembourg city including its fortification" label="Historic city of Luxembourg city including its fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="47106" end="47112" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="47113" end="47132" title="World Heritage List" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q433898" start="47282" end="47291" title="Théo Kerg" label="Théo Kerg"/>
<link wikidata="Q928638" start="47293" end="47306" title="Joseph Kutter" label="Joseph Kutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353731" start="47311" end="47325" title="Michel Majerus" label="Michel Majerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313899" start="47344" end="47359" title="Edward Steichen" label="Edward Steichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q769103" start="47373" end="47390" title="The Family of Man" label="The Family of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="47441" end="47460" title="Memory of the World Programme" label="Memory of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q836075" start="47504" end="47512" title="Clervaux" label="Clervaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q312242" start="47532" end="47546" title="Hugo Gernsback" label="Hugo Gernsback"/>
<link wikidata="Q253384" start="47652" end="47665" title="Loretta Young" label="Loretta Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q730471" start="47742" end="47765" title="Luxembourg in the Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q171784" start="47803" end="47807" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q208243" start="47846" end="47850" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q209678" start="47945" end="47949" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q114565318" start="48000" end="48004" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q200794" start="48056" end="48060" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q203975" start="48062" end="48066" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q211942" start="48068" end="48072" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q211490" start="48074" end="48078" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q153578" start="48083" end="48087" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q203254" start="48114" end="48118" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q207889" start="48120" end="48124" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q211490" start="48126" end="48130" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q209846" start="48136" end="48140" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092641" start="48239" end="48252" title="Luxembourgers" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q114565318" start="48269" end="48273" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q129372" start="48419" end="48446" title="European Capital of Culture" label="European Capital of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="48711" end="48719" title="Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192452" start="48925" end="48934" title="Expo 2010" label="Expo 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="49398" end="49412" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384178" start="49663" end="49682" title="Stade de Luxembourg" label="Stade de Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994712" start="49696" end="49705" title="Gasperich" label="Gasperich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="49716" end="49731" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634155" start="49755" end="49771" title="national stadium" label="national stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="49931" end="49943" title="Indoor arena" label="indoor venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272946" start="49962" end="49974" title="d&amp;#x27;Coque" label="d&amp;#x27;Coque"/>
<link wikidata="Q583718" start="49976" end="49985" title="Kirchberg, Luxembourg" label="Kirchberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="50001" end="50016" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="50083" end="50091" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479164" start="50148" end="50198" title="2007 Women&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="2007 Women&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q122929173" start="50200" end="50217" title="Hess Cycling Team" label="Hess Cycling Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q47629" start="50687" end="50694" title="German cuisine" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="51082" end="51098" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin-starred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751317" start="51366" end="51382" title="Luxemburger Wort" label="Luxemburger Wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351173" start="51812" end="51828" title="Radio Luxembourg (French)" label="Radio Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q921159" start="51833" end="51842" title="RTL Group" label="RTL Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q333025" start="51875" end="51878" title="SES (company)" label="SES"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="52180" end="52185" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q917808" start="52201" end="52221" title="Academy Award for Animated Short Film" label="Animated Short Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710490" start="52242" end="52251" title="Mr Hublot" label="Mr Hublot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112340" start="52300" end="52321" title="Outline of Luxembourg" label="Outline of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842766" start="52324" end="52348" title="Disability in Luxembourg" label="Disability in Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="52750" end="52768" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="52776" end="52803" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="52835" end="52843" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17516" wikidata="Q2621185" url="?curid=17516" title="Location parameter">
<text>In statistics, a location parameter of a probability distribution is a scalar- or vector-valued parameter formula_1, which determines the &quot;location&quot; or shift of the distribution. In the literature of location parameter estimation, the probability distributions with such parameter are found to be formally defined in one of the following equivalent ways:
* either as having a probability density function or probability mass function formula_2; or
* having a cumulative distribution function formula_3; or
* being defined as resulting from the random variable transformation formula_4, where formula_5 is a random variable with a certain, possibly unknown, distribution (See also #Additive_noise).

A direct example of a location parameter is the parameter formula_6 of the normal distribution. To see this, note that the probability density function formula_7 of a normal distribution formula_8 can have the parameter formula_6 factored out and be written as: 
:formula_10
thus fulfilling the first of the definitions given above.

The above definition indicates, in the one-dimensional case, that if formula_1 is increased, the probability density or mass function shifts rigidly to the right, maintaining its exact shape.

A location parameter can also be found in families having more than one parameter, such as location–scale families. In this case, the probability density function or probability mass function will be a special case of the more general form
:formula_12
where formula_1 is the location parameter, &quot;θ&quot; represents additional parameters, and formula_14 is a function parametrized on the additional parameters.

==Definition==
Source:

Let formula_15 be any probability density function and let formula_6 and formula_17 be any given constants. Then the function

formula_18

is a probability density function.
The location family is then defined as follows:

Let formula_19 be any probability density function. Then the family of probability density functions formula_20 is called the location family with standard probability density function formula_19, where formula_22 is called the location parameter for the family.

==Additive noise==
An alternative way of thinking of location families is through the concept of additive noise. If formula_1 is a constant and &quot;W&quot; is random noise with probability density formula_24 then formula_25 has probability density formula_26 and its distribution is therefore part of a location family.

==Proofs==

For the continuous univariate case, consider a probability density function formula_27, where formula_28 is a vector of parameters. A location parameter formula_1 can be added by defining:
:formula_30
it can be proved that formula_31 is a p.d.f. by verifying if it respects the two conditions formula_32 and formula_33. formula_31 integrates to 1 because:
:formula_35
now making the variable change formula_36 and updating the integration interval accordingly yields:
:formula_37
because formula_38 is a p.d.f. by hypothesis. formula_32 follows from formula_31 sharing the same image of formula_41, which is a p.d.f. so its image is contained in formula_42.

==See also==
* Central tendency
* Location test
* Invariant estimator
* Scale parameter
* Two-moment decision models

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3" end="13" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621185" start="17" end="35" title="Location parameter" label="location parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="41" end="65" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776487" start="96" end="105" title="statistical parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="386" end="414" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q869887" start="418" end="443" title="probability mass function" label="probability mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="469" end="501" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="690" end="705" title="#Additive_noise" label="#Additive_noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="784" end="803" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664772" start="1327" end="1350" title="location–scale family" label="location–scale families"/>
<link wikidata="Q353292" start="2260" end="2274" title="additive noise" label="additive noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="2331" end="2336" title="noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q734219" start="3172" end="3188" title="Central tendency" label="Central tendency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664820" start="3191" end="3204" title="Location test" label="Location test"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059509" start="3207" end="3226" title="Invariant estimator" label="Invariant estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289366" start="3229" end="3244" title="Scale parameter" label="Scale parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858735" start="3247" end="3273" title="Two-moment decision models" label="Two-moment decision models"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17519" wikidata="Q92597" url="?curid=17519" title="Larry Wall">
<text>Larry Arnold Wall (born September 27, 1954) is an American computer programmer, linguist and author. He is best known for creating the Perl programming language and the patch tool.

==Early life and education ==
Wall grew up in Los Angeles and Bremerton, Washington. He started higher education at Seattle Pacific University in 1976, majoring in chemistry and music and later pre-medicine. After a hiatus of several years working in the university&#x27;s computing center, he graduated with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in Natural and Artificial Languages.

While in graduate school at the University of California, Berkeley, Wall and his wife were studying linguistics with the intention of finding an unwritten language, perhaps in Africa, and creating a writing system for it. They would then use this new writing system to translate various texts into the language, among them the Bible. For health reasons these plans were cancelled, and they remained in the United States, where Wall instead joined the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory after he finished graduate school.

==Career==
Wall is the author of the codice_1 Usenet client and the widely used codice_2 program. He has won the International Obfuscated C Code Contest twice and was the recipient of the first Free Software Foundation Award for the Advancement of Free Software in 1998.

Wall developed the Perl interpreter and language while working for System Development Corporation, which later became part of Burroughs and then Unisys. He is the co-author of &quot;Programming Perl&quot; (often referred to as the &quot;Camel Book&quot; and published by O&#x27;Reilly), which is the definitive resource for Perl programmers; and edited the &quot;Perl Cookbook&quot;. He then became employed full-time by O&#x27;Reilly Media to further develop Perl and write books on the subject.

Wall&#x27;s training as a linguist is apparent in his books, interviews, and lectures. He often compares Perl to a natural language and explains his decisions in Perl&#x27;s design with linguistic rationale. He also often uses linguistic terms for Perl language constructs, so instead of traditional terms such as &quot;variable&quot;, &quot;function&quot;, and &quot;accessor&quot; he sometimes says &quot;noun&quot;, &quot;verb&quot;, and &quot;topicalizer&quot;.

==Personal life==
Wall is an active member of the New Life, Church of the Nazarene. He also works with his local church for Bible Quizzing for the Nor-Cal district. 

Wall&#x27;s Christian faith has influenced some of the terminology of Perl, such as the name itself, a biblical reference to the &quot;pearl of great price&quot; (Matthew 13:46). Similar references are the function name &quot;bless&quot;, and the organization of Raku (previously known as Perl 6) design documents with categories such as &quot;apocalypse&quot; and &quot;exegesis&quot;. Wall has also alluded to his faith when speaking at conferences, including at the Perl Conference 3.0 on August 23, 1999.

==See also==

*List of computer scientists
*List of programmers
*Timeline of programming languages

==References==
==Further reading==
* Slightly Skeptical View on Larry Wall and Perl (Softpanorama Larry Wall&#x27;s page)
* &quot;Perl, the first Postmodern Language&quot;

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92597" start="0" end="17" title="Larry Wall" label="Larry Arnold Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="59" end="78" title="computer programmer" label="computer programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="135" end="139" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="140" end="160" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q300846" start="169" end="174" title="Patch (Unix)" label="patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="228" end="239" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q695417" start="244" end="265" title="Bremerton, Washington" label="Bremerton, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904851" start="298" end="324" title="Seattle Pacific University" label="Seattle Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239245" start="376" end="388" title="pre-medicine" label="pre-medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="493" end="515" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="586" end="620" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="654" end="665" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="753" end="767" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1005" end="1009" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="1010" end="1035" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339181" start="1109" end="1117" title="rn (newsreader)" label="codice_1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324042" start="1118" end="1131" title="Usenet client" label="Usenet client"/>
<link wikidata="Q300846" start="1152" end="1160" title="Patch (Unix)" label="codice_2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286259" start="1185" end="1224" title="International Obfuscated C Code Contest" label="International Obfuscated C Code Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="1266" end="1290" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389573" start="1291" end="1333" title="Award for the Advancement of Free Software" label="Award for the Advancement of Free Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663644" start="1411" end="1441" title="System Development Corporation" label="System Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q256593" start="1470" end="1479" title="Burroughs Corporation" label="Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="1489" end="1495" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506520" start="1526" end="1542" title="Programming Perl" label="Programming Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169109" start="1707" end="1720" title="Perl Cookbook" label="Perl Cookbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065097" start="1765" end="1784" title="O&amp;#x27;Reilly Media" label="O&amp;#x27;Reilly Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="2249" end="2253" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="2267" end="2271" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q933845" start="2289" end="2300" title="Topic (linguistics)" label="topicalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="2369" end="2391" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Church of the Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903135" start="2433" end="2447" title="Bible quizzing" label="Bible Quizzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="2639" end="2646" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052676" start="2739" end="2743" title="Raku (programming language)" label="Raku"/>
<link wikidata="Q696203" start="2820" end="2830" title="apocalypse" label="apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="2847" end="2855" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476620" start="3001" end="3028" title="List of computer scientists" label="List of computer scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269048" start="3030" end="3049" title="List of programmers" label="List of programmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186936" start="3051" end="3084" title="Timeline of programming languages" label="Timeline of programming languages"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17524" wikidata="Q315" url="?curid=17524" title="Language">
<text>Language is a structured system of communication that consists of grammar and vocabulary. It is the primary means by which humans convey meaning, both in spoken and signed forms, and may also be conveyed through writing. Human language is characterized by its cultural and historical diversity, with significant variations observed between cultures and across time. Human languages possess the properties of productivity and displacement, which enable the creation of an infinite number of sentences, and the ability to refer to objects, events, and ideas that are not immediately present in the discourse. The use of human language relies on social convention and is acquired through learning.

Estimates of the number of human languages in the world vary between and . Precise estimates depend on an arbitrary distinction (dichotomy) established between languages and dialects. Natural languages are spoken, signed, or both; however, any language can be encoded into secondary media using auditory, visual, or tactile stimuli – for example, writing, whistling, signing, or braille. In other words, human language is modality-independent, but written or signed language is the way to inscribe or encode the natural human speech or gestures.

Depending on philosophical perspectives regarding the definition of language and meaning, when used as a general concept, &quot;language&quot; may refer to the cognitive ability to learn and use systems of complex communication, or to describe the set of rules that makes up these systems, or the set of utterances that can be produced from those rules. All languages rely on the process of semiosis to relate signs to particular meanings. Oral, manual and tactile languages contain a phonological system that governs how symbols are used to form sequences known as words or morphemes, and a syntactic system that governs how words and morphemes are combined to form phrases and utterances.

The scientific study of language is called linguistics. Critical examinations of languages, such as philosophy of language, the relationships between language and thought, how words represent experience, etc., have been debated at least since Gorgias and Plato in ancient Greek civilization. Thinkers such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) have argued that language originated from emotions, while others like Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) have argued that languages originated from rational and logical thought. Twentieth century philosophers such as Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) argued that philosophy is really the study of language itself. Major figures in contemporary linguistics include Ferdinand de Saussure and Noam Chomsky.

Language is thought to have gradually diverged from earlier primate communication systems when early hominins acquired the ability to form a theory of mind and shared intentionality. This development is sometimes thought to have coincided with an increase in brain volume, and many linguists see the structures of language as having evolved to serve specific communicative and social functions. Language is processed in many different locations in the human brain, but especially in Broca&#x27;s and Wernicke&#x27;s areas. Humans acquire language through social interaction in early childhood, and children generally speak fluently by approximately three years old. Language and culture are codependent. Therefore, in addition to its strictly communicative uses, language has social uses such as signifying group identity, social stratification, as well as use for social grooming and entertainment.

Languages evolve and diversify over time, and the history of their evolution can be reconstructed by comparing modern languages to determine which traits their ancestral languages must have had in order for the later developmental stages to occur. A group of languages that descend from a common ancestor is known as a language family; in contrast, a language that has been demonstrated not to have any living or non-living relationship with another language is called a language isolate. There are also many unclassified languages whose relationships have not been established, and spurious languages may have not existed at all. Academic consensus holds that between 50% and 90% of languages spoken at the beginning of the 21st century will probably have become extinct by the year 2100.

== Definitions ==

The English word &quot;language&quot; derives ultimately from Proto-Indo-European &quot;tongue, speech, language&quot; through Latin , &quot;language; tongue&quot;, and Old French . The word is sometimes used to refer to codes, ciphers, and other kinds of artificially constructed communication systems such as formally defined computer languages used for computer programming. Unlike conventional human languages, a formal language in this sense is a system of signs for encoding and decoding information. This article specifically concerns the properties of natural human language as it is studied in the discipline of linguistics.

As an object of linguistic study, &quot;language&quot; has two primary meanings: an abstract concept, and a specific linguistic system, e.g. &quot;French&quot;. The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, who defined the modern discipline of linguistics, first explicitly formulated the distinction using the French word &#x27; for language as a concept, &#x27; as a specific instance of a language system, and &quot;&quot; for the concrete use of speech in a particular language.

When speaking of language as a general concept, definitions can be used which stress different aspects of the phenomenon. These definitions also entail different approaches and understandings of language, and they also inform different and often incompatible schools of linguistic theory. Debates about the nature and origin of language go back to the ancient world. Greek philosophers such as Gorgias and Plato debated the relation between words, concepts and reality. Gorgias argued that language could represent neither the objective experience nor human experience, and that communication and truth were therefore impossible. Plato maintained that communication is possible because language represents ideas and concepts that exist independently of, and prior to, language.

During the Enlightenment and its debates about human origins, it became fashionable to speculate about the origin of language. Thinkers such as Rousseau and Johann Gottfried Herder argued that language had originated in the instinctive expression of emotions, and that it was originally closer to music and poetry than to the logical expression of rational thought. Rationalist philosophers such as Kant and René Descartes held the opposite view. Around the turn of the 20th century, thinkers began to wonder about the role of language in shaping our experiences of the world – asking whether language simply reflects the objective structure of the world, or whether it creates concepts that in turn impose structure on our experience of the objective world. This led to the question of whether philosophical problems are really firstly linguistic problems. The resurgence of the view that language plays a significant role in the creation and circulation of concepts, and that the study of philosophy is essentially the study of language, is associated with what has been called the linguistic turn and philosophers such as Wittgenstein in 20th-century philosophy. These debates about language in relation to meaning and reference, cognition and consciousness remain active today.

===Mental faculty, organ or instinct===
One definition sees language primarily as the mental faculty that allows humans to undertake linguistic behaviour: to learn languages and to produce and understand utterances. This definition stresses the universality of language to all humans, and it emphasizes the biological basis for the human capacity for language as a unique development of the human brain. Proponents of the view that the drive to language acquisition is innate in humans argue that this is supported by the fact that all cognitively normal children raised in an environment where language is accessible will acquire language without formal instruction. Languages may even develop spontaneously in environments where people live or grow up together without a common language; for example, creole languages and spontaneously developed sign languages such as Nicaraguan Sign Language. This view, which can be traced back to the philosophers Kant and Descartes, understands language to be largely innate, for example, in Chomsky&#x27;s theory of universal grammar, or American philosopher Jerry Fodor&#x27;s extreme innatist theory. These kinds of definitions are often applied in studies of language within a cognitive science framework and in neurolinguistics.

===Formal symbolic system===
Another definition sees language as a formal system of signs governed by grammatical rules of combination to communicate meaning. This definition stresses that human languages can be described as closed structural systems consisting of rules that relate particular signs to particular meanings. This structuralist view of language was first introduced by Ferdinand de Saussure, and his structuralism remains foundational for many approaches to language.

Some proponents of Saussure&#x27;s view of language have advocated a formal approach that studies language structure by identifying its basic elements and then by presenting a formal account of the rules according to which the elements combine in order to form words and sentences. The main proponent of such a theory is Noam Chomsky, the originator of the generative theory of grammar, who has defined language as the construction of sentences that can be generated using transformational grammars. Chomsky considers these rules to be an innate feature of the human mind and to constitute the rudiments of what language is. By way of contrast, such transformational grammars are also commonly used in formal logic, in formal linguistics, and in applied computational linguistics. In the philosophy of language, the view of linguistic meaning as residing in the logical relations between propositions and reality was developed by philosophers such as Alfred Tarski, Bertrand Russell, and other formal logicians.

===Tool for communication===

Yet another definition sees language as a system of communication that enables humans to exchange verbal or symbolic utterances. This definition stresses the social functions of language and the fact that humans use it to express themselves and to manipulate objects in their environment. Functional theories of grammar explain grammatical structures by their communicative functions, and understand the grammatical structures of language to be the result of an adaptive process by which grammar was &quot;tailored&quot; to serve the communicative needs of its users.

This view of language is associated with the study of language in pragmatic, cognitive, and interactive frameworks, as well as in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology. Functionalist theories tend to study grammar as dynamic phenomena, as structures that are always in the process of changing as they are employed by their speakers. This view places importance on the study of linguistic typology, or the classification of languages according to structural features, as processes of grammaticalization tend to follow trajectories that are partly dependent on typology. In the philosophy of language, the view of pragmatics as being central to language and meaning is often associated with Wittgenstein&#x27;s later works and with ordinary language philosophers such as J. L. Austin, Paul Grice, John Searle, and W.O. Quine.

===Human versus animal language===
A number of features, many of which were described by Charles Hockett and called design features set human language apart from communication used by non-human animals.

Communication systems used by other animals such as bees or apes are closed systems that consist of a finite, usually very limited, number of possible ideas that can be expressed. In contrast, human language is open-ended and productive, meaning that it allows humans to produce a vast range of utterances from a finite set of elements, and to create new words and sentences. This is possible because human language is based on a dual code, in which a finite number of elements which are meaningless in themselves (e.g. sounds, letters or gestures) can be combined to form an infinite number of larger units of meaning (words and sentences). However, one study has demonstrated that an Australian bird, the chestnut-crowned babbler, is capable of using the same acoustic elements in different arrangements to create two functionally distinct vocalizations. Additionally, pied babblers have demonstrated the ability to generate two functionally distinct vocalisations composed of the same sound type, which can only be distinguished by the number of repeated elements.

Several species of animals have proved to be able to acquire forms of communication through social learning: for instance a bonobo named Kanzi learned to express itself using a set of symbolic lexigrams. Similarly, many species of birds and whales learn their songs by imitating other members of their species. However, while some animals may acquire large numbers of words and symbols, none have been able to learn as many different signs as are generally known by an average 4 year old human, nor have any acquired anything resembling the complex grammar of human language.

Human languages differ from animal communication systems in that they employ grammatical and semantic categories, such as noun and verb, present and past, which may be used to express exceedingly complex meanings. It is distinguished by the property of recursivity: for example, a noun phrase can contain another noun phrase (as in &quot;the chimpanzee]&#x27;s lips]&quot;) or a clause can contain another clause (as in &quot;[I see [the dog is running&quot;). Human language is the only known natural communication system whose adaptability may be referred to as &quot;modality independent&quot;. This means that it can be used not only for communication through one channel or medium, but through several. For example, spoken language uses the auditive modality, whereas sign languages and writing use the visual modality, and braille writing uses the tactile modality.

Human language is unusual in being able to refer to abstract concepts and to imagined or hypothetical events as well as events that took place in the past or may happen in the future. This ability to refer to events that are not at the same time or place as the speech event is called &quot;displacement&quot;, and while some animal communication systems can use displacement (such as the communication of bees that can communicate the location of sources of nectar that are out of sight), the degree to which it is used in human language is also considered unique.

==Origin==

Theories about the origin of language differ in regard to their basic assumptions about what language is. Some theories are based on the idea that language is so complex that one cannot imagine it simply appearing from nothing in its final form, but that it must have evolved from earlier pre-linguistic systems among our pre-human ancestors. These theories can be called continuity-based theories. The opposite viewpoint is that language is such a unique human trait that it cannot be compared to anything found among non-humans and that it must therefore have appeared suddenly in the transition from pre-hominids to early man. These theories can be defined as discontinuity-based. Similarly, theories based on the generative view of language pioneered by Noam Chomsky see language mostly as an innate faculty that is largely genetically encoded, whereas functionalist theories see it as a system that is largely cultural, learned through social interaction.

Continuity-based theories are held by a majority of scholars, but they vary in how they envision this development. Those who see language as being mostly innate, such as psychologist Steven Pinker, hold the precedents to be animal cognition, whereas those who see language as a socially learned tool of communication, such as psychologist Michael Tomasello, see it as having developed from animal communication in primates: either gestural or vocal communication to assist in cooperation. Other continuity-based models see language as having developed from music, a view already espoused by Rousseau, Herder, Humboldt, and Charles Darwin. A prominent proponent of this view is archaeologist Steven Mithen. Stephen Anderson states that the age of spoken languages is estimated at 60,000 to 100,000 years and that: Researchers on the evolutionary origin of language generally find it plausible to suggest that language was invented only once, and that all modern spoken languages are thus in some way related, even if that relation can no longer be recovered ... because of limitations on the methods available for reconstruction.

Because language emerged in the early prehistory of man, before the existence of any written records, its early development has left no historical traces, and it is believed that no comparable processes can be observed today. Theories that stress continuity often look at animals to see if, for example, primates display any traits that can be seen as analogous to what pre-human language must have been like. Early human fossils can be inspected for traces of physical adaptation to language use or pre-linguistic forms of symbolic behaviour. Among the signs in human fossils that may suggest linguistic abilities are: the size of the brain relative to body mass, the presence of a larynx capable of advanced sound production and the nature of tools and other manufactured artifacts.

It was mostly undisputed that pre-human australopithecines did not have communication systems significantly different from those found in great apes in general. However, a 2017 study on &quot;Ardipithecus ramidus&quot; challenges this belief. Scholarly opinions vary as to the developments since the appearance of the genus &quot;Homo&quot; some 2.5 million years ago. Some scholars assume the development of primitive language-like systems (proto-language) as early as &quot;Homo habilis&quot; (2.3 million years ago) while others place the development of primitive symbolic communication only with &quot;Homo erectus&quot; (1.8 million years ago) or &quot;Homo heidelbergensis&quot; (0.6 million years ago), and the development of language proper with anatomically modern &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; with the Upper Paleolithic revolution less than 100,000 years ago.

Chomsky is one prominent proponent of a discontinuity-based theory of human language origins. He suggests that for scholars interested in the nature of language, &quot;talk about the evolution of the language capacity is beside the point.&quot; Chomsky proposes that perhaps &quot;some random mutation took place [...] and it reorganized the brain, implanting a language organ in an otherwise primate brain.&quot; Though cautioning against taking this story literally, Chomsky insists that &quot;it may be closer to reality than many other fairy tales that are told about evolutionary processes, including language.&quot;

In March 2024, researchers reported that the beginnings of human language began about 1.6 million years ago.

==Study==

The study of language, linguistics, has been developing into a science since the first grammatical descriptions of particular languages in India more than 2000 years ago, after the development of the Brahmi script. Modern linguistics is a science that concerns itself with all aspects of language, examining it from all of the theoretical viewpoints described above.

===Subdisciplines===
The academic study of language is conducted within many different disciplinary areas and from different theoretical angles, all of which inform modern approaches to linguistics. For example, descriptive linguistics examines the grammar of single languages, theoretical linguistics develops theories on how best to conceptualize and define the nature of language based on data from the various extant human languages, sociolinguistics studies how languages are used for social purposes informing in turn the study of the social functions of language and grammatical description, neurolinguistics studies how language is processed in the human brain and allows the experimental testing of theories, computational linguistics builds on theoretical and descriptive linguistics to construct computational models of language often aimed at processing natural language or at testing linguistic hypotheses, and historical linguistics relies on grammatical and lexical descriptions of languages to trace their individual histories and reconstruct trees of language families by using the comparative method.

===Early history===
The formal study of language is often considered to have started in India with Pāṇini, the 5th century BC grammarian who formulated 3,959 rules of Sanskrit morphology. However, Sumerian scribes already studied the differences between Sumerian and Akkadian grammar around 1900 BC. Subsequent grammatical traditions developed in all of the ancient cultures that adopted writing.

In the 17th century AD, the French Port-Royal Grammarians developed the idea that the grammars of all languages were a reflection of the universal basics of thought, and therefore that grammar was universal. In the 18th century, the first use of the comparative method by British philologist and expert on ancient India William Jones sparked the rise of comparative linguistics. The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt. Early in the 20th century, Ferdinand de Saussure introduced the idea of language as a static system of interconnected units, defined through the oppositions between them.

By introducing a distinction between diachronic and synchronic analyses of language, he laid the foundation of the modern discipline of linguistics. Saussure also introduced several basic dimensions of linguistic analysis that are still fundamental in many contemporary linguistic theories, such as the distinctions between syntagm and paradigm, and the Langue-parole distinction, distinguishing language as an abstract system (&quot;langue&quot;), from language as a concrete manifestation of this system (&quot;parole&quot;).

=== Modern linguistics ===
In the 1960s, Noam Chomsky formulated the generative theory of language. According to this theory, the most basic form of language is a set of syntactic rules that is universal for all humans and which underlies the grammars of all human languages. This set of rules is called Universal Grammar; for Chomsky, describing it is the primary objective of the discipline of linguistics. Thus, he considered that the grammars of individual languages are only of importance to linguistics insofar as they allow us to deduce the universal underlying rules from which the observable linguistic variability is generated.

In opposition to the formal theories of the generative school, functional theories of language propose that since language is fundamentally a tool, its structures are best analyzed and understood by reference to their functions. Formal theories of grammar seek to define the different elements of language and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or operations, while functional theories seek to define the functions performed by language and then relate them to the linguistic elements that carry them out. The framework of cognitive linguistics interprets language in terms of the concepts (which are sometimes universal, and sometimes specific to a particular language) which underlie its forms. Cognitive linguistics is primarily concerned with how the mind creates meaning through language.

==Physiological and neural architecture of language and speech==
Speaking is the default modality for language in all cultures. The production of spoken language depends on sophisticated capacities for controlling the lips, tongue and other components of the vocal apparatus, the ability to acoustically decode speech sounds, and the neurological apparatus required for acquiring and producing language. The study of the genetic bases for human language is at an early stage: the only gene that has definitely been implicated in language production is FOXP2, which may cause a kind of congenital language disorder if affected by mutations.

===The brain===
The brain is the coordinating center of all linguistic activity; it controls both the production of linguistic cognition and of meaning and the mechanics of speech production. Nonetheless, our knowledge of the neurological bases for language is quite limited, though it has advanced considerably with the use of modern imaging techniques. The discipline of linguistics dedicated to studying the neurological aspects of language is called neurolinguistics.

Early work in neurolinguistics involved the study of language in people with brain lesions, to see how lesions in specific areas affect language and speech. In this way, neuroscientists in the 19th century discovered that two areas in the brain are crucially implicated in language processing. The first area is Wernicke&#x27;s area, which is in the posterior section of the superior temporal gyrus in the dominant cerebral hemisphere. People with a lesion in this area of the brain develop receptive aphasia, a condition in which there is a major impairment of language comprehension, while speech retains a natural-sounding rhythm and a relatively normal sentence structure. The second area is Broca&#x27;s area, in the posterior inferior frontal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere. People with a lesion to this area develop expressive aphasia, meaning that they know what they want to say, they just cannot get it out. They are typically able to understand what is being said to them, but unable to speak fluently. Other symptoms that may be present in expressive aphasia include problems with word repetition. The condition affects both spoken and written language. Those with this aphasia also exhibit ungrammatical speech and show inability to use syntactic information to determine the meaning of sentences. Both expressive and receptive aphasia also affect the use of sign language, in analogous ways to how they affect speech, with expressive aphasia causing signers to sign slowly and with incorrect grammar, whereas a signer with receptive aphasia will sign fluently, but make little sense to others and have difficulties comprehending others&#x27; signs. This shows that the impairment is specific to the ability to use language, not to the physiology used for speech production.

With technological advances in the late 20th century, neurolinguists have also incorporated non-invasive techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electrophysiology to study language processing in individuals without impairments.

===Anatomy of speech===

Spoken language relies on human physical ability to produce sound, which is a longitudinal wave propagated through the air at a frequency capable of vibrating the ear drum. This ability depends on the physiology of the human speech organs. These organs consist of the lungs, the voice box (larynx), and the upper vocal tract – the throat, the mouth, and the nose. By controlling the different parts of the speech apparatus, the airstream can be manipulated to produce different speech sounds.

The sound of speech can be analyzed into a combination of segmental and suprasegmental elements. The segmental elements are those that follow each other in sequences, which are usually represented by distinct letters in alphabetic scripts, such as the Roman script. In free flowing speech, there are no clear boundaries between one segment and the next, nor usually are there any audible pauses between them. Segments therefore are distinguished by their distinct sounds which are a result of their different articulations, and can be either vowels or consonants. Suprasegmental phenomena encompass such elements as stress, phonation type, voice timbre, and prosody or intonation, all of which may have effects across multiple segments.

Consonants and vowel segments combine to form syllables, which in turn combine to form utterances; these can be distinguished phonetically as the space between two inhalations. Acoustically, these different segments are characterized by different formant structures, that are visible in a spectrogram of the recorded sound wave. Formants are the amplitude peaks in the frequency spectrum of a specific sound.

Vowels are those sounds that have no audible friction caused by the narrowing or obstruction of some part of the upper vocal tract. They vary in quality according to the degree of lip aperture and the placement of the tongue within the oral cavity. Vowels are called &quot;close&quot; when the lips are relatively closed, as in the pronunciation of the vowel (English &quot;ee&quot;), or &quot;open&quot; when the lips are relatively open, as in the vowel (English &quot;ah&quot;). If the tongue is located towards the back of the mouth, the quality changes, creating vowels such as (English &quot;oo&quot;). The quality also changes depending on whether the lips are rounded as opposed to unrounded, creating distinctions such as that between (unrounded front vowel such as English &quot;ee&quot;) and (rounded front vowel such as German &quot;ü&quot;).

Consonants are those sounds that have audible friction or closure at some point within the upper vocal tract. Consonant sounds vary by place of articulation, i.e. the place in the vocal tract where the airflow is obstructed, commonly at the lips, teeth, alveolar ridge, palate, velum, uvula, or glottis. Each place of articulation produces a different set of consonant sounds, which are further distinguished by manner of articulation, or the kind of friction, whether full closure, in which case the consonant is called &quot;occlusive&quot; or &quot;stop&quot;, or different degrees of aperture creating &quot;fricatives&quot; and &quot;approximants&quot;. Consonants can also be either &quot;voiced or unvoiced&quot;, depending on whether the vocal cords are set in vibration by airflow during the production of the sound. Voicing is what separates English in &quot;bus&quot; (unvoiced sibilant) from in &quot;buzz&quot; (voiced sibilant).

Some speech sounds, both vowels and consonants, involve release of air flow through the nasal cavity, and these are called &quot;nasals&quot; or &quot;nasalized&quot; sounds. Other sounds are defined by the way the tongue moves within the mouth such as the l-sounds (called &quot;laterals&quot;, because the air flows along both sides of the tongue), and the r-sounds (called &quot;rhotics&quot;).

By using these speech organs, humans can produce hundreds of distinct sounds: some appear very often in the world&#x27;s languages, whereas others are much more common in certain language families, language areas, or even specific to a single language.

==Modality==
Human languages display considerable plasticity in their deployment of two fundamental modes: oral (speech and mouthing) and manual (sign and gesture). For example, it is common for oral language to be accompanied by gesture, and for sign language to be accompanied by mouthing. In addition, some language communities use both modes to convey lexical or grammatical meaning, each mode complementing the other. Such bimodal use of language is especially common in genres such as story-telling (with Plains Indian Sign Language and Australian Aboriginal sign languages used alongside oral language, for example), but also occurs in mundane conversation. For instance, many Australian languages have a rich set of case suffixes that provide details about the instrument used to perform an action. Others lack such grammatical precision in the oral mode, but supplement it with gesture to convey that information in the sign mode. In Iwaidja, for example, &#x27;he went out for fish using a torch&#x27; is spoken as simply &quot;he-hunted fish torch&quot;, but the word for &#x27;torch&#x27; is accompanied by a gesture indicating that it was held. In another example, the ritual language Damin had a heavily reduced oral vocabulary of only a few hundred words, each of which was very general in meaning, but which were supplemented by gesture for greater precision (e.g., the single word for fish, &quot;l*i&quot;, was accompanied by a gesture to indicate the kind of fish).

Secondary modes of language, by which a fundamental mode is conveyed in a different medium, include writing (including braille), sign (in manually coded language), whistling and drumming. Tertiary modes – such as semaphore, Morse code and spelling alphabets – convey the secondary mode of writing in a different medium. For some extinct languages that are maintained for ritual or liturgical purposes, writing may be the primary mode, with speech secondary.

==Structure==
When described as a system of symbolic communication, language is traditionally seen as consisting of three parts: signs, meanings, and a code connecting signs with their meanings. The study of the process of semiosis, how signs and meanings are combined, used, and interpreted is called semiotics. Signs can be composed of sounds, gestures, letters, or symbols, depending on whether the language is spoken, signed, or written, and they can be combined into complex signs, such as words and phrases. When used in communication, a sign is encoded and transmitted by a sender through a channel to a receiver who decodes it.
Some of the properties that define human language as opposed to other communication systems are: the arbitrariness of the linguistic sign, meaning that there is no predictable connection between a linguistic sign and its meaning; the duality of the linguistic system, meaning that linguistic structures are built by combining elements into larger structures that can be seen as layered, e.g. how sounds build words and words build phrases; the discreteness of the elements of language, meaning that the elements out of which linguistic signs are constructed are discrete units, e.g. sounds and words, that can be distinguished from each other and rearranged in different patterns; and the productivity of the linguistic system, meaning that the finite number of linguistic elements can be combined into a theoretically infinite number of combinations.

The rules by which signs can be combined to form words and phrases are called syntax or grammar. The meaning that is connected to individual signs, morphemes, words, phrases, and texts is called semantics. The division of language into separate but connected systems of sign and meaning goes back to the first linguistic studies of de Saussure and is now used in almost all branches of linguistics.

===Semantics===

Languages express meaning by relating a sign form to a meaning, or its content. Sign forms must be something that can be perceived, for example, in sounds, images, or gestures, and then related to a specific meaning by social convention. Because the basic relation of meaning for most linguistic signs is based on social convention, linguistic signs can be considered arbitrary, in the sense that the convention is established socially and historically, rather than by means of a natural relation between a specific sign form and its meaning.

Thus, languages must have a vocabulary of signs related to specific meaning. The English sign &quot;dog&quot; denotes, for example, a member of the species &quot;Canis familiaris&quot;. In a language, the array of arbitrary signs connected to specific meanings is called the lexicon, and a single sign connected to a meaning is called a lexeme. Not all meanings in a language are represented by single words. Often, semantic concepts are embedded in the morphology or syntax of the language in the form of grammatical categories.

All languages contain the semantic structure of predication: a structure that predicates a property, state, or action. Traditionally, semantics has been understood to be the study of how speakers and interpreters assign truth values to statements, so that meaning is understood to be the process by which a predicate can be said to be true or false about an entity, e.g. &quot;[x [is y]]&quot; or &quot;[x [does y]]&quot;. Recently, this model of semantics has been complemented with more dynamic models of meaning that incorporate shared knowledge about the context in which a sign is interpreted into the production of meaning. Such models of meaning are explored in the field of pragmatics.

===Sounds and symbols===

Depending on modality, language structure can be based on systems of sounds (speech), gestures (sign languages), or graphic or tactile symbols (writing). The ways in which languages use sounds or signs to construct meaning are studied in phonology.

Sounds as part of a linguistic system are called phonemes. Phonemes are abstract units of sound, defined as the smallest units in a language that can serve to distinguish between the meaning of a pair of minimally different words, a so-called minimal pair. In English, for example, the words &quot;bat&quot; and &quot;pat&quot; form a minimal pair, in which the distinction between and differentiates the two words, which have different meanings. However, each language contrasts sounds in different ways. For example, in a language that does not distinguish between voiced and unvoiced consonants, the sounds and (if they both occur) could be considered a single phoneme, and consequently, the two pronunciations would have the same meaning. Similarly, the English language does not distinguish phonemically between aspirated and non-aspirated pronunciations of consonants, as many other languages like Korean and Hindi do: the unaspirated in &quot;spin&quot; and the aspirated in &quot;pin&quot; are considered to be merely different ways of pronouncing the same phoneme (such variants of a single phoneme are called allophones), whereas in Mandarin Chinese, the same difference in pronunciation distinguishes between the words &#x27;crouch&#x27; and &#x27;eight&#x27; (the accent above the á means that the vowel is pronounced with a high tone).

All spoken languages have phonemes of at least two different categories, vowels and consonants, that can be combined to form syllables. As well as segments such as consonants and vowels, some languages also use sound in other ways to convey meaning. Many languages, for example, use stress, pitch, duration, and tone to distinguish meaning. Because these phenomena operate outside of the level of single segments, they are called suprasegmental. Some languages have only a few phonemes, for example, Rotokas and Pirahã language with 11 and 10 phonemes respectively, whereas languages like Taa may have as many as 141 phonemes. In sign languages, the equivalent to phonemes (formerly called cheremes) are defined by the basic elements of gestures, such as hand shape, orientation, location, and motion, which correspond to manners of articulation in spoken language.

Writing systems represent language using visual symbols, which may or may not correspond to the sounds of spoken language. The Latin alphabet (and those on which it is based or that have been derived from it) was originally based on the representation of single sounds, so that words were constructed from letters that generally denote a single consonant or vowel in the structure of the word. In syllabic scripts, such as the Inuktitut syllabary, each sign represents a whole syllable. In logographic scripts, each sign represents an entire word, and will generally bear no relation to the sound of that word in spoken language.

Because all languages have a very large number of words, no purely logographic scripts are known to exist. Written language represents the way spoken sounds and words follow one after another by arranging symbols according to a pattern that follows a certain direction. The direction used in a writing system is entirely arbitrary and established by convention. Some writing systems use the horizontal axis (left to right as the Latin script or right to left as the Arabic script), while others such as traditional Chinese writing use the vertical dimension (from top to bottom). A few writing systems use opposite directions for alternating lines, and others, such as the ancient Maya script, can be written in either direction and rely on graphic cues to show the reader the direction of reading.

In order to represent the sounds of the world&#x27;s languages in writing, linguists have developed the International Phonetic Alphabet, designed to represent all of the discrete sounds that are known to contribute to meaning in human languages.

===Grammar===

Grammar is the study of how meaningful elements called &quot;morphemes&quot; within a language can be combined into utterances. Morphemes can either be &quot;free&quot; or &quot;bound&quot;. If they are free to be moved around within an utterance, they are usually called &quot;words&quot;, and if they are bound to other words or morphemes, they are called affixes. The way in which meaningful elements can be combined within a language is governed by rules. The study of the rules for the internal structure of words are called morphology. The rules of the internal structure of phrases and sentences are called &quot;syntax&quot;.

====Grammatical categories====

Grammar can be described as a system of categories and a set of rules that determine how categories combine to form different aspects of meaning. Languages differ widely in whether they are encoded through the use of categories or lexical units. However, several categories are so common as to be nearly universal. Such universal categories include the encoding of the grammatical relations of participants and predicates by grammatically distinguishing between their relations to a predicate, the encoding of temporal and spatial relations on predicates, and a system of grammatical person governing reference to and distinction between speakers and addressees and those about whom they are speaking.

====Word classes====
Languages organize their parts of speech into classes according to their functions and positions relative to other parts. All languages, for instance, make a basic distinction between a group of words that prototypically denotes things and concepts and a group of words that prototypically denotes actions and events. The first group, which includes English words such as &quot;dog&quot; and &quot;song&quot;, are usually called nouns. The second, which includes &quot;think&quot; and &quot;sing&quot;, are called verbs. Another common category is the adjective: words that describe properties or qualities of nouns, such as &quot;red&quot; or &quot;big&quot;. Word classes can be &quot;open&quot; if new words can continuously be added to the class, or relatively &quot;closed&quot; if there is a fixed number of words in a class. In English, the class of pronouns is closed, whereas the class of adjectives is open, since an infinite number of adjectives can be constructed from verbs (e.g. &quot;saddened&quot;) or nouns (e.g. with the -like suffix, as in &quot;noun-like&quot;). In other languages such as Korean, the situation is the opposite, and new pronouns can be constructed, whereas the number of adjectives is fixed.

Word classes also carry out differing functions in grammar. Prototypically, verbs are used to construct predicates, while nouns are used as arguments of predicates. In a sentence such as &quot;Sally runs&quot;, the predicate is &quot;runs&quot;, because it is the word that predicates a specific state about its argument &quot;Sally&quot;. Some verbs such as &quot;curse&quot; can take two arguments, e.g. &quot;Sally cursed John&quot;. A predicate that can only take a single argument is called &quot;intransitive&quot;, while a predicate that can take two arguments is called &quot;transitive&quot;.

Many other word classes exist in different languages, such as conjunctions like &quot;and&quot; that serve to join two sentences, articles that introduce a noun, interjections such as &quot;wow!&quot;, or ideophones like &quot;splash&quot; that mimic the sound of some event. Some languages have positionals that describe the spatial position of an event or entity. Many languages have classifiers that identify countable nouns as belonging to a particular type or having a particular shape. For instance, in Japanese, the general noun classifier for humans is &quot;nin&quot; (人), and it is used for counting humans, whatever they are called:

:&quot;san-nin no gakusei&quot; (三人の学生) lit. &quot;3 human-classifier of student&quot; – three students
For trees, it would be:
:&quot;san-bon no ki&quot; (三本の木) lit. &quot;3 classifier-for-long-objects of tree&quot; – three trees

====Morphology====
In linguistics, the study of the internal structure of complex words and the processes by which words are formed is called morphology. In most languages, it is possible to construct complex words that are built of several morphemes. For instance, the English word &quot;unexpected&quot; can be analyzed as being composed of the three morphemes &quot;un-&quot;, &quot;expect&quot; and &quot;-ed&quot;.

Morphemes can be classified according to whether they are independent morphemes, so-called roots, or whether they can only co-occur attached to other morphemes. These bound morphemes or affixes can be classified according to their position in relation to the root: &quot;prefixes&quot; precede the root, suffixes follow the root, and infixes are inserted in the middle of a root. Affixes serve to modify or elaborate the meaning of the root. Some languages change the meaning of words by changing the phonological structure of a word, for example, the English word &quot;run&quot;, which in the past tense is &quot;ran&quot;. This process is called &quot;ablaut&quot;. Furthermore, morphology distinguishes between the process of inflection, which modifies or elaborates on a word, and the process of derivation, which creates a new word from an existing one. In English, the verb &quot;sing&quot; has the inflectional forms &quot;singing&quot; and &quot;sung&quot;, which are both verbs, and the derivational form &quot;singer&quot;, which is a noun derived from the verb with the agentive suffix &quot;-er&quot;.

Languages differ widely in how much they rely on morphological processes of word formation. In some languages, for example, Chinese, there are no morphological processes, and all grammatical information is encoded syntactically by forming strings of single words. This type of morpho-syntax is often called isolating, or analytic, because there is almost a full correspondence between a single word and a single aspect of meaning. Most languages have words consisting of several morphemes, but they vary in the degree to which morphemes are discrete units. In many languages, notably in most Indo-European languages, single morphemes may have several distinct meanings that cannot be analyzed into smaller segments. For example, in Latin, the word , or &quot;good&quot;, consists of the root , meaning &quot;good&quot;, and the suffix -, which indicates masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case. These languages are called &quot;fusional languages&quot;, because several meanings may be fused into a single morpheme. The opposite of fusional languages are agglutinative languages which construct words by stringing morphemes together in chains, but with each morpheme as a discrete semantic unit. An example of such a language is Turkish, where for example, the word , or &quot;from your houses&quot;, consists of the morphemes, with the meanings &quot;house-plural-your-from&quot;. The languages that rely on morphology to the greatest extent are traditionally called polysynthetic languages. They may express the equivalent of an entire English sentence in a single word. For example, in Persian the single word means &quot;I didn&#x27;t understand it&quot; consisting of morphemes with the meanings, &quot;negation.understand.past.I.it&quot;. As another example with more complexity, in the Yupik word , which means &quot;He had not yet said again that he was going to hunt reindeer&quot;, the word consists of the morphemes with the meanings, &quot;reindeer-hunt-future-say-negation-again-third.person.singular.indicative&quot;, and except for the morpheme (&quot;reindeer&quot;) none of the other morphemes can appear in isolation.

Many languages use morphology to cross-reference words within a sentence. This is sometimes called &quot;agreement&quot;. For example, in many Indo-European languages, adjectives must cross-reference the noun they modify in terms of number, case, and gender, so that the Latin adjective , or &quot;good&quot;, is inflected to agree with a noun that is masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case. In many polysynthetic languages, verbs cross-reference their subjects and objects. In these types of languages, a single verb may include information that would require an entire sentence in English. For example, in the Basque phrase , or &quot;you saw me&quot;, the past tense auxiliary verb (similar to English &quot;do&quot;) agrees with both the subject (you) expressed by the - prefix, and with the object (me) expressed by the – suffix. The sentence could be directly transliterated as &quot;see you-did-me&quot;

====Syntax====

Another way in which languages convey meaning is through the order of words within a sentence. The grammatical rules for how to produce new sentences from words that are already known is called syntax. The syntactical rules of a language determine why a sentence in English such as &quot;I love you&quot; is meaningful, but &quot;*love you I&quot; is not. Syntactical rules determine how word order and sentence structure is constrained, and how those constraints contribute to meaning. For example, in English, the two sentences &quot;the slaves were cursing the master&quot; and &quot;the master was cursing the slaves&quot; mean different things, because the role of the grammatical subject is encoded by the noun being in front of the verb, and the role of object is encoded by the noun appearing after the verb. Conversely, in Latin, both &quot;Dominus servos vituperabat&quot; and &quot;Servos vituperabat dominus&quot; mean &quot;the master was reprimanding the slaves&quot;, because &quot;servos&quot;, or &quot;slaves&quot;, is in the accusative case, showing that they are the grammatical object of the sentence, and &quot;dominus&quot;, or &quot;master&quot;, is in the nominative case, showing that he is the subject.

Latin uses morphology to express the distinction between subject and object, whereas English uses word order. Another example of how syntactic rules contribute to meaning is the rule of inverse word order in questions, which exists in many languages. This rule explains why when in English, the phrase &quot;John is talking to Lucy&quot; is turned into a question, it becomes &quot;Who is John talking to?&quot;, and not &quot;John is talking to who?&quot;. The latter example may be used as a way of placing special emphasis on &quot;who&quot;, thereby slightly altering the meaning of the question. Syntax also includes the rules for how complex sentences are structured by grouping words together in units, called phrases, that can occupy different places in a larger syntactic structure. Sentences can be described as consisting of phrases connected in a tree structure, connecting the phrases to each other at different levels. To the right is a graphic representation of the syntactic analysis of the English sentence &quot;the cat sat on the mat&quot;. The sentence is analyzed as being constituted by a noun phrase, a verb, and a prepositional phrase; the prepositional phrase is further divided into a preposition and a noun phrase, and the noun phrases consist of an article and a noun.

The reason sentences can be seen as being composed of phrases is because each phrase would be moved around as a single element if syntactic operations were carried out. For example, &quot;the cat&quot; is one phrase, and &quot;on the mat&quot; is another, because they would be treated as single units if a decision was made to emphasize the location by moving forward the prepositional phrase: &quot;[And] on the mat, the cat sat&quot;. There are many different formalist and functionalist frameworks that propose theories for describing syntactic structures, based on different assumptions about what language is and how it should be described. Each of them would analyze a sentence such as this in a different manner.

===Typology and universals===
Languages can be classified in relation to their grammatical types. Languages that belong to different families nonetheless often have features in common, and these shared features tend to correlate. For example, languages can be classified on the basis of their basic word order, the relative order of the verb, and its constituents in a normal indicative sentence. In English, the basic order is SVO (subject–verb–object): &quot;The snake(S) bit(V) the man(O)&quot;, whereas for example, the corresponding sentence in the Australian language Gamilaraay would be &quot;d̪uyugu n̪ama d̪ayn yiːy&quot; (snake man bit), SOV. Word order type is relevant as a typological parameter, because basic word order type corresponds with other syntactic parameters, such as the relative order of nouns and adjectives, or of the use of prepositions or postpositions. Such correlations are called implicational universals. For example, most (but not all) languages that are of the SOV type have postpositions rather than prepositions, and have adjectives before nouns.

All languages structure sentences into Subject, Verb, and Object, but languages differ in the way they classify the relations between actors and actions. English uses the nominative-accusative word typology: in English transitive clauses, the subjects of both intransitive sentences (&quot;I run&quot;) and transitive sentences (&quot;I love you&quot;) are treated in the same way, shown here by the nominative pronoun &quot;I&quot;. Some languages, called ergative, Gamilaraay among them, distinguish instead between Agents and Patients. In ergative languages, the single participant in an intransitive sentence, such as &quot;I run&quot;, is treated the same as the patient in a transitive sentence, giving the equivalent of &quot;me run&quot;. Only in transitive sentences would the equivalent of the pronoun &quot;I&quot; be used. In this way the semantic roles can map onto the grammatical relations in different ways, grouping an intransitive subject either with Agents (accusative type) or Patients (ergative type) or even making each of the three roles differently, which is called the tripartite type.

The shared features of languages which belong to the same typological class type may have arisen completely independently. Their co-occurrence might be due to universal laws governing the structure of natural languages, &quot;language universals&quot;, or they might be the result of languages evolving convergent solutions to the recurring communicative problems that humans use language to solve.

==Social contexts of use and transmission==

While humans have the ability to learn any language, they only do so if they grow up in an environment in which language exists and is used by others. Language is therefore dependent on communities of speakers in which children learn language from their elders and peers and themselves transmit language to their own children. Languages are used by those who speak them to communicate and to solve a plethora of social tasks. Many aspects of language use can be seen to be adapted specifically to these purposes. Owing to the way in which language is transmitted between generations and within communities, language perpetually changes, diversifying into new languages or converging due to language contact. The process is similar to the process of evolution, where the process of descent with modification leads to the formation of a phylogenetic tree.

However, languages differ from biological organisms in that they readily incorporate elements from other languages through the process of diffusion, as speakers of different languages come into contact. Humans also frequently speak more than one language, acquiring their first language or languages as children, or learning new languages as they grow up. Because of the increased language contact in the globalizing world, many small languages are becoming endangered as their speakers shift to other languages that afford the possibility to participate in larger and more influential speech communities.

===Usage and meaning===
When studying the way in which words and signs are used, it is often the case that words have different meanings, depending on the social context of use. An important example of this is the process called deixis, which describes the way in which certain words refer to entities through their relation between a specific point in time and space when the word is uttered. Such words are, for example, the word, &quot;I&quot; (which designates the person speaking), &quot;now&quot; (which designates the moment of speaking), and &quot;here&quot; (which designates the position of speaking). Signs also change their meanings over time, as the conventions governing their usage gradually change. The study of how the meaning of linguistic expressions changes depending on context is called pragmatics. Deixis is an important part of the way that we use language to point out entities in the world. Pragmatics is concerned with the ways in which language use is patterned and how these patterns contribute to meaning. For example, in all languages, linguistic expressions can be used not just to transmit information, but to perform actions. Certain actions are made only through language, but nonetheless have tangible effects, e.g. the act of &quot;naming&quot;, which creates a new name for some entity, or the act of &quot;pronouncing someone man and wife&quot;, which creates a social contract of marriage. These types of acts are called speech acts, although they can also be carried out through writing or hand signing.

The form of linguistic expression often does not correspond to the meaning that it actually has in a social context. For example, if at a dinner table a person asks, &quot;Can you reach the salt?&quot;, that is, in fact, not a question about the length of the arms of the one being addressed, but a request to pass the salt across the table. This meaning is implied by the context in which it is spoken; these kinds of effects of meaning are called conversational implicatures. These social rules for which ways of using language are considered appropriate in certain situations and how utterances are to be understood in relation to their context vary between communities, and learning them is a large part of acquiring communicative competence in a language.

===Acquisition===

All healthy, normally developing human beings learn to use language. Children acquire the language or languages used around them: whichever languages they receive sufficient exposure to during childhood. The development is essentially the same for children acquiring sign or oral languages. This learning process is referred to as first-language acquisition, since unlike many other kinds of learning, it requires no direct teaching or specialized study. In &quot;The Descent of Man&quot;, naturalist Charles Darwin called this process &quot;an instinctive tendency to acquire an art&quot;.
First language acquisition proceeds in a fairly regular sequence, though there is a wide degree of variation in the timing of particular stages among normally developing infants. Studies published in 2013 have indicated that unborn fetuses are capable of language acquisition to some degree. From birth, newborns respond more readily to human speech than to other sounds. Around one month of age, babies appear to be able to distinguish between different speech sounds. Around six months of age, a child will begin babbling, producing the speech sounds or handshapes of the languages used around them. Words appear around the age of 12 to 18 months; the average vocabulary of an eighteen-month-old child is around 50 words. A child&#x27;s first utterances are holophrases (literally &quot;whole-sentences&quot;), utterances that use just one word to communicate some idea. Several months after a child begins producing words, the child will produce two-word utterances, and within a few more months will begin to produce telegraphic speech, or short sentences that are less grammatically complex than adult speech, but that do show regular syntactic structure. From roughly the age of three to five years, a child&#x27;s ability to speak or sign is refined to the point that it resembles adult language.

Acquisition of second and additional languages can come at any age, through exposure in daily life or courses. Children learning a second language are more likely to achieve native-like fluency than adults, but in general, it is very rare for someone speaking a second language to pass completely for a native speaker. An important difference between first language acquisition and additional language acquisition is that the process of additional language acquisition is influenced by languages that the learner already knows.

===Culture===
Languages, understood as the particular set of speech norms of a particular community, are also a part of the larger culture of the community that speaks them. Languages differ not only in pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar, but also through having different &quot;cultures of speaking.&quot; Humans use language as a way of signalling identity with one cultural group as well as difference from others. Even among speakers of one language, several different ways of using the language exist, and each is used to signal affiliation with particular subgroups within a larger culture. Linguists and anthropologists, particularly sociolinguists, ethnolinguists, and linguistic anthropologists have specialized in studying how ways of speaking vary between speech communities.

Linguists use the term &quot;varieties&quot; to refer to the different ways of speaking a language. This term includes geographically or socioculturally defined dialects as well as the jargons or styles of subcultures. Linguistic anthropologists and sociologists of language define communicative style as the ways that language is used and understood within a particular culture.

Because norms for language use are shared by members of a specific group, communicative style also becomes a way of displaying and constructing group identity. Linguistic differences may become salient markers of divisions between social groups, for example, speaking a language with a particular accent may imply membership of an ethnic minority or social class, one&#x27;s area of origin, or status as a second language speaker. These kinds of differences are not part of the linguistic system, but are an important part of how people use language as a social tool for constructing groups.

However, many languages also have grammatical conventions that signal the social position of the speaker in relation to others through the use of registers that are related to social hierarchies or divisions. In many languages, there are stylistic or even grammatical differences between the ways men and women speak, between age groups, or between social classes, just as some languages employ different words depending on who is listening. For example, in the Australian language Dyirbal, a married man must use a special set of words to refer to everyday items when speaking in the presence of his mother-in-law. Some cultures, for example, have elaborate systems of &quot;social deixis&quot;, or systems of signalling social distance through linguistic means. In English, social deixis is shown mostly through distinguishing between addressing some people by first name and others by surname, and in titles such as &quot;Mrs.&quot;, &quot;boy&quot;, &quot;Doctor&quot;, or &quot;Your Honor&quot;, but in other languages, such systems may be highly complex and codified in the entire grammar and vocabulary of the language. For instance, in languages of east Asia such as Thai, Burmese, and Javanese, different words are used according to whether a speaker is addressing someone of higher or lower rank than oneself in a ranking system with animals and children ranking the lowest and gods and members of royalty as the highest.

===Writing, literacy and technology===
Throughout history a number of different ways of representing language in graphic media have been invented. These are called writing systems.

The use of writing has made language even more useful to humans. It makes it possible to store large amounts of information outside of the human body and retrieve it again, and it allows communication across physical distances and timespans that would otherwise be impossible. Many languages conventionally employ different genres, styles, and registers in written and spoken language, and in some communities, writing traditionally takes place in an entirely different language than the one spoken. There is some evidence that the use of writing also has effects on the cognitive development of humans, perhaps because acquiring literacy generally requires explicit and formal education.

The invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late 4th millennium BC. The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered to be the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400 to 3200 BC with the earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC. It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention; however, it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian, or was a case of cultural diffusion. A similar debate exists for the Chinese script, which developed around 1200 BC. The pre-Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems (including among others Olmec and Maya scripts) are generally believed to have had independent origins.

===Change===
All languages change as speakers adopt or invent new ways of speaking and pass them on to other members of their speech community. Language change happens at all levels from the phonological level to the levels of vocabulary, morphology, syntax, and discourse. Even though language change is often initially evaluated negatively by speakers of the language who often consider changes to be &quot;decay&quot; or a sign of slipping norms of language usage, it is natural and inevitable.

Changes may affect specific sounds or the entire phonological system. Sound change can consist of the replacement of one speech sound or phonetic feature by another, the complete loss of the affected sound, or even the introduction of a new sound in a place where there had been none. Sound changes can be &quot;conditioned&quot; in which case a sound is changed only if it occurs in the vicinity of certain other sounds. Sound change is usually assumed to be &quot;regular&quot;, which means that it is expected to apply mechanically whenever its structural conditions are met, irrespective of any non-phonological factors. On the other hand, sound changes can sometimes be &quot;sporadic&quot;, affecting only one particular word or a few words, without any seeming regularity. Sometimes a simple change triggers a chain shift in which the entire phonological system is affected. This happened in the Germanic languages when the sound change known as Grimm&#x27;s law affected all the stop consonants in the system. The original consonant * became /b/ in the Germanic languages, the previous * in turn became /p/, and the previous * became /f/. The same process applied to all stop consonants and explains why Italic languages such as Latin have &quot;p&quot; in words like pater&quot; and pisces&quot;, whereas Germanic languages, like English, have father&quot; and fish&quot;.

Another example is the Great Vowel Shift in English, which is the reason that the spelling of English vowels do not correspond well to their current pronunciation. This is because the vowel shift brought the already established orthography out of synchronization with pronunciation. Another source of sound change is the erosion of words as pronunciation gradually becomes increasingly indistinct and shortens words, leaving out syllables or sounds. This kind of change caused Latin &quot;mea domina&quot; to eventually become the French &quot;madame&quot; and American English &quot;ma&#x27;am&quot;.

Change also happens in the grammar of languages as discourse patterns such as idioms or particular constructions become grammaticalized. This frequently happens when words or morphemes erode and the grammatical system is unconsciously rearranged to compensate for the lost element. For example, in some varieties of Caribbean Spanish the final /s/ has eroded away. Since Standard Spanish uses final /s/ in the morpheme marking the second person subject &quot;you&quot; in verbs, the Caribbean varieties now have to express the second person using the pronoun &quot;tú&quot;. This means that the sentence &quot;what&#x27;s your name&quot; is &quot;¿como te llamas?&quot; in Standard Spanish, but in Caribbean Spanish. The simple sound change has affected both morphology and syntax. Another common cause of grammatical change is the gradual petrification of idioms into new grammatical forms, for example, the way the English &quot;going to&quot; construction lost its aspect of movement and in some varieties of English has almost become a full-fledged future tense (e.g. &quot;I&#x27;m gonna&quot;).

Language change may be motivated by &quot;language internal&quot; factors, such as changes in pronunciation motivated by certain sounds being difficult to distinguish aurally or to produce, or through patterns of change that cause some rare types of constructions to drift towards more common types. Other causes of language change are social, such as when certain pronunciations become emblematic of membership in certain groups, such as social classes, or with ideologies, and therefore are adopted by those who wish to identify with those groups or ideas. In this way, issues of identity and politics can have profound effects on language structure.

===Contact===

One source of language change is contact and the resulting diffusion of linguistic traits between languages. Language contact occurs when speakers of two or more languages or varieties interact on a regular basis. Multilingualism is likely to have been the norm throughout human history and most people in the modern world are multilingual. Before the rise of the concept of the ethno-national state, monolingualism was characteristic mainly of populations inhabiting small islands. But with the ideology that made one people, one state, and one language the most desirable political arrangement, monolingualism started to spread throughout the world. There are only 250 countries in the world corresponding to some 6,000 languages, which means that most countries are multilingual and most languages therefore exist in close contact with other languages.

When speakers of different languages interact closely, it is typical for their languages to influence each other. Through sustained language contact over long periods, linguistic traits diffuse between languages, and languages belonging to different families may converge to become more similar. In areas where many languages are in close contact, this may lead to the formation of language areas in which unrelated languages share a number of linguistic features. A number of such language areas have been documented, among them, the Balkan language area, the Mesoamerican language area, and the Ethiopian language area. Also, larger areas such as South Asia, Europe, and Southeast Asia have sometimes been considered language areas because of the widespread diffusion of specific areal features.
Language contact may also lead to a variety of other linguistic phenomena, including language convergence, borrowing, and relexification (the replacement of much of the native vocabulary with that of another language). In situations of extreme and sustained language contact, it may lead to the formation of new mixed languages that cannot be considered to belong to a single language family. One type of mixed language called pidgins occurs when adult speakers of two different languages interact on a regular basis, but in a situation where neither group learns to speak the language of the other group fluently. In such a case, they will often construct a communication form that has traits of both languages, and that has a simplified grammatical and phonological structure. The language comes to contain mostly the grammatical and phonological categories that exist in both languages. Pidgin languages are defined by not having any native speakers, but only being spoken by people who have another language as their first language. But if the Pidgin language becomes the main language of a speech community, then eventually children will grow up learning the Pidgin language as their first language. As the generation of child learners grows up, the pidgin will often be seen to change its structure and acquire a greater degree of complexity. This type of language is generally called a creole language. An example of such mixed languages is Tok Pisin, the official language of Papua New Guinea, which originally arose as a Pidgin based on English and Austronesian languages; others are Kreyòl ayisyen, the French-based creole language spoken in Haiti, and Michif, a mixed language of Canada, based on the Native American language Cree and French.

==Linguistic diversity==
&quot;SIL Ethnologue&quot; defines a &quot;living language&quot; as &quot;one that has at least one speaker for whom it is their first language&quot;. The exact number of known living languages varies from 6,000 to 7,000, depending on the precision of one&#x27;s definition of &quot;language&quot;, and in particular, on how one defines the distinction between a &quot;language&quot; and a &quot;dialect&quot;. As of 2016, &quot;Ethnologue&quot; cataloged 7,097 living human languages. The &quot;Ethnologue&quot; establishes linguistic groups based on studies of mutual intelligibility, and therefore often includes more categories than more conservative classifications. For example, the Danish language that most scholars consider a single language with several dialects is classified as two distinct languages (Danish and Jutish) by the &quot;Ethnologue&quot;.

According to the &quot;Ethnologue&quot;, 389 languages (nearly 6%) have more than a million speakers. These languages together account for 94% of the world&#x27;s population, whereas 94% of the world&#x27;s languages account for the remaining 6% of the global population.

===Languages and dialects===
There is no clear distinction between a language and a dialect, notwithstanding a famous aphorism attributed to linguist Max Weinreich that &quot;a language is a dialect with an army and navy&quot;. For example, national boundaries frequently override linguistic difference in determining whether two linguistic varieties are languages or dialects. Hakka, Cantonese and Mandarin are, for example, often classified as &quot;dialects&quot; of Chinese, even though they are more different from each other than Swedish is from Norwegian. Before the Yugoslav Wars, Serbo-Croatian was generally considered a single language with two normative variants, but due to sociopolitical reasons, Croatian and Serbian are now often treated as separate languages and employ different writing systems. In other words, the distinction may hinge on political considerations as much as on cultural differences as on distinctive writing systems or the degree of mutual intelligibility. The latter is, in fact, a rather unreliable criterion to discriminate languages and dialects. Pluricentric languages, which are languages with more than one standard variety, are a case in point. Standard American English and Standard RP (English) English, for instance, may in some areas be more different than languages with names, e.g. Swedish and Norwegian. A complex social process of &quot;language making&quot; underlies these assignments of status and in some cases even linguistic experts may not agree (e.g. the One Standard German Axiom). The language making process is dynamic and subject to change over time.

===Language families of the world===
The world&#x27;s languages can be grouped into language families consisting of languages that can be shown to have common ancestry. Linguists recognize many hundreds of language families, although some of them can possibly be grouped into larger units as more evidence becomes available and in-depth studies are carried out. At present, there are also dozens of language isolates: languages that cannot be shown to be related to any other languages in the world. Among them are Basque, spoken in Europe, Zuni of New Mexico, Purépecha of Mexico, Ainu of Japan, Burushaski of Pakistan, and many others.

The language family of the world that has the most speakers is the Indo-European languages, spoken by 46% of the world&#x27;s population. This family includes major world languages like English, Spanish, French, German, Russian, and Hindustani (Hindi/Urdu). The Indo-European family spread first through hypothesized Indo-European migrations that would have taken place some time in the period –1500 BCE, and subsequently through much later European colonial expansion, which brought the Indo-European languages to a politically and often numerically dominant position in the Americas and much of Africa. The Sino-Tibetan languages are spoken by 20% of the world&#x27;s population and include many of the languages of East Asia, including Hakka, Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese, and hundreds of smaller languages.

Africa is home to a large number of language families, the largest of which is the Niger-Congo language family, which includes such languages as Swahili, Shona, and Yoruba. Speakers of the Niger-Congo languages account for 6.9% of the world&#x27;s population. A similar number of people speak the Afroasiatic languages, which include the populous Semitic languages such as Arabic, Hebrew language, and the languages of the Sahara region, such as the Berber languages and Hausa.

The Austronesian languages are spoken by 5.5% of the world&#x27;s population and stretch from Madagascar to maritime Southeast Asia all the way to Oceania. It includes such languages as Malagasy, Māori, Samoan, and many of the indigenous languages of Indonesia and Taiwan. The Austronesian languages are considered to have originated in Taiwan around 3000 BC and spread through the Oceanic region through island-hopping, based on an advanced nautical technology. Other populous language families are the Dravidian languages of South Asia (among them Kannada, Tamil, and Telugu), the Turkic languages of Central Asia (such as Turkish), the Austroasiatic (among them Khmer), and Tai–Kadai languages of Southeast Asia (including Thai).

The areas of the world in which there is the greatest linguistic diversity, such as the Americas, Papua New Guinea, West Africa, and South-Asia, contain hundreds of small language families. These areas together account for the majority of the world&#x27;s languages, though not the majority of speakers. In the Americas, some of the largest language families include the Quechua, Arawak, and Tupi-Guarani families of South America, the Uto-Aztecan, Oto-Manguean, and Mayan of Mesoamerica, and the Na-Dene, Iroquoian, and Algonquian language families of North America. In Australia, most indigenous languages belong to the Pama-Nyungan family, whereas New Guinea is home to a large number of small families and isolates, as well as a number of Austronesian languages. Due to its remoteness and geographical fragmentation, Papua New Guinea emerges in fact as the leading location worldwide for both species (8% of world total) and linguistic richness – with 830 living tongues (12% of world total).

===Language endangerment===
Language endangerment occurs when a language is at risk of falling out of use as its speakers die out or shift to speaking another language. Language loss occurs when the language has no more native speakers, and becomes a &quot;dead language&quot;. If eventually no one speaks the language at all, it becomes an &quot;extinct language&quot;. While languages have always gone extinct throughout human history, they have been disappearing at an accelerated rate in the 20th and 21st centuries due to the processes of globalization and neo-colonialism, where the economically powerful languages dominate other languages.

The more commonly spoken languages dominate the less commonly spoken languages, so the less commonly spoken languages eventually disappear from populations. Of the between 6,000 and 7,000 languages spoken as of 2010, between 50 and 90% of those are expected to have become extinct by the year 2100. The top 20 languages, those spoken by more than 50 million speakers each, are spoken by 50% of the world&#x27;s population, whereas many of the other languages are spoken by smaller communities, most of them with less than 10,000 speakers.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) operates with five levels of language endangerment: &quot;safe&quot;, &quot;vulnerable&quot; (not spoken by children outside the home), &quot;definitely endangered&quot; (not spoken by children), &quot;severely endangered&quot; (only spoken by the oldest generations), and &quot;critically endangered&quot; (spoken by a few members of the oldest generation, often semi-speakers). Despite claims that the world would be better off if most adopted a single common &quot;lingua franca&quot;, such as English or Esperanto, there is a consensus that the loss of languages harms the cultural diversity of the world. It is a common belief, going back to the biblical narrative of the tower of Babel in the Old Testament, that linguistic diversity causes political conflict, but many of the world&#x27;s major episodes of violence have taken place in situations with low linguistic diversity, such as the Yugoslav and American Civil War, or the genocide of Rwanda.

Many projects aim to prevent or slow this loss by revitalizing endangered languages and promoting education and literacy in minority languages. Across the world, many countries have enacted specific legislation to protect and stabilize the language of indigenous speech communities. A minority of linguists have argued that language loss is a natural process that should not be counteracted and that documenting endangered languages for posterity is sufficient.

The University of Waikato is using the Welsh language as a model for their Māori language revitalisation programme, as they deem Welsh to be the world&#x27;s leading example for the survival of languages. In 2019, Hawaiian TV company Oiwi visited a Welsh language centre in Nant Gwrtheyrn, North Wales, to help find ways of preserving their Ōlelo Hawaiʻi language.

==See also==

* Father tongue hypothesis
* Human communication
** Attitude (psychology)
** Body language
** Humor
** Listening
** Reading
** Speaking
** Social skills
* International auxiliary language
* Linguistic rights
* Linguistic diversity index
* List of language regulators
* Lists of languages
* List of official languages
* Outline of linguistics
* Problem of religious language
* Psycholinguistics
* Speech–language pathology

==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (pbk)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* World Atlas of Language Structures: a large database of structural (phonological, grammatical, lexical) properties of languages
* Ethnologue: Languages of the World is a comprehensive catalog of all of the world&#x27;s known living languages</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="0" end="8" title="Language" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="35" end="48" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="66" end="73" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="78" end="88" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="123" end="128" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="165" end="171" title="signed language" label="signed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="212" end="219" title="writing system" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634309" start="408" end="420" title="Productivity (linguistics)" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282610" start="425" end="437" title="Displacement (linguistics)" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="643" end="660" title="social convention" label="social convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="685" end="693" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="870" end="877" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="880" end="896" title="Natural language" label="Natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="902" end="908" title="speech" label="spoken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375490" start="956" end="963" title="Encoding (semiotics)" label="encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="1020" end="1027" title="stimulus (physiology)" label="stimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="1075" end="1082" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q11258845" start="1118" end="1126" title="Modality (semiotics)" label="modality"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="1256" end="1282" title="philosophy of language" label="philosophical perspectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q681696" start="1634" end="1642" title="semiosis" label="semiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="1653" end="1658" title="Sign (linguistics)" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="1673" end="1681" title="Meaning (linguistics)" label="meanings"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="1728" end="1740" title="phonology" label="phonological"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="1818" end="1826" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="1835" end="1844" title="syntax" label="syntactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="1978" end="1989" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486702" start="2085" end="2105" title="language and thought" label="language and thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q179785" start="2178" end="2185" title="Gorgias" label="Gorgias"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2190" end="2195" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2199" end="2225" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="2244" end="2265" title="Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="2348" end="2361" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="2486" end="2505" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="2631" end="2652" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="2657" end="2669" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q107588" start="2773" end="2780" title="hominin" label="hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="2813" end="2827" title="theory of mind" label="theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q654390" start="2839" end="2853" title="intentionality" label="intentionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="3124" end="3135" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q728285" start="3155" end="3167" title="Broca&amp;#x27;s area" label="Broca&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q824214" start="3172" end="3192" title="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area" label="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="3202" end="3209" title="language acquisition" label="acquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="3485" end="3493" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="3495" end="3516" title="social stratification" label="social stratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q616914" start="3537" end="3552" title="social grooming" label="social grooming"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="3557" end="3570" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q524648" start="3583" end="3589" title="language change" label="evolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="3657" end="3670" title="historical linguistics" label="reconstructed"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="3674" end="3683" title="Comparative method (linguistics)" label="comparing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="3892" end="3907" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="3997" end="4009" title="Genetic relationship (linguistics)" label="relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="4044" end="4060" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q33956" start="4082" end="4103" title="unclassified language" label="unclassified language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015649" start="4156" end="4173" title="spurious language" label="spurious language"/>
<link wikidata="Q253756" start="4337" end="4344" title="Language death" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="4445" end="4464" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4510" end="4515" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="4552" end="4562" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="4604" end="4608" title="code" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="4611" end="4617" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q33215" start="4639" end="4685" title="constructed language" label="artificially constructed communication systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="4739" end="4759" title="programming language" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="4800" end="4815" title="formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="4835" end="4841" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="4845" end="4850" title="Sign (linguistics)" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="4877" end="4888" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="4943" end="4965" title="Natural language" label="natural human language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="5004" end="5015" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="5165" end="5171" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="5198" end="5219" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q85808997" start="5768" end="5785" title="Theory of language" label="linguistic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179785" start="5892" end="5899" title="Gorgias" label="Gorgias"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="5904" end="5909" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="6288" end="6301" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="6434" end="6457" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Gottfried Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="6685" end="6699" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513072" start="7361" end="7376" title="linguistic turn" label="linguistic turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="7646" end="7660" title="mind" label="mental faculty"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="7951" end="7962" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="8363" end="8379" title="creole languages" label="creole languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33765" start="8431" end="8455" title="Nicaraguan Sign Language" label="Nicaraguan Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070614" start="8568" end="8574" title="innatism" label="innate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="8592" end="8599" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q728252" start="8617" end="8634" title="universal grammar" label="universal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q319186" start="8660" end="8671" title="Jerry Fodor" label="Jerry Fodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="8781" end="8798" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q215948" start="8816" end="8832" title="neurolinguistics" label="neurolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="8902" end="8915" title="formal system" label="formal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466334" start="9067" end="9085" title="structural linguistics" label="structural systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="9164" end="9177" title="structuralism" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="9219" end="9240" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="9640" end="9652" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="9676" end="9704" title="generative linguistics" label="generative theory of grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="10021" end="10033" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378186" start="10038" end="10056" title="formal linguistics" label="formal linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="10073" end="10098" title="computational linguistics" label="computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207534" start="10270" end="10283" title="Alfred Tarski" label="Alfred Tarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="10285" end="10301" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="10313" end="10325" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963060" start="10651" end="10681" title="Functional theories of grammar" label="Functional theories of grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="10997" end="11006" title="pragmatics" label="pragmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q508969" start="11008" end="11017" title="cognitive linguistics" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="11061" end="11077" title="sociolinguistics" label="sociolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="11082" end="11105" title="linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192625" start="11315" end="11334" title="linguistic typology" label="linguistic typology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358208" start="11421" end="11439" title="grammaticalization" label="grammaticalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="11627" end="11646" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Wittgenstein&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="11707" end="11719" title="J. L. Austin" label="J. L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311776" start="11721" end="11731" title="Paul Grice" label="Paul Grice"/>
<link wikidata="Q295012" start="11733" end="11744" title="John Searle" label="John Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214969" start="11750" end="11760" title="Willard van Orman Quine" label="W.O. Quine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621452" start="11852" end="11867" title="Charles Hockett" label="Charles Hockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264332" start="11879" end="11894" title="Hockett&amp;#x27;s design features" label="design features"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643092" start="11957" end="11964" title="Animal language" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879528" start="12019" end="12023" title="Bee learning and communication" label="bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628518" start="12027" end="12031" title="great ape language" label="apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634309" start="12193" end="12203" title="Productivity (linguistics)" label="productive"/>
<link wikidata="Q660160" start="12674" end="12698" title="chestnut-crowned babbler" label="chestnut-crowned babbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304486" start="12838" end="12851" title="Southern pied babbler" label="pied babblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19537" start="13160" end="13166" title="bonobo" label="bonobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565461" start="13173" end="13178" title="Kanzi" label="Kanzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13229" end="13237" title="Yerkish#Lexigram concept" label="lexigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q980357" start="13690" end="13725" title="grammatical categories" label="grammatical and semantic categories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13866" end="13877" title="Recursion#In language" label="recursivity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13951" end="14065" title="the chimpanzee]&amp;#x27;s lips]&amp;quot;) or a clause can contain another clause (as in &amp;quot;[I see [the dog is running" label="the chimpanzee]&amp;#x27;s lips]&amp;quot;) or a clause can contain another clause (as in &amp;quot;[I see [the dog is running"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="14386" end="14399" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="14442" end="14449" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282610" start="14777" end="14789" title="Displacement (linguistics)" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="14892" end="14895" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="15823" end="15835" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="16210" end="16223" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q499210" start="16251" end="16267" title="animal cognition" label="animal cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q714346" start="16366" end="16383" title="Michael Tomasello" label="Michael Tomasello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434121" start="16417" end="16437" title="animal communication" label="animal communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="16584" end="16589" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="16618" end="16626" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="16628" end="16634" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q77888" start="16636" end="16644" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt" label="Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="16650" end="16664" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347622" start="16718" end="16731" title="Steven Mithen" label="Steven Mithen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610301" start="16733" end="16749" title="Stephen R. Anderson" label="Stephen Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="17195" end="17205" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9637" start="17840" end="17846" title="larynx" label="larynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q511893" start="17983" end="18000" title="australopithecine" label="australopithecine"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="18081" end="18090" title="great ape" label="great ape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18135" end="18155" title="Origin of language#Ardipithecus ramidus" label="Ardipithecus ramidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="18273" end="18277" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q101373" start="18419" end="18431" title="Homo habilis" label="Homo habilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="18549" end="18561" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105784" start="18601" end="18621" title="Homo heidelbergensis" label="Homo heidelbergensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="18697" end="18741" title="Anatomically modern humans" label="anatomically modern &amp;quot;Homo sapiens&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706556" start="18751" end="18779" title="behavioral modernity" label="Upper Paleolithic revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="19577" end="19588" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="19693" end="19698" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="19754" end="19767" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q777864" start="20134" end="20157" title="descriptive linguistics" label="descriptive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q351625" start="20200" end="20223" title="theoretical linguistics" label="theoretical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="20360" end="20376" title="sociolinguistics" label="sociolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q215948" start="20521" end="20537" title="neurolinguistics" label="neurolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="20640" end="20665" title="computational linguistics" label="computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="20846" end="20868" title="historical linguistics" label="historical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="21021" end="21039" title="comparative method" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21130" end="21135" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q189725" start="21141" end="21147" title="Pāṇini" label="Pāṇini"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="21209" end="21217" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="21218" end="21228" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="21239" end="21244" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="21296" end="21304" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="21309" end="21317" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542096" start="21475" end="21493" title="Port-Royal Grammar" label="Port-Royal Grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="21690" end="21708" title="comparative method" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="21720" end="21731" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q273969" start="21760" end="21773" title="William Jones (philologist)" label="William Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q878226" start="21794" end="21817" title="comparative linguistics" label="comparative linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q77888" start="21911" end="21931" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt" label="Wilhelm von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="21960" end="21981" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="22142" end="22152" title="Diachronic linguistics" label="diachronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208048" start="22157" end="22167" title="Synchronic linguistics" label="synchronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625450" start="22429" end="22436" title="syntagmatic analysis" label="syntagm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845242" start="22441" end="22449" title="paradigmatic analysis" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973772" start="22459" end="22484" title="Langue and parole" label="Langue-parole distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="22675" end="22687" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="22703" end="22732" title="Generative linguistics" label="generative theory of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q728252" start="22938" end="22955" title="Universal Grammar" label="Universal Grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963060" start="23336" end="23367" title="Functional theories of grammar" label="functional theories of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="23502" end="23528" title="Formal grammar" label="Formal theories of grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q508969" start="23831" end="23852" title="cognitive linguistics" label="cognitive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="24524" end="24531" title="genetics" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q227241" start="24655" end="24660" title="FOXP2" label="FOXP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561430" start="24688" end="24716" title="Developmental verbal dyspraxia" label="congenital language disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="24732" end="24740" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215948" start="25198" end="25214" title="neurolinguistics" label="neurolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q824214" start="25529" end="25549" title="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area" label="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064601" start="25592" end="25615" title="superior temporal gyrus" label="superior temporal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741331" start="25708" end="25725" title="receptive aphasia" label="receptive aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="25874" end="25892" title="syntax" label="sentence structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q728285" start="25913" end="25930" title="Broca&amp;#x27;s area" label="Broca&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558534" start="25949" end="25971" title="inferior frontal gyrus" label="inferior frontal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q923164" start="26042" end="26060" title="expressive aphasia" label="expressive aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29791401" start="26312" end="26327" title="word repetition" label="word repetition"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="27132" end="27169" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="functional magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154774" start="27181" end="27198" title="electrophysiology" label="electrophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="27350" end="27355" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q173801" start="27453" end="27461" title="ear drum" label="ear drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9637" start="27580" end="27586" title="larynx" label="larynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q602418" start="27842" end="27870" title="Segment (linguistics)" label="segmental and suprasegmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="28400" end="28406" title="Stress (linguistics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q678132" start="28408" end="28417" title="phonation" label="phonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="28430" end="28436" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="28442" end="28449" title="Prosody (linguistics)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576720" start="28453" end="28463" title="Intonation (linguistics)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="28522" end="28531" title="Consonant" label="Consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="28537" end="28542" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="28568" end="28576" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="28699" end="28711" title="Acoustics" label="Acoustically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414685" start="28769" end="28776" title="formant" label="formant"/>
<link wikidata="Q578970" start="28811" end="28822" title="spectrogram" label="spectrogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q815839" start="29205" end="29210" title="Close vowel" label="close"/>
<link wikidata="Q840326" start="29326" end="29330" title="open vowel" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425556" start="29600" end="29607" title="Roundedness" label="rounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505896" start="29736" end="29755" title="rounded front vowel" label="rounded front vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q448692" start="30042" end="30056" title="alveolar ridge" label="alveolar ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q172605" start="30058" end="30064" title="palate" label="palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056395" start="30066" end="30071" title="Soft palate" label="velum"/>
<link wikidata="Q273538" start="30073" end="30078" title="uvula" label="uvula"/>
<link wikidata="Q374418" start="30083" end="30090" title="glottis" label="glottis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210847" start="30200" end="30222" title="manner of articulation" label="manner of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971057" start="30315" end="30324" title="occlusive" label="occlusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="30340" end="30344" title="stop consonant" label="stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="30400" end="30409" title="fricative" label="fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="30427" end="30439" title="approximant consonant" label="approximants"/>
<link wikidata="Q494510" start="30483" end="30501" title="Voice (phonetics)" label="voiced or unvoiced"/>
<link wikidata="Q51600" start="30668" end="30685" title="sibilant" label="unvoiced sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q506687" start="30713" end="30728" title="Voiced alveolar sibilant" label="voiced sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="30861" end="30867" title="Nasal consonant" label="nasals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606582" start="30883" end="30892" title="Nasalization" label="nasalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q223714" start="31012" end="31020" title="Lateral consonant" label="laterals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076155" start="31114" end="31121" title="rhotics" label="rhotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926370" start="31509" end="31517" title="mouthing" label="mouthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926370" start="31667" end="31675" title="mouthing" label="mouthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380124" start="31896" end="31923" title="Plains Indian Sign Language" label="Plains Indian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q955216" start="31928" end="31964" title="Australian Aboriginal sign languages" label="Australian Aboriginal sign languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="32109" end="32113" title="grammatical case" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977429" start="32328" end="32335" title="Iwaidja language" label="Iwaidja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35321" start="32583" end="32588" title="Damin" label="Damin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="32971" end="32978" title="writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="32990" end="32997" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808730" start="33009" end="33032" title="manually coded language" label="manually coded language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737212" start="33035" end="33044" title="whistled language" label="whistling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321104" start="33049" end="33057" title="talking drum" label="drumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q104476225" start="33084" end="33093" title="semaphore" label="semaphore"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="33095" end="33105" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926511" start="33110" end="33127" title="spelling alphabet" label="spelling alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661175" start="33374" end="33396" title="symbolic communication" label="symbolic communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="33459" end="33464" title="sign (semiotics)" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509484" start="33466" end="33474" title="meaning (semiotics)" label="meanings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105566" start="33482" end="33486" title="code (semiotics)" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q681696" start="33553" end="33561" title="semiosis" label="semiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="33632" end="33641" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="34897" end="34903" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="35014" end="35023" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="35808" end="35818" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="35942" end="35958" title="Canis familiaris" label="Canis familiaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="36055" end="36062" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111352" start="36117" end="36123" title="lexeme" label="lexeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q980357" start="36286" end="36308" title="Grammatical category" label="grammatical categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q179080" start="36359" end="36370" title="predicate (grammar)" label="predication"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="36531" end="36542" title="truth value" label="truth value"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="36993" end="37003" title="pragmatics" label="pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="37270" end="37279" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="37331" end="37339" title="phonemes" label="phonemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="37525" end="37537" title="minimal pair" label="minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="38099" end="38126" title="aspiration (linguistics)" label="aspirated and non-aspirated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="38186" end="38192" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="38197" end="38202" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="38401" end="38411" title="allophones" label="allophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="38425" end="38441" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322198" start="38636" end="38652" title="oral language" label="spoken languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="38705" end="38711" title="vowels" label="vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="38716" end="38726" title="consonants" label="consonants"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="38757" end="38765" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="38915" end="38921" title="stress (linguistics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441804" start="38923" end="38928" title="pitch accent" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="38930" end="38938" title="Vowel length" label="duration"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="38944" end="38948" title="tonal language" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="39062" end="39076" title="suprasegmental" label="suprasegmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q13203" start="39132" end="39139" title="Rotokas language" label="Rotokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33825" start="39144" end="39159" title="Pirahã language" label="Pirahã language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39221" end="39224" title="Taa language#Phonology" label="Taa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="39262" end="39275" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39278" end="39304" title="Phoneme#Phonemes in sign languages" label="the equivalent to phonemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="39322" end="39329" title="chereme" label="chereme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="39499" end="39513" title="Writing system" label="Writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="39626" end="39640" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="39896" end="39912" title="syllabary" label="syllabic scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="39926" end="39935" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="39989" end="40000" title="logographic" label="logographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="40596" end="40609" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="41034" end="41065" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="41253" end="41261" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="41470" end="41474" title="word" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="41550" end="41555" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="41722" end="41732" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536018" start="42298" end="42336" title="morphosyntactic alignment" label="distinguishing between their relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="42369" end="42377" title="Grammatical tense" label="temporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="42382" end="42389" title="Preposition and postposition" label="spatial"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="42431" end="42449" title="grammatical person" label="grammatical person"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="42608" end="42623" title="parts of speech" label="parts of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="43012" end="43016" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="43097" end="43101" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="43135" end="43144" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="43693" end="43699" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q179080" start="43917" end="43927" title="predicate (grammar)" label="predicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185614" start="43953" end="43961" title="argument (linguistics)" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q830012" start="44309" end="44333" title="transitivity (grammar)" label="&amp;quot;intransitive&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774805" start="44391" end="44413" title="transitive verb" label="&amp;quot;transitive&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36484" start="44478" end="44490" title="conjunction (grammar)" label="conjunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="44546" end="44554" title="article (grammar)" label="articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="44578" end="44591" title="interjections" label="interjections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302610" start="44621" end="44631" title="ideophones" label="ideophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q63153" start="44802" end="44813" title="Classifier (linguistics)" label="classifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="44925" end="44933" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="45435" end="45445" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="45534" end="45542" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="45805" end="45810" title="Root (linguistics)" label="roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="45900" end="45905" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="45985" end="45991" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="46018" end="46024" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q201322" start="46048" end="46053" title="infix" label="infix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125709" start="46369" end="46375" title="ablaut" label="ablaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="46444" end="46454" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q728001" start="46515" end="46525" title="Morphological derivation" label="derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423311" start="47137" end="47146" title="Isolating language" label="isolating"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="47723" end="47733" title="nominative" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="47773" end="47791" title="fusional languages" label="fusional languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q171263" start="47900" end="47923" title="agglutinative languages" label="agglutinative languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="48074" end="48081" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q48641" start="48313" end="48336" title="polysynthetic languages" label="polysynthetic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="48434" end="48441" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970" start="48638" end="48643" title="Yupik language" label="Yupik"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="49087" end="49096" title="Agreement (linguistics)" label="agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="49610" end="49616" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="50758" end="50763" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="50970" end="50985" title="accusative case" label="accusative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="51013" end="51031" title="Object (grammar)" label="grammatical object"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="51107" end="51122" title="nominative case" label="nominative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658424" start="51343" end="51374" title="Wh-movement" label="inverse word order in questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435289" start="51666" end="51682" title="focus (linguistics)" label="special emphasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="51874" end="51880" title="phrase" label="phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q257885" start="53476" end="53486" title="word order" label="word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="53514" end="53518" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796" start="53564" end="53572" title="sentence (linguistics)" label="sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="53605" end="53608" title="Subject–verb–object" label="SVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="53731" end="53750" title="Australian Aboriginal languages" label="Australian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111818" start="53751" end="53761" title="Gamilaraay language" label="Gamilaraay"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="53825" end="53828" title="Subject-object-verb" label="SOV"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="54030" end="54042" title="prepositions" label="prepositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="54046" end="54059" title="postpositions" label="postpositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q980142" start="54090" end="54114" title="Linguistic universals" label="implicational universals"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="54174" end="54177" title="Subject-object-verb" label="SOV"/>
<link wikidata="Q178435" start="54434" end="54455" title="Nominative–accusative language" label="nominative-accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q862156" start="54720" end="54728" title="Ergativity" label="ergative"/>
<link wikidata="Q892171" start="55357" end="55372" title="Tripartite language" label="tripartite type"/>
<link wikidata="Q383340" start="56006" end="56029" title="speech community" label="communities of speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="56048" end="56062" title="language acquisition" label="learn language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="56193" end="56204" title="communicate" label="communicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410327" start="56510" end="56526" title="language contact" label="language contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="56569" end="56578" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="56655" end="56672" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="56813" end="56822" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="56947" end="56961" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="57133" end="57143" title="endangered language" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q340015" start="57511" end="57517" title="deixis" label="deixis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="58743" end="58753" title="speech act" label="speech act"/>
<link wikidata="Q571227" start="59277" end="59303" title="conversational implicature" label="conversational implicature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193729" start="59549" end="59573" title="communicative competence" label="communicative competence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347178" start="59622" end="59641" title="Human development (biology)" label="normally developing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="59876" end="59880" title="sign language" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322198" start="59884" end="59897" title="oral language" label="oral language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165434" start="60073" end="60091" title="The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex" label="The Descent of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="60110" end="60124" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="60432" end="60437" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202064" start="60655" end="60668" title="Phone (phonetics)" label="speech sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723890" start="60715" end="60723" title="babbling" label="babbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020668" start="60756" end="60765" title="handshape" label="handshape"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="60862" end="60872" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="60917" end="60921" title="word" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q258403" start="60945" end="60954" title="utterance" label="utterance"/>
<link wikidata="Q447985" start="60960" end="60971" title="Holophrasis" label="holophrases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399182" start="61221" end="61239" title="telegraphic speech" label="telegraphic speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="61274" end="61287" title="Grammar" label="grammatically"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="62679" end="62693" title="Sociolinguistics" label="sociolinguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q29407" start="62695" end="62709" title="Anthropological linguistics" label="ethnolinguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="62715" end="62741" title="Linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q383340" start="62805" end="62823" title="Speech community" label="speech communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="62855" end="62864" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="62987" end="62994" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q286576" start="63011" end="63018" title="register (sociolinguistics)" label="jargons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313235" start="63022" end="63028" title="style shifting" label="styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="63032" end="63042" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="64149" end="64161" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q35465" start="64282" end="64289" title="Dyirbal language" label="Dyirbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q340015" start="64483" end="64489" title="deixis" label="deixis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="64975" end="64979" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="64981" end="64988" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q49341" start="64994" end="65002" title="Old Javanese" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="65397" end="65412" title="writing systems" label="writing systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="65426" end="65433" title="writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="66086" end="66102" title="formal education" label="formal education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="66198" end="66208" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q115439" start="66221" end="66238" title="4th millennium BC" label="4th millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="66244" end="66252" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="66261" end="66277" title="cuneiform (script)" label="cuneiform script"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="66286" end="66306" title="Egyptian hieroglyphs" label="Egyptian hieroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213532" start="66701" end="66719" title="cultural diffusion" label="cultural diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="66753" end="66767" title="Chinese script" label="Chinese script"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="66805" end="66818" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922461" start="66819" end="66847" title="Mesoamerican writing systems" label="Mesoamerican writing systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="66872" end="66877" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q211248" start="66882" end="66893" title="Maya script" label="Maya script"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117161" start="67501" end="67520" title="Phonological change" label="phonological system"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="67522" end="67534" title="Sound change" label="Sound change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152224" start="67589" end="67605" title="distinctive feature" label="phonetic feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067965" start="68269" end="68280" title="chain shift" label="chain shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="68355" end="68373" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="68405" end="68421" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q131848" start="68664" end="68680" title="Italic languages" label="Italic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q268206" start="68858" end="68875" title="Great Vowel Shift" label="Great Vowel Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="69366" end="69372" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="69516" end="69521" title="idiom" label="idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358208" start="69558" end="69573" title="grammaticalized" label="grammaticalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q772345" start="69754" end="69771" title="Caribbean Spanish" label="Caribbean Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074990" start="69809" end="69825" title="Standard Spanish" label="Standard Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="69869" end="69882" title="grammatical person" label="second person"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307436" start="70807" end="70812" title="Drift (linguistics)" label="drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486741" start="71003" end="71013" title="Language ideology" label="ideologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213532" start="71268" end="71277" title="Trans-cultural diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="71384" end="71393" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="71423" end="71438" title="Multilingualism" label="Multilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="71482" end="71495" title="human history" label="human history"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="71588" end="71608" title="Nation state" label="ethno-national state"/>
<link wikidata="Q839463" start="72448" end="72462" title="Sprachbund" label="language areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637288" start="72601" end="72621" title="Balkan language area" label="Balkan language area"/>
<link wikidata="Q926433" start="72627" end="72653" title="Mesoamerican language area" label="Mesoamerican language area"/>
<link wikidata="Q992106" start="72663" end="72686" title="Ethiopian language area" label="Ethiopian language area"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="72715" end="72725" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q640624" start="72848" end="72862" title="areal feature (linguistics)" label="areal features"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774741" start="72949" end="72969" title="language convergence" label="language convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="72971" end="72980" title="loanword" label="borrowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207297" start="72986" end="73000" title="relexification" label="relexification"/>
<link wikidata="Q33694" start="73176" end="73190" title="mixed language" label="mixed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="73291" end="73298" title="pidgins" label="pidgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="74257" end="74272" title="creole language" label="creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="74312" end="74321" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="74348" end="74364" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="74422" end="74444" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="74457" end="74471" title="Haitian Creole" label="Kreyòl ayisyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="74516" end="74521" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q13315" start="74527" end="74533" title="Michif language" label="Michif"/>
<link wikidata="Q33390" start="74601" end="74605" title="Cree language" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="74650" end="74664" title="SIL Ethnologue" label="SIL Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="75040" end="75047" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="75207" end="75229" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="75333" end="75348" title="Danish language" label="Danish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340322" start="75469" end="75475" title="Jutlandic dialect" label="Jutish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="75823" end="75840" title="Language or dialect" label="clear distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="75866" end="75873" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="75900" end="75908" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q467106" start="75932" end="75945" title="Max Weinreich" label="Max Weinreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q32454" start="75957" end="76002" title="a language is a dialect with an army and navy" label="a language is a dialect with an army and navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="76160" end="76165" title="Hakka Chinese" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="76167" end="76176" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="76181" end="76189" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="76318" end="76325" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="76334" end="76343" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="76356" end="76369" title="Yugoslav civil war" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="76371" end="76385" title="Serbo-Croatian language" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="76493" end="76501" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="76506" end="76513" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="76719" end="76733" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="76752" end="76774" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q250858" start="76870" end="76891" title="Pluricentric language" label="Pluricentric language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308526" start="76972" end="76997" title="General American English" label="Standard American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985" start="77002" end="77031" title="RP English" label="Standard RP (English) English"/>
<link wikidata="Q123293203" start="77298" end="77323" title="One Standard German Axiom" label="One Standard German Axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="77483" end="77500" title="Language family" label="language families"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="77798" end="77814" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="77914" end="77920" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q10188" start="77940" end="77944" title="Zuni language" label="Zuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="77948" end="77958" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q36803" start="77960" end="77969" title="Purépecha language" label="Purépecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969" start="77981" end="77985" title="Ainu language" label="Ainu"/>
<link wikidata="Q216286" start="77996" end="78006" title="Burushaski language" label="Burushaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="78010" end="78018" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="78105" end="78128" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="78224" end="78231" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="78233" end="78240" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="78242" end="78248" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="78250" end="78256" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="78258" end="78265" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="78271" end="78281" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="78283" end="78288" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="78289" end="78293" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28445743" start="78355" end="78379" title="Indo-European migrations" label="Indo-European migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245246" start="78479" end="78506" title="History of colonialism" label="European colonial expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="78614" end="78622" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="78635" end="78641" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="78647" end="78669" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="78784" end="78800" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="78802" end="78811" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="78849" end="78855" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="78932" end="78959" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger-Congo language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="78994" end="79001" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="79003" end="79008" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="79014" end="79020" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="79146" end="79167" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="79196" end="79213" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="79222" end="79228" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="79230" end="79245" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="79272" end="79278" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="79299" end="79315" title="Berber languages" label="Berber languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="79320" end="79325" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="79332" end="79354" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="79422" end="79432" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="79436" end="79459" title="maritime Southeast Asia" label="maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="79475" end="79482" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="79514" end="79522" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="79524" end="79529" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="79531" end="79537" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="79579" end="79588" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="79593" end="79599" title="Formosan languages" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="79832" end="79851" title="Dravidian languages" label="Dravidian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="79855" end="79865" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="79878" end="79885" title="Kannada language" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="79887" end="79892" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="79898" end="79904" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="79911" end="79927" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="79953" end="79960" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="79967" end="79980" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="79993" end="79998" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="80005" end="80024" title="Tai–Kadai languages" label="Tai–Kadai languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="80028" end="80042" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="80054" end="80058" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="80160" end="80176" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="80178" end="80189" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="80433" end="80440" title="Quechuan languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q626753" start="80442" end="80448" title="Arawak languages" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q148610" start="80454" end="80466" title="Tupi-Guarani languages" label="Tupi-Guarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q34073" start="80498" end="80509" title="Uto-Aztecan languages" label="Uto-Aztecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33669" start="80511" end="80523" title="Oto-Manguean languages" label="Oto-Manguean"/>
<link wikidata="Q33738" start="80529" end="80534" title="Mayan languages" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="80538" end="80549" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q26986" start="80559" end="80566" title="Na-Dene languages" label="Na-Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q33623" start="80568" end="80577" title="Iroquoian languages" label="Iroquoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="80583" end="80593" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="80615" end="80628" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33942" start="80684" end="80703" title="Pama-Nyungan languages" label="Pama-Nyungan family"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="81088" end="81109" title="endangered language" label="Language endangerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="81193" end="81198" title="language shift" label="shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q387080" start="81229" end="81242" title="Language loss" label="Language loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q38058796" start="81317" end="81330" title="dead language" label="dead language"/>
<link wikidata="Q38058796" start="81407" end="81423" title="extinct language" label="extinct language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="81604" end="81617" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q190586" start="81622" end="81637" title="neo-colonialism" label="neo-colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319" start="82011" end="82027" title="List of languages by number of native speakers" label="top 20 languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="82251" end="82315" title="UNESCO" label="United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311707" start="82689" end="82702" title="Speaker types" label="semi-speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="82793" end="82806" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="82833" end="82842" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q41213" start="83002" end="83016" title="tower of Babel" label="tower of Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="83024" end="83037" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="83222" end="83230" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="83235" end="83253" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="83262" end="83280" title="Rwandan genocide" label="genocide of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="83333" end="83345" title="language revitalization" label="revitalizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q334451" start="83473" end="83493" title="Language policy" label="specific legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q383340" start="83546" end="83564" title="speech community" label="speech communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q606140" start="83750" end="83771" title="University of Waikato" label="University of Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="83785" end="83799" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="83821" end="83835" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732527" start="83980" end="83984" title="World Indigenous Television Broadcasters Network" label="Oiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="83995" end="84009" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402681" start="84020" end="84034" title="Nant Gwrtheyrn" label="Nant Gwrtheyrn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="84036" end="84047" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="84087" end="84100" title="Hawaiian language" label="Ōlelo Hawaiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013311" start="84128" end="84152" title="Father tongue hypothesis" label="Father tongue hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066689" start="84155" end="84174" title="Human communication" label="Human communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q622645" start="84178" end="84199" title="Attitude (psychology)" label="Attitude (psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q477298" start="84203" end="84216" title="Body language" label="Body language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35874" start="84220" end="84225" title="Humor" label="Humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646450" start="84229" end="84238" title="Listening" label="Listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q199657" start="84242" end="84249" title="Reading" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="84253" end="84261" title="Speaking" label="Speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413287" start="84265" end="84278" title="Social skills" label="Social skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q838296" start="84281" end="84313" title="International auxiliary language" label="International auxiliary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667964" start="84316" end="84333" title="Linguistic rights" label="Linguistic rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554041" start="84336" end="84362" title="Linguistic diversity index" label="Linguistic diversity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q836353" start="84365" end="84392" title="List of language regulators" label="List of language regulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183574" start="84395" end="84413" title="Lists of languages" label="Lists of languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q842626" start="84416" end="84442" title="List of official languages" label="List of official languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112675" start="84445" end="84467" title="Outline of linguistics" label="Outline of linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814191" start="84470" end="84499" title="Problem of religious language" label="Problem of religious language"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="84502" end="84519" title="Psycholinguistics" label="Psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="84522" end="84547" title="Speech–language pathology" label="Speech–language pathology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17528" wikidata="Q152019" url="?curid=17528" title="Laura Bush">
<text>Laura Lane Welch Bush (née Welch; born November 4, 1946) is an American educator who was the first lady of the United States from 2001 to 2009 as the wife of George W. Bush, the 43rd president of the United States. Bush was previously the first lady of Texas from 1995 to 2000 when her husband was governor.

Born in Midland, Texas, Bush graduated from Southern Methodist University in 1968 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in education, and took a job as a second grade teacher. After attaining her master&#x27;s degree in library science at the University of Texas at Austin, she was employed as a librarian.

Bush met her future husband, George W. Bush, in 1977, and they were married later that year. The couple had twin daughters in 1981. Bush&#x27;s political involvement began during her marriage. She campaigned with her husband during his unsuccessful 1978 run for the United States Congress, and later for his successful Texas gubernatorial campaign.

As First Lady of Texas, Bush implemented many initiatives focused on health, education, and literacy. In 1999–2000, she aided her husband in campaigning for the presidency in a number of ways, such as delivering a keynote address at the 2000 Republican National Convention, which gained her national attention. She became first lady after her husband was inaugurated as president on January 20, 2001.

Polled by The Gallup Organization as one of the most popular first ladies, Bush was involved in national and global concerns during her tenure. She continued to advance her trademark interests of education and literacy by establishing the annual National Book Festival in 2001. She encouraged education on a worldwide scale. She also advanced women&#x27;s causes through The Heart Truth and Susan G. Komen for the Cure organizations. She represented the United States during her foreign trips, which tended to focus on HIV/AIDS and malaria awareness.

==Early life and career==
Laura Lane Welch was born on November 4, 1946, at Midland Memorial Hospital in Midland, Texas, the only child of Harold Bruce Welch 1912- 1995 and Jenna Louise 1919- 2019 ( Hawkins) Welch. She is of English, French, and Swiss ancestry.

Her father was a house builder and later successful real estate developer, while her mother worked as the bookkeeper for her father&#x27;s business. Early on, her parents encouraged her to read, leading to what would become her love of reading. She said, &quot;I learned [how important reading is] at home from my mother. When I was a little girl, my mother would read stories to me. I have loved books and going to the library ever since. In the summer, I liked to spend afternoons reading in the library. I enjoyed the &quot;Little House on the Prairie&quot; and &quot;Little Women&quot; books, and many others ... Reading gives you enjoyment throughout your life.&quot; Bush has also credited her second grade teacher, Charlene Gnagy, for inspiring her interest in education.

On the night of November 6, 1963, two days after her 17th birthday, Laura Bush ran a stop sign and struck another car, killing its driver. The victim was her close friend and classmate Michael Dutton Douglas. By some accounts, Douglas had been Bush&#x27;s boyfriend at one time, but she stated that he was not her boyfriend at that time but rather a very close friend. Bush and her passenger, both 17, were treated for minor injuries. According to the accident report released by the city of Midland in 2000, in response to an open-records request, she was not charged in the incident. In 2000 Laura Bush&#x27;s spokesman said, &quot;It was a very tragic accident that deeply affected the families and was very painful for all involved, including the community at large.&quot; In her book &quot;Spoken from the Heart&quot;, she said that the crash caused her to lose her faith &quot;for many, many years&quot;.

She attended James Bowie Elementary School, San Jacinto Junior High School, and Robert E. Lee High School in Midland. She graduated from Lee in 1964 and went on to attend Southern Methodist University in Dallas where she was a member of Kappa Alpha Theta. She graduated in 1968 with a Bachelor of Science degree in education.

After graduating from SMU, she began her career as a school teacher at Longfellow Elementary School in the Dallas Independent School District. She then taught for three years at John F. Kennedy Elementary School, a Houston Independent School District school in Houston, until 1972.

In 1973, Bush attained a Master of Science degree in Library Science from the University of Texas at Austin. She was soon employed as a librarian at the Kashmere Gardens Branch at the Houston Public Library. The following year, she moved back to Austin and took another job as a librarian in the Austin Independent School District school Dawson Elementary until 1977. She reflected on her employment experiences to a group of children in 2003, saying, &quot;I worked as a teacher and librarian and I learned how important reading is in school and in life.&quot;

==Marriage and family==
Bush met her husband in July 1977 when mutual friends Joe and Jan O&#x27;Neill invited them to a backyard barbecue at their home. He proposed to her at the end of September and they were married on November 5 of that year, the day after her 31st birthday, at the First United Methodist Church in Midland, the same church in which she had been baptized. The couple honeymooned in Cozumel, Mexico. George W. Bush detailed his choice to marry Laura as the &quot;best decision of [his] life&quot;. Laura, an only child, said she gained &quot;brothers and sisters and wonderful in-laws&quot; who all accepted her after she wed George W. Bush.

The year after their marriage, the couple began campaigning for George W. Bush&#x27;s 1978 Congressional candidacy. According to George Bush, when he asked her to marry him, she had said, &quot;Yes. But only if you promise me that I&#x27;ll never have to make a campaign speech.&quot; She soon relented and gave her first stump speech for him in 1978 on the courthouse steps in Muleshoe, Texas. After narrowly winning the primary, he lost the general election.

Bush attended the inauguration of her father-in-law George H. W. Bush as Ronald Reagan&#x27;s vice-president in January 1981, after Reagan won the 1980 United States presidential election. She credited her father-in-law&#x27;s election to the vice presidency with giving her and her husband national exposure.
The Bushes had tried to conceive for three years, but pregnancy did not happen easily. On November 25, 1981, Laura Bush gave birth to fraternal twin daughters, Barbara and Jenna. The twins were born five weeks early by an emergency Caesarean section in Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, Texas, as Laura had developed life-threatening pre-eclampsia (toxemia).

George W. Bush credited his wife with his decision to stop drinking in 1986. She reflected that she thought her husband &quot;was drinking too much&quot; amid her knowing it was not his desired way of living. Approaching him, she related that her father had been alcoholic and it was not a pattern she wished to repeat in their family.
She is also credited with having a stabilizing effect on his private life. According to &quot;People&quot; magazine reporter Jane Simms Podesta, &quot;She is the steel in his back. She is a civilizing influence on him. I think she built him, in many ways, into the person he is today.&quot;

Bush traveled to Kuwait in April 1993, accompanying her in-laws as well as brothers-in-law Jeb and Marvin Bush after former president Bush was invited to return to the Middle East for the first time since his presidency.

Several times a year, Bush and her husband travel to their sprawling family estate, the Bush compound, better known as Walker&#x27;s Point. Located in Kennebunkport, Maine, the compound is where Bush family gatherings have been held for nearly 100 years.

==First Lady of Texas==
Bush became the First Lady of Texas when her husband was elected as the Governor of Texas and served as first lady of that state from January 17, 1995, to December 21, 2000. When asked about her interest in politics, she responded &quot;It doesn&#x27;t drive me.&quot;

Though during her years in the Governor&#x27;s Mansion, she did not hold a single formal event, Laura worked for women&#x27;s and children&#x27;s causes including health, education, and literacy. She implemented four major initiatives: Take Time For Kids, an awareness campaign to educate parents and caregivers on parenting; family literacy, through cooperation with the Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy, she urged Texas communities to establish family literacy programs; Reach Out and Read, a pediatric reading program; and Ready to Read, an early childhood educational program.

She raised money for public libraries through her establishment of the Texas Book Festival, in 1995. She established the First Lady&#x27;s Family Literacy Initiative, which encouraged families to read together. Bush further established &quot;Rainbow Rooms&quot; across the state, in an effort to provide emergency services for neglected or abused children. Through this, she promoted the Adopt-a-Caseworker Program to provide support for Child Protective Services. She used her position to advocate Alzheimer&#x27;s disease and breast cancer awareness as well.

Her husband announced his campaign for President of the United States in mid-1999, something that she agreed to. She did say, however, that she had never dreamed that he would run for office. The Bush campaign worked to assure voters that as First Lady, she would not seek to emulate then-First Lady Hillary Clinton, who had faced controversy for leading several policy initiatives from within the White House despite being unelected. When asked who she would be like out of the past First Ladies, she insisted it would be herself.
In July, she delivered a keynote address to the delegates at the 2000 Republican National Convention, which put her on the national stage. In December 2000, her husband resigned as Governor of Texas to prepare for his inauguration as President of the United States in January 2001.

==First Lady of the United States==
As First Lady, Bush was involved in issues of concern to children and women, both nationally and internationally. Her major initiatives included education and women&#x27;s health.

===Education and children and the National Book Festival===
Early into the administration, Bush made it known that she would focus much of her attention on education. This included recruiting highly qualified teachers to ensure that young children would be taught well. She also focused on early child development.

In 2001, to promote reading and education, she partnered with the Library of Congress to launch the annual National Book Festival. More than 60 organizations that promote reading, literacy, and libraries—including the National Basketball Association participated. Bush served as Honorary Chair from 2001 to 2008.

In January 2002, Bush testified before the Senate Committee on Education, asking for higher teachers&#x27; salaries and better training for Head Start programs. She is also credited with creating a national initiative called &quot;Ready to Read, Ready to Learn&quot;, which promotes reading at a young age. To promote American patriotic heritage in schools, she helped launch the National Anthem Project. In 2006, Bush and media executives worked together to provide a $500,000 grant for school libraries along the Gulf Coast which had been devastated by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.

Immediately following the September 11, 2001 attacks, Bush spoke regarding America&#x27;s children:

&quot;We need to reassure our children that they are safe in their homes and schools. We need to reassure them that many people love them and care for them, and that while there are some bad people in the world, there are many more good people.&quot;

The following day, she composed open letters to America&#x27;s families, focusing on elementary and middle school students, which she distributed through state education officials. She took an interest in mitigating the emotional effects of the attacks on children, particularly the disturbing images repeatedly replayed on television. On the one-year anniversary, she encouraged parents to instead read to their children, and perhaps light a candle in memoriam, saying, &quot;Don&#x27;t let your children see the images, especially on September 11, when you know it&#x27;ll probably be on television again and again – the plane hitting the building or the buildings falling.&quot;

Later in her tenure, she was honored by the United Nations, as the body named her honorary ambassador for the United Nations&#x27; Decade of Literacy. In this position, she announced that she would host a Conference on Global Literacy. The conference, held in September 2006, encouraged a constant effort to promote literacy and highlighted many successful literacy programs. She coordinated this as a result of her many trips abroad where she witnessed how literacy benefited children in poorer nations.

On July 28, 2008, she visited Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site in Flat Rock, North Carolina, where she met with superintendent Connie Backlund and the Friends of Carl Sandburg Home&#x27;s President Linda Holt as well as various students from Boys and Girls Club of Henderson County, North Carolina.

On October 3, 2008, she visited Laura Ingalls Wilder Historic Home and Museum where she praised her works such as &quot;Farmer Boy&quot;, &quot;These Happy Golden Years&quot; and &quot;Little House on the Prairie&quot;, the last of which she had felt an association with as a child. During the same Laura Ingalls Wilder&#x27;s estate visit, she said that she read her books to her daughters and gave the writer Save America&#x27;s Treasures grant.

===September 11 attacks===
On September 11, 2001, Bush had been hosting her in-laws George H. W. Bush and Barbara Bush at the White House and was scheduled to give a testimony to Congress on education. Instead, during the September 11 attacks, Bush was taken to inside the White House and placed in an underground bunker, later being met by her husband, who had returned to Washington from Florida.

Two weeks after the September 11 terrorist attacks, Bush inaugurated a music concert at the Kennedy Center, organized to raise funds for families of the victims. Though she received applause, she returned the compliment to members of the audience and added that although the event was tragic, Americans had deepened their appreciation &quot;of life itself, how fragile it can be, what a gift it is and how much we need each other&quot;. Senator Ted Kennedy, who introduced Bush at the event, praised her and said he knew his late brother, President John F. Kennedy, would also be proud of her. Bush believes the September 11 attacks ignited the interest in the way Afghan women were treated.

===Women&#x27;s health and rights===
Another of her signature issues were those relating to the health and well-being of women. She established the Women&#x27;s Health and Wellness Initiative and became involved with two major campaigns.

Bush first became involved with The Heart Truth awareness campaign in 2003. It is an organization established by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute to raise awareness about heart disease in women, and how to prevent the condition. She serves in the honorary position of ambassador for the program leading the federal government&#x27;s effort to give women a &quot;wake up call&quot; about the risk of heart disease. She commented on the disease: &quot;Like many women, I assumed heart disease was a man&#x27;s disease and cancer was what we would fear the most. Yet heart disease kills more women in our country than all forms of cancer combined. When it comes to heart disease, education, prevention, and even a little red dress can save lives.&quot; She has undertaken a signature personal element of traveling around the country and talking to women at hospital and community events featuring the experiences of women who live, or had lived, with the condition. This outreach was credited with directly saving the life of at least one woman who went to the hospital after experiencing symptoms of a heart attack after hearing her message.

With her predecessor, former First Lady Nancy Reagan, Bush dedicated the First Ladies Red Dress Collection at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in May 2005. It is an exhibit containing red suits worn by former First Ladies Lady Bird Johnson, Betty Ford, Rosalynn Carter, Nancy Reagan, Barbara Bush, Hillary Clinton, and Laura Bush meant to raise awareness by highlighting America&#x27;s first ladies. She has participated in fashion shows displaying red dresses worn on celebrities as well.

Bush&#x27;s mother, Jenna Welch, was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 78. She endured surgery and had no further signs of cancer. Laura Bush has become a breast cancer activist on her mother&#x27;s behalf through her involvement in the Susan G. Komen for the Cure. She applauded the foundation&#x27;s efforts in eliminating cancer and said, &quot;A few short years ago, a diagnosis of breast cancer left little hope of recovery. But thanks to the work of the Komen Foundation ... more women and men are beating breast cancer and beating the odds.&quot; She used her position to gain international support for the foundation through the Partnership for Breast Cancer Awareness and Research of the Americas, an initiative that unites experts from the United States, Brazil, Costa Rica and Mexico.

In November 2001, she became the first person other than a president to deliver the weekly presidential radio address. She used the opportunity to discuss the plight of women in Afghanistan leading up to the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan, saying &quot;The brutal oppression of women is a central goal of the terrorists.&quot; Her husband was originally to give the address but he felt that she should do it; she later recalled, &quot;At that moment, it was not that I found my voice. Instead, it was as if my voice found me.&quot; Her words summarized one of the goals and moral rationales of the U.S. involvement in Afghanistan and it became one of the more famous speeches of his administration. In May 2002, she made a speech to the people of Afghanistan through Radio Liberty. In March 2005, she made the first of three trips to that country as First Lady.

===Campaigning===

Bush campaigned for Republicans around the country in 2002 for that year&#x27;s midterm elections, attending and hosting fundraisers as well as giving speeches.

Opponents deemed this as the Bush administration &quot;working against women&#x27;s rights issues and using women to do their dirty work&quot; and partly a test for Bush on how well she could campaign for her husband in the impending two years when he sought re-election.

During the 2004 election cycle, Bush made joint appearances with her husband on the campaign trail, including in battleground states such as Florida. She advocated for his re-election in a speech at the 2004 Republican National Convention, and was credited with having raised $15 million for her husband&#x27;s campaign as well as the Republican Party while still succeeding in keeping a separate schedule that allowed for her to tend to the traditional duties she had as First Lady. In a July 2004 interview, Teresa Heinz, wife of Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry, said, &quot;Well, you know, I don&#x27;t know Laura Bush. But she seems to be calm, and she has a sparkle in her eye, which is good. But I don&#x27;t know that she&#x27;s ever had a real job—I mean, since she&#x27;s been grown up.&quot; Heinz later apologized for the remark, stating that she had forgotten that Laura Bush was a teacher and librarian prior to her marriage. Bush stated that she forgave her while insisting her apology was unnecessary, citing her understanding of the &quot;trick questions&quot; asked by the media.

Bush was a participant in the 2006 midterm elections, beginning her campaigning in April. Though her poll numbers had decreased from an 80% approval rating, they still superseded that of President Bush, whose approval rating was only praised by a third of Americans. Ed Henry of CNN noted Bush&#x27;s popularity, writing, &quot;The first lady is treated like a rock star on the campaign trail – with local Republicans lining up for photographs and autographs – as she criss-crosses the country to help candidates.&quot; Bush relied on a strategy of praising the Republican candidate for their achievements and attending events alongside them. In September 2008, Bush spoke during the first night of the 2008 Republican National Convention, her joint appearance with Cindy McCain geared toward raising hurricane relief funds for victims of Hurricane Gustav.

===Popularity and style===

Laura Bush&#x27;s approval ratings have consistently ranked very high. In January 2006, a &quot;USA Today&quot;/CBS/Gallup poll recorded her approval rating at 82 percent and disapproval at 13 percent. That places Bush as one of the most popular first ladies. Former White House Press Secretary Ari Fleischer said, &quot;She is more popular, and more welcome, in many parts of the country than the president ... In races where the moderates are in the most trouble, Laura Bush is the one who can do the most good.&quot;

Jude Ellison Sady Doyle reasoned that Bush was hard to dislike due to her adopting &quot;the least partisan causes&quot; such as literacy and breast cancer, which would attract the support of most Americans and her coming off as a &quot;mild, polite, ordinary woman who might go to church with your mother, or organize suburban potlucks&quot;. Doyle furthered that her statements were never enough to offend others and the harshest criticism that could be bestowed upon her was that she was boring.

She disagreed with Fox News&#x27; Chris Wallace in 2006 when Wallace asked why the American people were beginning to lose confidence in President Bush, saying, &quot;Well, I don&#x27;t think they are. And I don&#x27;t really believe those polls. I travel around the country, I see people, I see their response to my husband, I see their response to me. There are a lot of difficult challenges right now in the United States ... All of those decisions that the President has to make surrounding each one of these very difficult challenges are hard. They&#x27;re hard decisions to make. And of course some people are unhappy about what some of those decisions are. But I think people know that he is doing what he thinks is right for the United States, that he&#x27;s doing what he – especially in the war on terror, what he thinks he is obligated to do for the people in the United States, and that is to protect them ... When his polls were really high they weren&#x27;t on the front page.&quot;

During the January 2005 second inauguration ceremonies for her husband, Laura Bush was looked highly upon by &quot;People&quot; magazine, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, and others for her elegance and fashion sense. At the inauguration she wore a winter white cashmere dress and matching coat designed by Oscar de la Renta. Following the inauguration were the inaugural galas, to which Bush wore a pale, aqua lace gown, sprinkled with crystals, with long sleeves in a silver blue mist. The tulle gown was also designed for her by de la Renta. According to &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, &quot;[I]t made her look radiant and glamorous.&quot;

===Foreign trips===
During her husband&#x27;s second term, Bush was more involved in foreign matters. She traveled to numerous countries as a representative of the United States.

As First Lady, she took five goodwill trips to Africa. The purpose of these has mostly been to raise awareness about HIV/AIDS and malaria as part of the Bush administration&#x27;s initiative to address the global epidemics, but Bush has also stressed the need for education and greater opportunities for women. She has taken many other trips to other countries to promote and gain support for President Bush&#x27;s Emergency Plan for AIDS relief; these countries include Zambia (2007), Mozambique (2007), Mali (2007), Senegal (2007), and Haiti (2008).

In mid-2007, she took a trip to Myanmar where she spoke out in support of the pro-democracy movement, and urged Burmese soldiers and militias to refrain from violence. Later that October, she ventured to the Middle East. Bush said she was in the region in an attempt to improve America&#x27;s image by highlighting concern for women&#x27;s health, specifically promoting her breast cancer awareness work with the US-Middle East Partnership for Breast Cancer Awareness and Research. She defined the trip as successful, saying that stereotypes were broken on both sides.

Overall, Bush traveled to 77 countries in the eight years of her husband&#x27;s presidency, touring 67 of those during the second term.

===Views on policy===
Bush is a Republican and has identified herself with the GOP since her marriage.

When asked about abortion in 2000, Bush said she did not believe &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; should be overturned. She did not comment on whether women had the right to an abortion. She did say, however, that the country should do &quot;what we can to limit the number of abortions, to try to reduce the number of abortions in a lot of ways, and that is, by talking about responsibility with girls and boys, by teaching abstinence, having abstinence classes everywhere in schools and in churches and in Sunday school&quot;.

Bush responded to a question during a 2006 interview concerning the Federal Marriage Amendment by calling for elected leaders not to politicize same-sex marriage, &quot;I don&#x27;t think it should be used as a campaign tool, obviously. It requires a lot of sensitivity to just talk about the issue ... a lot of sensitivity.&quot;

On July 12, 2005, while in South Africa, Bush suggested her husband replace retiring Supreme Court justice Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor with another woman. On October 2, during a private dinner at the White House with his wife, President Bush nominated Harriet Miers to replace O&#x27;Connor. Later that month, after Miers had faced intense criticism, Laura Bush questioned whether the charges were sexist in nature.

===Legacy===

In late October 2008, days before that year&#x27;s presidential election, Bush hosted a three-hour session with staffers and historians discussing how she would like to be remembered, leading to this meeting being termed the &quot;legacy lunch&quot;. According to historian Myra Gutin, this was the first time in history that a First Lady had ever directly reached out to historians to talk about her accomplishments. Attendants of the meeting said that Bush wanted to change the perception that she was a traditional First Lady in that she always stayed by her husband&#x27;s side. At a 2014 National Press Club, Anita McBride opined that it would be harder for people to understand where Bush had &quot;the greatest impact&quot; due to the several signature issues that Bush advocated for while First Lady.

In 2017, journalist Brooke Baldwin suggested Bush&#x27;s efforts toward improving the lives of Afghan women may have contributed to more Afghanistan women being in positions within the Afghanistan private sector.

Bush enjoyed widespread approval by the American public both as the incumbent First Lady and during her retirement. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; contributor Krissah Thompson recalled Bush&#x27;s favorability being &quot;as close to universal popularity as any modern political figure&quot; when the Bushes left the White House in 2009 and called her &quot;the most high-profile promoter of the George W. Bush legacy — a burden she carries lightly and with a smile.&quot; A 2014 poll which asked who was the most popular First Lady in the past 25 years found Bush ranked in fourth place (out of 4 candidates), behind Hillary Clinton, mother-in-law Barbara and direct successor Michelle Obama.

==Subsequent activities==

In February 2009, the month after she and her husband left office, Laura and George W. Bush moved into a new residence in Dallas. In November 2009, the former First Lady, accompanied by her husband, made a visit to families of veterans in Fort Hood. The couple expressed their wishes that the trip not be publicized. However, Fox News revealed the trip the following morning.

In May 2010, Bush released her memoir, &quot;Spoken from the Heart&quot;, in conjunction with a national tour.

On May 11, 2010, during an interview on &quot;Larry King Live&quot;, Bush was asked about same-sex marriage. She said she viewed it as a generational issue and believed it would be made legal in the future. Bush offered support for the issue by saying &quot;when couples are committed to each other and love each other ... they ought to have the same sort of rights that everyone has.&quot; Bush referred to her 2000 interview, reaffirming her support for &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;, &quot;I think it&#x27;s important that [abortion] remain legal. Because I think it&#x27;s important for people – that for medical reasons and, and other reasons.&quot;
On February 22, 2013, without her consent, she was included in a pro-gay advertisement from the Respect of Marriage Coalition. A statement from Bush&#x27;s spokesperson states that Bush &quot;did not approve of her inclusion in this advertisement nor is she associated with the group that made the ad in any way. When she became aware of the advertisement last night, we requested that the group remove her from it.&quot;

Bush continued to remain involved and concerned over the state of women in Afghanistan, speaking out editorials and appearances during 2013 that the women and girls who had been helped could not be abandoned during and after the planned withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan. In March 2016, Bush wrote an op-ed for &quot;The Washington Post&quot; on changes occurring among women in Afghanistan while noting continued violence and calling for American involvement in Afghanistan to be consistent and predictable in continuing along with the international community &quot;to provide significant development assistance in the areas of health care, entrepreneurship and education&quot;. In June 2016, Bush stated that she hoped the US remained in Afghanistan and had consulted with women there who feared the departure of American troops would create &quot;a vacuum&quot; similar to Iraq, furthering that the US &quot;would have to start all over again&quot; if they withdrew troops. In late 2017, Bush and First Lady of Afghanistan Rula Ghani traveled to Washington to rally lawmaker support for Afghanistan and women there.

In April 2015, Bush criticized Rand Paul&#x27;s isolationist stance on U.S. foreign aid, calling the view &quot;not really realistic&quot; and asserting the United States should save lives whenever it can. That August, she shared the first public photos of her newborn granddaughter Poppy Louise.

===Public appearances===
On October 26, 2009, Bush spoke at the 25th Annual Women&#x27;s Conference in Salt Lake City, Utah.

On May 31, 2012, Bush and her husband unveiled their official portraits painted by John Howard Sanden in a ceremony at the White House attended by several members of their family and former members of the Bush administration. Bush jokingly told then First Lady Michelle Obama at the ceremony that &quot;nothing makes a house a home like having portraits of its former occupants staring down at you from the walls&quot;. Bush was portrayed in the White House&#x27;s Green Room in her portrait, wearing a midnight blue gown.

On July 25, 2012, she spoke at the Luisa Hunnewell&#x27;s estate, where she praised Edith Wharton&#x27;s works, in particular &quot;Ethan Frome&quot; on her 150th anniversary. She also said that prior to this speech she also visited houses of Mark Twain at his 166th anniversary on November 29, 2001, and was a guest of the show &quot;Mark Twain Tonight&quot;. Ten years prior to the Luisa Hunnewell&#x27;s estate visit she also visited Louisa May Alcott&#x27;s Orchard House in Concord, Massachusetts at which she met with the National Trust for Historic Preservation&#x27;s President and listened to Concord-Carlisle High School&#x27;s chorus.

In April 2013, Bush was in attendance at a news conference, where she said the recently built George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum was not a monument for her husband but instead a representation of the White House and the struggles of America during his tenure. She also mentioned not having trouble donating clothes to the library, admitting that she probably would have never worn them again in the first place. That month it was announced that she would serve as a keynote speaker for the 2013 Global Business Travel Association Convention in August. At the convention, she stressed the importance of child literacy, continuing her advocating of an issue that she had become associated with since her tenure as First Lady. In early August 2013, she reported that her husband was in stable condition after having a stent implanted in his heart, calling it &quot;terrific&quot; that it was caught in time, and stressed the importance of regular check ups with doctors. In September, she appeared at a fundraiser for the organization Solutions for Change.

On April 26, 2014, she gave a speech at the Ericsson Center in Plano, Texas, where she spoke on behalf of the company&#x27;s mentoring program for girls. Throughout the month, she made appearances at fundraisers for schools in Colorado. On May 9, 2014, she was scheduled to speak at the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center on the anniversary of the Boston Marathon bombing. She was to arrive there with her daughter Barbara Pierce Bush, her husband George W. Bush, and Soledad O&#x27;Brien, a journalist.

In 2015, Bush had several speaking arrangements on issues relating to her husband&#x27;s presidency. In July, the former First Lady, accompanied by her husband, attended the centennial anniversary of Tioga Road In Yosemite National Park in July and appeared in New Orleans in order to commemorate the tenth anniversary of Hurricane Katrina. In October, she was a featured speaker for Wayland Baptist University.

Bush was keynote speaker at the Go Red for Women Summit in Austin in February 2016, an event designed to promote both financing and awareness for women fighting heart disease. In March, Bush attended the funeral of Nancy Reagan in California. and attended the memorial service for victims in the Dallas police officers shooting four months later in July.

On February 4, 2017, Bush appeared at the annual Union Regional Foundation&#x27;s Heart of a Woman brunch, saying women do not worry about their own health due to often taking care of someone else and that their improving in health would benefit those around them. 
On March 8, Bush was keynote speaker at the Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center&#x27;s annual Humanitarian Awards Dinner, Bush relating that she had learned about the Holocaust through her father. In April, Bush was the keynote speaker of the 25th annual Art of Hope Gala at the Dallas Museum of Art. On May 17, Bush made her second visit to the Andrew Johnson Hermitage and gave the keynote address at the 117th Spring Outing celebration. On May 31, Bush delivered a speech at the South-Central Monarch Symposium on the monarch butterfly decline in recent years. On June 3, Bush served as the keynote speaker at the National Willa Cather Center dedication in Red Cloud, Nebraska and officially opened the center with a ribbon cut. The following month, Bush accepted an invitation to join the eminent international Council of Patrons of the Asian University for Women (AUW) in Chittagong, Bangladesh. The university, which is the product of east–west foundational partnerships (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Open Society Foundation, IKEA Foundation etc.) and regional cooperation, serves extraordinarily talented women from 15 countries across Asia and the Middle East, including Afghanistan and Myanmar. In September, Bush delivered the keynote address at the Gateway to Opportunity luncheon at the Omni Dallas Hotel.

In April 2020, amid the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, Bush and Michelle Obama made a joint appearance on the &quot;One World: Together At Home&quot; televised concert special by the Global Citizen Festival where they expressed appreciation for healthcare workers, first responders, pharmacists, veterinarians, sanitation workers as well as grocery store workers and those delivering food and supplies to homes.

On September 11, 2021, Bush and her husband commemorated the 20th anniversary of the September 11 attacks at the Flight 93 National Memorial.

===Obama administration===

Over the course of the Obama presidency, she developed an alliance with Michelle Obama, her immediate successor as First Lady. Despite their political differences, Michelle Obama has called Laura Bush both her friend and a role model, crediting Bush with setting &quot;a high bar&quot; for her during her tenure as First Lady. Bush defended Obama during her husband&#x27;s campaign for president in 2008, publicly coming to her defense when she received criticism for a remark she made about being proud of her country for the first time in her adulthood during the campaign.
Obama sent Bush a note thanking her and after the election met with Bush at the White House in November 2008, Bush giving Obama a tour of her and her family&#x27;s soon-to-be home.

In September 2009, Bush openly praised President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama. She reasoned that President Obama was performing well in the presidency despite having multiple initiatives taking place and complimented the First Lady&#x27;s transformation of the White House into &quot;a comfortable home for her family&quot;.

The following year, in September 2010, Bush and Obama commemorated the ninth anniversary of the September 11 attacks by leading a ceremony from a mountaintop to national memorial park.
The two both acted as keynote speakers and met with the families of the 40 victims of United Airlines Flight 93 plane crash. In their remarks, the two sang each other&#x27;s praises. Obama thanked Bush for her handling of the aftermath of September 11 attacks, while Bush called her a &quot;first lady who serves this country with such grace&quot;.

In July 2013, Bush and Obama appeared together in Africa at the First Ladies Summit. Their husbands were also present, leading White House staffer Ben Rhodes to refer to the joint appearance as proof of the support for Africa in the United States regardless of political party. In their remarks, both Bush and Obama stressed the importance of being role models.

Nine months later, on April 18, 2014, Bush spoke to &quot;Inquisitr&quot; regarding income inequality where she said next regarding Michelle Obama&#x27;s income: &quot;I want to make sure that when she&#x27;s working she&#x27;s getting paid the same as men. I gotta say that First Ladies right now don&#x27;t [get paid], even though that&#x27;s a tough job!&quot; In August 2014, Bush and Obama appeared together at the Kennedy Center. Shortly afterward, Bush told &quot;The Washington Post&quot; that she believed Obama was ready to leave the White House.

In March 2015, Bush and Obama were named as co-chairs of the Find Your Park campaign, an attempt to increase national park support and introduce millennials to the park service before its centennial the following year. The pair made a joint appearance at the George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum in September 2015, Bush appearing physically while Obama was present through a video call. Obama spoke of her admiration for Bush, who in turn mentioned their collaborations as &quot;a great example for the world to see that women in different political parties, in the United States, agree on so many issues&quot;.

===Trump administration===
On January 20, 2017, Bush and her husband attended the inauguration of Donald Trump. In a November interview, Bush stated that she wished the Trumps &quot;the very best&quot; given that she knew what it was like to live in the White House and confirmed that she both been in contact with former First Lady Melania Trump and been invited to the Diplomatic Reception Room by retained personnel from the Bush administration.

On June 17, 2018, Bush wrote an opinion piece firmly opposing the Trump administration family separation policy in &quot;The Washington Post&quot;. She mentioned how her mother-in-law Barbara Bush had picked up a crying AIDS baby while on a visit to the HIV/AIDS shelter &quot;Grandma&#x27;s House&quot; in 1989. She mentioned this to indicate her shock upon discovery that the workers at the children&#x27;s border shelter have been instructed &quot;not to pick up or touch the children to comfort them&quot;.

===Biden administration===
On January 20, 2021, Bush and her husband attended the inauguration of Joe Biden.

===Involvement with GOP===
In the later months of 2012, Bush campaigned for Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney, hosting a fundraiser in September with Ann Romney and appearing in Livonia, Michigan, the following month for a Romney campaign event. Michigan spokeswoman for the Romney campaign Kelsey Knight said having Mrs. Bush there would &quot;just fuel the fire and the momentum we are seeing&quot;. She also campaigned for vice presidential nominee Paul Ryan, telling a crowd in Detroit that he and Romney had &quot;better answers&quot; on the economy and foreign policy.

After the 2012 election, where Romney lost to President Obama, Bush was asked in March 2013 during an interview whether the GOP&#x27;s positions on social issues such as same-sex marriage and abortion led to more than half of female voters voting for the President. Bush responded that some of the candidates had &quot;frightened some candidates&quot;, but at the same time expressed her liking of the Republican Party having room for difference of opinion and that within the party, &quot;we have room for all&quot;.

Throughout 2015, Bush was active in the presidential campaign of brother-in-law Jeb Bush, hosting fundraisers and endorsing him. This was the most politically involved she had been since leaving the White House seven years prior, supporting her brother-in-law alongside the rest of her family because, in her words, he was &quot;our candidate&quot;.
In March she affirmed her support for her brother-in-law, calling herself and her husband &quot;huge Jeb supporters&quot;. It was reported that she would be assisting the campaign&#x27;s fundraising in Florida in October, Bloomberg News commenting that Jeb Bush was &quot;calling in help from perhaps the most popular member of his family&quot;. According to Clay Johnson, a friend of the Bush family, she was reportedly surprised by Donald Trump&#x27;s becoming frontrunner over the course of the election cycle. In February 2016, amid her brother-in-law&#x27;s campaign trailing Trump in South Carolina polls, Bush traveled there with her husband. Jeb Bush dropped out of the race after the South Carolina primary. The following month, Bush declined answering if she would vote for Trump, who was the frontrunner in the Republican primary, should he become the nominee and said the U.S. was going through a xenophobic period at the time of the election cycle. Ultimately, Bush and her husband refused to vote for a president in 2016.

==Libraries==

Bush created the Laura Bush Foundation for America&#x27;s Libraries &quot;to support the education of our nation&#x27;s children by providing funds to update, extend, and diversify the book and print collections of America&#x27;s school libraries&quot;. Every year, the Laura Bush Foundation&#x27;s grants award more than $1,000,000 to US schools.

The Laura Bush 21st Century Library Program grant, offered by the Institute of Museum and Library Services, provides funding for &quot;the recruitment and education of library students and continuing education for those already in the profession, as well as the development of new programs and curricula&quot;. Bush&#x27;s 21st Century Library Program is an equal opportunity grant that does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, disability, or age.

In May 2015, Bush bestowed a $7,000 grant to six schools within Austin, Texas.

After Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita in 2005, the Laura Bush Foundation for America&#x27;s Libraries awarded grants of $10,000 to $75,000 to school libraries whose collections were damaged or destroyed in the hurricanes. In 2017, after the devastation from Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria as well as the California wildfires, the foundation again is going to dedicate their resources to disaster-affected schools to rebuild their book collections.

==Laura W. Bush Institute for Women&#x27;s Health==
In August 2007, the Laura W. Bush Institute for Women&#x27;s Health (LWBIWH) was founded at the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center. This institute aims to integrate research, education and community outreach in a multidisciplinary approach to women&#x27;s health and has begun efforts to establish a multi-campus women&#x27;s health institute in Amarillo, El Paso, Lubbock and the Permian Basin.

A subsidiary of the center, the Jenna Welch Women&#x27;s Center, opened in Midland, Texas, on August 10, 2010, to deliver expert medical care to women and their families. Operating in partnership with the Laura Bush Institute, the Jenna Welch Center, named for Bush&#x27;s mother, strives for excellence in research, education and community outreach.

==Writings and recordings==
Bush wrote her first book with her daughter Jenna called &quot;Read All About It!&quot;. It was published on April 23, 2008. Bush&#x27;s memoir, &quot;Spoken from the Heart&quot;, was published in 2010. The book received mixed reviews from critics but got positive responses from readers. The book earned &quot;Goodreads&quot; Choice Award Nominee for Memoir and Autobiography (2010). Her non-fictional book about oppressed women of Afghanistan titled &quot;We Are Afghan Women: Voices of Hope&quot; was published on March 8, 2016. She wrote another children&#x27;s book with her daughter Jenna, &quot;Our Great Big Backyard&quot;. The book was published on May 10, 2016. She was the recipient of a lifetime achievement award from the Junior League of Dallas, of which she is a member.

==Awards and honors==
During and after her tenure as the First Lady, Laura Bush received a number of awards and honors. In October 2002, the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity honored her in recognition of her efforts on behalf of education. Also in 2002, she was named Barbara Walters&#x27; Most Fascinating Person of the year.

The American Library Association honored her for her years of support to America&#x27;s libraries and librarians in April 2005.

On October 18, 2003, she was conferred by the former president Gloria Macapagal Arroyo the Order of Gabriela Silang, a single-class order which makes her the first U.S. First Lady recipient during the state visit of President George Bush to the Philippines.

She received an award in honor of her dedication to help improve the living conditions and education of children around the world, from the Kuwait-American Foundation in March 2006. She accepted The Nichols-Chancellor&#x27;s Medal on behalf of disaster relief workers around the world in May 2006 from Vanderbilt University. In 2007, she received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.

Four learning facilities have been named for her: the Laura Welch Bush Elementary School of Pasadena ISD in Houston, Texas, the Laura W. Bush Elementary School in the Leander ISD in Travis County, Texas, just outside Austin, the Laura Bush Middle School (Lubbock-Cooper ISD) in Lubbock, Texas, and the Laura Bush Education Center at Camp Bondsteel, a U.S. military base in Kosovo. She was awarded the 2008 Christian Freedom International Freedom Award. Bush is on the Board of Selectors of Jefferson Awards for Public Service.

In 2012, Bush—along with Hector Ruiz, Charles Matthews, Melinda Perrin, Julius Glickman and Admiral William H. McRaven, the Navy Seal who oversaw the raid that killed Osama bin Laden—was named a Distinguished Alumnus of the University of Texas at Austin.

In October 2015, Bush was conferred an honorary Doctor of Letters degree from Wayland Baptist University in recognition of her longtime advocacy on behalf of education, health care and human rights following an address she gave on the university&#x27;s campus. November, she received the 2015 Prevent Blindness Person of Vision Award.

In November 2016 Bush received 10 for 10 award from &quot;Women&#x27;s Democracy Network&quot; in recognition of her years of work on behalf of Afghan women&#x27;s rights.

In May 2017 Bush received an honor at the &quot;Women Making History Awards&quot; in Washington, D.C.

In 2018 Laura Bush and former President George W. Bush were awarded the National Constitution Center Liberty Medal for their work with U.S. military veterans since leaving the White House.

In 2021 Bush received the Concordia Leadership Award.

==In popular culture==
Laura Bush is portrayed by Elizabeth Banks in Oliver Stone&#x27;s film &quot;W&quot;. Curtis Sittenfeld&#x27;s bestselling novel &quot;American Wife&quot; is largely based on her life.

In 2018, Bush appeared in an episode of HGTV&#x27;s &quot;Fixer Upper&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Gerhart, Ann. &quot;The Perfect Wife: The Life and Choices of Laura Bush&quot;. A biography. 
*Gormley, Beatrice. &quot;Laura Bush: America&#x27;s First Lady&quot;. A biography. 
*Kessler, Ronald. &quot;Laura Bush: An Intimate Portrait of the First Lady&quot;. A biography. 
*Montgomery, Leslie. &quot;Were It Not For Grace: Stories From Women After God&#x27;s Own Heart; Featuring Condoleezza Rice, First Lady Laura Bush, Beth Moore &amp; Others&quot;. Laura Bush shares her story about how God has had his hand on her life. 

==External links==
* Laura Bush Foundation for America&#x27;s Libraries 
* Laura Bush 21st Century Librarian Program. U.S.Institute of Museums and Library Services.
*First Lady biography at Whitehouse.gov
*&quot;The book on Laura Bush&quot; by Dennis B. Roddy, &quot;Pittsburgh Post-Gazette&quot;
*&quot;A Laura Bush we don&#x27;t know&quot; by Eugene Robinson, &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;
*
*Laura Bush at C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;First Ladies: Influence &amp; Image&quot;
* Jessie Hawkins and Jenna Welch Grandmother and Mother of Laura Bush Borderlands EPCC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152019" start="0" end="21" title="Laura Bush" label="Laura Lane Welch Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="23" end="26" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q152019" start="27" end="32" title="Laura Bush" label="Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="93" end="124" title="first lady of the United States" label="first lady of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="158" end="172" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570923" start="239" end="258" title="first lady of Texas" label="first lady of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128321" start="317" end="331" title="Midland, Texas" label="Midland, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="353" end="382" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="398" end="420" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="424" end="433" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443701" start="455" end="467" title="second grade" label="second grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="497" end="517" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420675" start="521" end="536" title="library science" label="library science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="544" end="573" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="875" end="897" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="928" end="947" title="Governor of Texas" label="Texas gubernatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="1051" end="1059" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597789" start="1196" end="1231" title="2000 Republican National Convention" label="2000 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454187" start="1314" end="1338" title="First inauguration of George W. Bush" label="inaugurated as president"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="1371" end="1394" title="The Gallup Organization" label="The Gallup Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792734" start="1607" end="1629" title="National Book Festival" label="National Book Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739165" start="1732" end="1747" title="The Heart Truth" label="The Heart Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q246898" start="1752" end="1779" title="Susan G. Komen for the Cure" label="Susan G. Komen for the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="1893" end="1900" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q128321" start="2018" end="2032" title="Midland, Texas" label="Midland, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400672" start="2703" end="2730" title="Little House on the Prairie" label="Little House on the Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="2747" end="2759" title="Little Women" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q250429" start="3041" end="3050" title="stop sign" label="stop sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578911" start="3751" end="3772" title="Spoken from the Heart" label="Spoken from the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343842" start="3948" end="3973" title="Robert E. Lee High School (Midland, Texas)" label="Robert E. Lee High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="4039" end="4068" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="4072" end="4078" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333441" start="4105" end="4122" title="Kappa Alpha Theta" label="Kappa Alpha Theta"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="4153" end="4172" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q37226" start="4248" end="4262" title="school teacher" label="school teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211353" start="4302" end="4336" title="Dallas Independent School District" label="Dallas Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029560" start="4410" end="4445" title="Houston Independent School District" label="Houston Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="4456" end="4463" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="4503" end="4520" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420675" start="4531" end="4546" title="Library Science" label="Library Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="4552" end="4585" title="the University of Texas at Austin" label="the University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647690" start="4662" end="4684" title="Houston Public Library" label="Houston Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="4724" end="4730" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823141" start="4774" end="4808" title="Austin Independent School District" label="Austin Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q104850741" start="4816" end="4833" title="Dawson Elementary School" label="Dawson Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="5074" end="5085" title="George W. Bush" label="her husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="5408" end="5416" title="baptism" label="baptized"/>
<link wikidata="Q20119933" start="5444" end="5451" title="Cozumel" label="Cozumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q982501" start="6082" end="6097" title="Muleshoe, Texas" label="Muleshoe, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="6126" end="6133" title="Partisan primary" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="6218" end="6235" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="6239" end="6252" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="6313" end="6353" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6610" end="6624" title="Twin#Fraternal (sororal; dizygotic) twins" label="fraternal twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153730" start="6636" end="6643" title="Barbara Bush (born 1981)" label="Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q153481" start="6648" end="6653" title="Jenna Bush Hager" label="Jenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="6708" end="6725" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874615" start="6729" end="6761" title="Baylor University Medical Center" label="Baylor University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="6765" end="6778" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61335" start="6820" end="6833" title="pre-eclampsia" label="pre-eclampsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="6905" end="6913" title="Alcoholic drink" label="drinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="7270" end="7288" title="People (American magazine)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="7491" end="7497" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q221997" start="7565" end="7568" title="Jeb Bush" label="Jeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375345" start="7573" end="7584" title="Marvin Bush" label="Marvin Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="7642" end="7653" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017467" start="7784" end="7797" title="Bush compound" label="Bush compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738795" start="7847" end="7860" title="Kennebunkport" label="Kennebunkport"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="7862" end="7867" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743830" start="7891" end="7902" title="Bush family" label="Bush family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="8048" end="8065" title="Governor of Texas" label="Governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707718" start="8277" end="8300" title="Texas Governor&amp;#x27;s Mansion" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="8432" end="8440" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015626" start="8618" end="8661" title="Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy" label="Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707536" start="8910" end="8929" title="Texas Book Festival" label="Texas Book Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="9143" end="9161" title="emergency services" label="emergency services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931511" start="9166" end="9173" title="neglect" label="neglect"/>
<link wikidata="Q167191" start="9179" end="9185" title="child abuse" label="abused"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097775" start="9277" end="9302" title="Child Protective Services" label="Child Protective Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="9338" end="9362" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959784" start="9367" end="9390" title="breast cancer awareness" label="breast cancer awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="9701" end="9716" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="10815" end="10834" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792734" start="10856" end="10878" title="National Book Festival" label="National Book Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q10973208" start="11203" end="11213" title="Head Start Program" label="Head Start"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970365" start="11443" end="11466" title="National Anthem Project" label="National Anthem Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="11674" end="11700" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040758" start="13220" end="13261" title="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site" label="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459852" start="13265" end="13290" title="Flat Rock, Henderson County, North Carolina" label="Flat Rock, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923055" start="13441" end="13460" title="Boys &amp;amp; Girls Clubs of America" label="Boys and Girls Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q511747" start="13464" end="13496" title="Henderson County, North Carolina" label="Henderson County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435715" start="13619" end="13629" title="Farmer Boy" label="Farmer Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428115" start="13643" end="13667" title="These Happy Golden Years" label="These Happy Golden Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400672" start="13684" end="13711" title="Little House on the Prairie" label="Little House on the Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427983" start="13910" end="13939" title="Save America&amp;#x27;s Treasures" label="Save America&amp;#x27;s Treasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="14032" end="14049" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="14054" end="14066" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="14170" end="14190" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="14440" end="14454" title="Kennedy Center" label="Kennedy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="14793" end="14804" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="14897" end="14912" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739165" start="15312" end="15327" title="The Heart Truth" label="The Heart Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973027" start="15397" end="15438" title="National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute" label="National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="15464" end="15477" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="16474" end="16486" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="16548" end="16594" title="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts" label="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q233648" start="16674" end="16691" title="Lady Bird Johnson" label="Lady Bird Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213122" start="16693" end="16703" title="Betty Ford" label="Betty Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q219353" start="16705" end="16720" title="Rosalynn Carter" label="Rosalynn Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="16736" end="16748" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="16750" end="16765" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q246898" start="17189" end="17216" title="Susan G. Komen for the Cure" label="Susan G. Komen for the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="17717" end="17723" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="17725" end="17735" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528559" start="17908" end="17938" title="Women&amp;#x27;s rights in Afghanistan" label="plight of women in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="17957" end="17985" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="U.S. invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="18514" end="18527" title="Radio Liberty" label="Radio Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q359662" start="19267" end="19302" title="2004 Republican National Convention" label="2004 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q288503" start="19574" end="19586" title="Teresa Heinz" label="Teresa Heinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="19628" end="19638" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="20452" end="20455" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462917" start="20876" end="20911" title="2008 Republican National Convention" label="2008 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q240628" start="20939" end="20951" title="Cindy McCain" label="Cindy McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q236126" start="21012" end="21028" title="Hurricane Gustav" label="Hurricane Gustav"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="21155" end="21164" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="21171" end="21174" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="21175" end="21186" title="Gallup poll" label="Gallup poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306431" start="21326" end="21353" title="White House Press Secretary" label="White House Press Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263856" start="21354" end="21367" title="Ari Fleischer" label="Ari Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536664" start="21580" end="21603" title="Jude Ellison Sady Doyle" label="Jude Ellison Sady Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="22099" end="22107" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964885" start="22114" end="22127" title="Chris Wallace (journalist)" label="Chris Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="22880" end="22893" title="war on terror" label="war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="23192" end="23198" title="People (American magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="23221" end="23240" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q288029" start="23384" end="23401" title="Oscar de la Renta" label="Oscar de la Renta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="23750" end="23780" title="George W. Bush&amp;#x27;s second term as President of the United States" label="her husband&amp;#x27;s second term"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="24033" end="24040" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402412" start="24056" end="24093" title="President&amp;#x27;s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief" label="Bush administration&amp;#x27;s initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="24374" end="24380" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="24389" end="24399" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="24408" end="24412" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="24421" end="24428" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="24441" end="24446" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="24488" end="24495" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24869" end="24936" title="US-Middle East Partnership for Breast Cancer Awareness and Research" label="US-Middle East Partnership for Breast Cancer Awareness and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="24986" end="24996" title="stereotype" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="25195" end="25205" title="U.S. Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="25338" end="25349" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q210978" start="25683" end="25693" title="abstinence" label="abstinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="25766" end="25779" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110619" start="25856" end="25882" title="Federal Marriage Amendment" label="Federal Marriage Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="25932" end="25949" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="26205" end="26218" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132" start="26227" end="26251" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q286514" start="26369" end="26382" title="Harriet Miers" label="Harriet Miers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="26515" end="26521" title="Sexism" label="sexist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036350" start="27141" end="27160" title="National Press Club (United States)" label="National Press Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974402" start="27378" end="27392" title="Brooke Baldwin" label="Brooke Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="27543" end="27554" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="27694" end="27713" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q97930433" start="27732" end="27748" title="Krissah Thompson" label="Krissah Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="27890" end="27901" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="28251" end="28265" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="28417" end="28423" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q783854" start="28534" end="28543" title="Fort Hood" label="Fort Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="28621" end="28629" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578911" start="28717" end="28738" title="Spoken from the Heart" label="Spoken from the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423559" start="28830" end="28845" title="Larry King Live" label="Larry King Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="28874" end="28891" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q661717" start="29498" end="29505" title="pro-gay" label="pro-gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028129" start="30093" end="30135" title="withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan (2011–2016)" label="withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="30182" end="30201" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070416" start="30865" end="30890" title="First Lady of Afghanistan" label="First Lady of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18198028" start="30891" end="30901" title="Rula Ghani" label="Rula Ghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q463557" start="31016" end="31025" title="Rand Paul" label="Rand Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="31386" end="31406" title="Salt Lake City, Utah" label="Salt Lake City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q62700051" start="31456" end="31480" title="John Howard Sanden&amp;#x27;s Portraits of President George W. Bush and Mrs. Laura Welch Bush" label="their official portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q15458532" start="31492" end="31510" title="John Howard Sanden" label="John Howard Sanden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="31670" end="31684" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q276032" start="32017" end="32030" title="Edith Wharton" label="Edith Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402934" start="32065" end="32076" title="Ethan Frome" label="Ethan Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="32176" end="32186" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770099" start="32268" end="32286" title="Mark Twain Tonight" label="Mark Twain Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q185696" start="32370" end="32387" title="Louisa May Alcott" label="Louisa May Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100190" start="32395" end="32408" title="Orchard House" label="Orchard House"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="32412" end="32434" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967792" start="32461" end="32501" title="National Trust for Historic Preservation" label="National Trust for Historic Preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158760" start="32535" end="32563" title="Concord-Carlisle High School" label="Concord-Carlisle High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508430" start="32674" end="32720" title="George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum" label="George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q51689" start="33710" end="33722" title="Plano, Texas" label="Plano, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="33874" end="33882" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947862" start="33934" end="33973" title="Boston Convention and Exhibition Center" label="Boston Convention and Exhibition Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086137" start="34000" end="34023" title="Boston Marathon bombing" label="Boston Marathon bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q153730" start="34067" end="34086" title="Barbara Bush (born 1981)" label="Barbara Pierce Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349845" start="34120" end="34140" title="Soledad O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Soledad O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="34418" end="34429" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975912" start="34541" end="34567" title="Wayland Baptist University" label="Wayland Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="34785" end="34797" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="34801" end="34811" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q25631175" start="34866" end="34897" title="2016 shooting of Dallas police officers" label="Dallas police officers shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q745866" start="35482" end="35502" title="Dallas Museum of Art" label="Dallas Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q212398" start="35724" end="35741" title="monarch butterfly" label="monarch butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q960478" start="35863" end="35882" title="Red Cloud, Nebraska" label="Red Cloud, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806765" start="36044" end="36070" title="Asian University for Women" label="Asian University for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="36560" end="36577" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="36588" end="36602" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080368" start="36707" end="36730" title="Global Citizen Festival" label="Global Citizen Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428714" start="37050" end="37077" title="Flight 93 National Memorial" label="Flight 93 National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="37915" end="37927" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q638603" start="38477" end="38502" title="United Airlines Flight 93" label="United Airlines Flight 93"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="38791" end="38797" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453138" start="38805" end="38824" title="First Ladies Summit" label="First Ladies Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886347" start="38888" end="38898" title="Ben Rhodes (White House staffer)" label="Ben Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080989" start="39162" end="39171" title="Inquisitr" label="Inquisitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="39524" end="39538" title="Kennedy Center" label="Kennedy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="39575" end="39594" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q27824398" start="40367" end="40395" title="First inauguration of Donald Trump" label="inauguration of Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q432473" start="40618" end="40631" title="Melania Trump" label="Melania Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906891" start="40656" end="40681" title="Diplomatic Reception Room" label="Diplomatic Reception Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q55025660" start="40801" end="40846" title="Trump administration family separation policy" label="Trump administration family separation policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="40919" end="40931" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738250" start="41329" end="41354" title="inauguration of Joe Biden" label="inauguration of Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="41465" end="41476" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100946" start="41517" end="41527" title="Ann Romney" label="Ann Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q853552" start="41545" end="41562" title="Livonia, Michigan" label="Livonia, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203966" start="41819" end="41828" title="Paul Ryan" label="Paul Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="41849" end="41856" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q221997" start="42542" end="42550" title="Jeb Bush" label="Jeb Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="43034" end="43048" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="43246" end="43258" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="43721" end="43731" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040649" start="44279" end="44319" title="Institute of Museum and Library Services" label="Institute of Museum and Library Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="44780" end="44797" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737890" start="44802" end="44816" title="Hurricane Rita" label="Hurricane Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="45048" end="45054" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38685186" start="45056" end="45060" title="Hurricane Irma" label="Irma"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178187" start="45066" end="45071" title="Hurricane Maria" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637514" start="45087" end="45107" title="2017 California wildfires" label="California wildfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499536" start="45304" end="45351" title="Laura W. Bush Institute for Women&amp;#x27;s Health" label="Laura W. Bush Institute for Women&amp;#x27;s Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119816" start="45380" end="45424" title="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center" label="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q153481" start="46115" end="46120" title="Jenna Bush Hager" label="Jenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578911" start="46222" end="46243" title="Spoken from the Heart" label="Spoken from the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359213" start="46382" end="46391" title="Goodreads" label="Goodreads"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="46504" end="46515" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46529" end="46564" title="We Are Afghan Women: Voices of Hope" label="We Are Afghan Women: Voices of Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q153481" start="46660" end="46665" title="Jenna Bush Hager" label="Jenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237794" start="46806" end="46819" title="Junior League" label="Junior League"/>
<link wikidata="Q107587015" start="46999" end="47034" title="Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity" label="Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q231417" start="47129" end="47144" title="Barbara Walters" label="Barbara Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859391" start="47151" end="47174" title="Barbara Walters&amp;#x27; 10 Most Fascinating People" label="Most Fascinating Person"/>
<link wikidata="Q465584" start="47193" end="47221" title="American Library Association" label="American Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="47381" end="47404" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885384" start="47409" end="47433" title="Order of Gabriela Silang" label="Order of Gabriela Silang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="47482" end="47497" title="U.S. First Lady" label="U.S. First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="47544" end="47555" title="George W. Bush" label="George Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="47717" end="47723" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754030" start="47772" end="47807" title="The Nichols-Chancellor&amp;#x27;s Medal" label="The Nichols-Chancellor&amp;#x27;s Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="47821" end="47836" title="disaster relief" label="disaster relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="47879" end="47900" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="47954" end="47985" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8560655" start="48080" end="48092" title="Pasadena ISD" label="Pasadena ISD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="48096" end="48110" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509528" start="48155" end="48166" title="Leander ISD" label="Leander ISD"/>
<link wikidata="Q110426" start="48170" end="48190" title="Travis County, Texas" label="Travis County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="48205" end="48211" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108239" start="48243" end="48261" title="Lubbock-Cooper ISD" label="Lubbock-Cooper ISD"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="48266" end="48280" title="Lubbock, Texas" label="Lubbock, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q138525" start="48321" end="48335" title="Camp Bondsteel" label="Camp Bondsteel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="48361" end="48367" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109623" start="48394" end="48425" title="Christian Freedom International" label="Christian Freedom International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175374" start="48478" end="48513" title="Jefferson Awards for Public Service" label="Jefferson Awards for Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q563211" start="48541" end="48552" title="Hector Ruiz" label="Hector Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q522205" start="48616" end="48634" title="William H. McRaven" label="William H. McRaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="48640" end="48649" title="Navy Seal" label="Navy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19085" start="48666" end="48698" title="raid that killed Osama bin Laden" label="raid that killed Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="48740" end="48769" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975912" start="48850" end="48876" title="Wayland Baptist University" label="Wayland Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528559" start="49252" end="49278" title="Afghan women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="Afghan women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="49366" end="49382" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q538275" start="49456" end="49484" title="National Constitution Center" label="National Constitution Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q219373" start="49679" end="49694" title="Elizabeth Banks" label="Elizabeth Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="49698" end="49710" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q959051" start="49729" end="49730" title="W. (film)" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="Q456855" start="49738" end="49755" title="Curtis Sittenfeld" label="Curtis Sittenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124856" start="49878" end="49882" title="HGTV" label="HGTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175508" start="49890" end="49913" title="Fixer Upper (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Fixer Upper&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365016" start="50132" end="50147" title="Ronald Kessler" label="Kessler, Ronald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956766" start="50670" end="50684" title="Whitehouse.gov" label="Whitehouse.gov"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186449" start="50724" end="50739" title="Dennis B. Roddy" label="Dennis B. Roddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="50895" end="50901" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50915" end="50950" title="First Ladies: Influence &amp;amp; Image" label="First Ladies: Influence &amp;amp; Image"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17530" wikidata="Q2754968" url="?curid=17530" title="Lattice">
<text>Lattice may refer to:
== Arts and design ==
* Latticework, an ornamental criss-crossed framework, an arrangement of crossing laths or other thin strips of material
* Lattice (music), an organized grid model of pitch ratios
* Lattice (pastry), an ornamental pattern of crossing strips of pastry

== Companies ==
* Lattice Engines, a technology company specializing in business applications for marketing and sales
* Lattice Group, a former British gas transmission business
* Lattice Semiconductor, a US-based integrated circuit manufacturer

== Science, technology, and mathematics ==
=== Mathematics ===
* Lattice (group), a repeating arrangement of points
** Lattice (discrete subgroup), a discrete subgroup of a topological group whose quotient carries an invariant finite Borel measure
** Lattice (module), a module over a ring that is embedded in a vector space over a field
** Lattice graph, a graph that can be drawn within a repeating arrangement of points
** Lattice-based cryptography, encryption systems based on repeating arrangements of points
* Lattice (order), a partially ordered set with unique least upper bounds and greatest lower bounds
** Lattice-based access control, computer security systems based on partially ordered access privileges
** Skew lattice, a non-commutative generalization of order-theoretic lattices
* Lattice multiplication, a multiplication algorithm suitable for hand calculation

=== Other uses in science and technology ===
* Bethe lattice, a regular infinite tree structure used in statistical mechanics
* Bravais lattice, a repetitive arrangement of atoms
* Lattice C, a compiler for the C programming language
* Lattice mast, a type of observation mast common on major warships in the early 20th century
* Lattice model (physics), a model defined not on a continuum, but on a grid
* Lattice tower, or truss tower is a type of freestanding framework tower
* Lattice truss bridge, a type of truss bridge that uses many closely spaced diagonal elements

== Other uses ==
* Lattice model (finance), a method for evaluating stock options that divides time into discrete intervals

== See also ==
* Grid (disambiguation)
* Mesh (disambiguation)
* Trellis (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2754968" start="0" end="7" title="Lattice" label="Lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368562" start="46" end="57" title="Latticework" label="Latticework"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497091" start="166" end="181" title="Lattice (music)" label="Lattice (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497093" start="225" end="241" title="Lattice (pastry)" label="Lattice (pastry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497112" start="313" end="328" title="Lattice Engines" label="Lattice Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497098" start="415" end="428" title="Lattice Group" label="Lattice Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q747207" start="475" end="496" title="Lattice Semiconductor" label="Lattice Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096885" start="607" end="622" title="Lattice (group)" label="Lattice (group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497088" start="661" end="688" title="Lattice (discrete subgroup)" label="Lattice (discrete subgroup)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497090" start="793" end="809" title="Lattice (module)" label="Lattice (module)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497118" start="883" end="896" title="Lattice graph" label="Lattice graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497083" start="968" end="994" title="Lattice-based cryptography" label="Lattice-based cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="1059" end="1074" title="Lattice (order)" label="Lattice (order)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996125" start="1160" end="1188" title="Lattice-based access control" label="Lattice-based access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534803" start="1264" end="1276" title="Skew lattice" label="Skew lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516846" start="1341" end="1363" title="Lattice multiplication" label="Lattice multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q794168" start="1470" end="1483" title="Bethe lattice" label="Bethe lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q865788" start="1551" end="1566" title="Bravais lattice" label="Bravais lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q649594" start="1604" end="1613" title="Lattice C" label="Lattice C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497121" start="1659" end="1671" title="Lattice mast" label="Lattice mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394145" start="1753" end="1776" title="Lattice model (physics)" label="Lattice model (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440476" start="1830" end="1843" title="Lattice tower" label="Lattice tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q113534" start="1904" end="1924" title="Lattice truss bridge" label="Lattice truss bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497124" start="2017" end="2040" title="Lattice model (finance)" label="Lattice model (finance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q233558" start="2140" end="2161" title="Grid (disambiguation)" label="Grid (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q299947" start="2164" end="2185" title="Mesh (disambiguation)" label="Mesh (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838010" start="2188" end="2212" title="Trellis (disambiguation)" label="Trellis (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17532" wikidata="Q368623" url="?curid=17532" title="Lorisidae">
<text>Lorisidae (or sometimes Loridae) is a family of strepsirrhine primates. The lorisids are all slim arboreal animals and comprise the lorises, pottos, and angwantibos. Lorisids live in tropical, central Africa as well as in south and southeast Asia.

== Classification ==
There are five genera and sixteen species of lorisid.

* Order Primates
** Suborder Strepsirrhini: non-tarsier prosimians
*** Infraorder Lemuriformes
**** Superfamily Lemuroidea
**** Superfamily Lorisoidea
***** Family Lorisidae
****** Subfamily Perodicticinae
******* Genus &quot;Arctocebus&quot;, angwantibos
******* Genus &quot;Perodicticus&quot;, pottos
****** Subfamily Lorisinae
******* Genus &quot;Loris&quot;, slender lorises
******* Genus &quot;Nycticebus&quot;, slow lorises
******* Genus &quot;Xanthonycticebus&quot;, pygmy slow loris
***** Family Galagidae: galagos
** Suborder Haplorrhini: tarsiers, monkeys and apes

== Description ==

Lorisids have a close, woolly fur, which is usually grey or brown, darker on the top side. The eyes are large and face forward. The ears are small and often partially hidden in the fur. The thumbs are opposable and the index finger is short. The second toe of the hind legs has a fine claw for grooming, typical for strepsirrhines. Their tails are short or are missing completely. They grow to a length of 17 to 40 cm and a weight of between 0.3 and 2 kg, depending on the species. Their dental formula is similar to that of lemurs: 

== Behavior and ecology ==
Lorisids are nocturnal and arboreal. Unlike the closely related galagos, lorisids never jump. Some have slow deliberate movements, whilst others can move with some speed across branches. It was previously thought that all lorisids moved slowly, but investigations using red light proved this to be wrong. Nonetheless, even the faster species freeze or move slowly if they hear or see any potential predator. This habit of remaining motionless whilst in danger is successful only because of the leafy environment of their jungle home, which helps to conceal their true position. With their strong hands they clasp at the branches and cannot be removed without significant force. Most lorisids are solitary or live in small family groups.

Slow lorises from southeast Asia produce a secretion from their brachial gland (a scent gland on the upper arm, between the axilla and elbow), that is licked and mixed with their saliva to form a toxin which may be used for defense. The slender lorises from Sri Lanka and South India also possess these brachial glands, but it is uncertain whether they also synthesize the toxin. The potto (&quot;Perodicticus potto&quot;) is thought to lack brachial glands, though it produces similar toxic excretions with its anal glands.

Lorisids have a gestation period of four to six months and give birth to two young. These often clasp themselves to the belly of the mother or wait in nests, while the mother goes to search for food. After three to nine months - depending on the species - they are weaned and are fully mature within 10 to 18 months. The life expectancy of lorises can be to up to 20 years.

Lorisids consume insects, bird eggs and small vertebrates as well as fruits and gums.

==References==
===Literature cited===


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368623" start="0" end="9" title="Lorisidae" label="Lorisidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q368623" start="24" end="31" title="Lorisidae" label="Loridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="48" end="61" title="strepsirrhine" label="strepsirrhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="62" end="69" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q368623" start="76" end="84" title="Lorisidae" label="lorisids"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="98" end="106" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428868" start="132" end="137" title="loris" label="loris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816393" start="141" end="146" title="potto" label="potto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019157" start="153" end="163" title="angwantibo" label="angwantibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="201" end="207" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="242" end="246" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="285" end="291" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="333" end="340" title="Primate" label="Primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="354" end="367" title="Strepsirrhini" label="Strepsirrhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q37212" start="407" end="419" title="Lemuriformes" label="Lemuriformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192405" start="437" end="442" title="Lemur" label="Lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q545982" start="465" end="475" title="Lorisoidea" label="Lorisoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153394" start="516" end="530" title="Perodicticinae" label="Perodicticinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019157" start="551" end="561" title="Arctocebus" label="Arctocebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816393" start="601" end="613" title="Perodicticus" label="Perodicticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428868" start="645" end="654" title="Lorisinae" label="Lorisinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259581" start="675" end="680" title="slender loris" label="Loris"/>
<link wikidata="Q74941" start="724" end="734" title="Nycticebus" label="Nycticebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q111446938" start="775" end="791" title="Xanthonycticebus" label="Xanthonycticebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="829" end="838" title="Galagidae" label="Galagidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q82261" start="860" end="871" title="Haplorrhini" label="Haplorrhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="1408" end="1422" title="dentition" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192405" start="1445" end="1451" title="lemurs" label="lemurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="1495" end="1504" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="1509" end="1517" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="1546" end="1552" title="galago" label="galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q74941" start="2220" end="2230" title="Slow loris" label="Slow loris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84230" start="2263" end="2272" title="secretion" label="secretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264033" start="2302" end="2313" title="scent gland" label="scent gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q499" start="2344" end="2350" title="axilla" label="axilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259581" start="2457" end="2472" title="Slender loris" label="slender lorises"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816393" start="2604" end="2609" title="potto" label="potto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="2762" end="2771" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333203" start="3011" end="3017" title="weaning" label="weaned"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="3067" end="3082" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="3138" end="3144" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q659503" start="3147" end="3155" title="bird egg" label="bird egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="3167" end="3177" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="3190" end="3195" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633062" start="3201" end="3205" title="Gum (botany)" label="gums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17537" wikidata="Q23118" url="?curid=17537" title="LSD">
<text>Lysergic acid diethylamide, commonly known as LSD (from German ), is a potent psychedelic drug that intensifies thoughts, emotions, and sensory perception. Often referred to as acid or lucy, LSD can cause mystical, spiritual, or religious experiences. At higher doses, it primarily induces visual and auditory hallucinations. LSD is not considered addictive, because it does not produce compulsive drug-seeking behavior. Using LSD can lead to adverse psychological reactions, such as anxiety, paranoia, and delusions. Additionally, it may trigger &quot;flashbacks,&quot; also known as hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD), where individuals experience persistent visual distortions after use.

The effects of LSD begin within 30 minutes of ingestion and can last up to 20 hours, with most trips averaging 8–12 hours. It is synthesized from lysergic acid and commonly administered via tabs of blotter paper. LSD is mainly used recreationally or for spiritual purposes. As a serotonin receptor agonist, LSD&#x27;s precise effects are not fully understood, but it is known to alter the brain’s default mode network, leading to its powerful psychedelic effects.

The drug was first synthesized by Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann in 1938 and became widely studied in the 1950s and 1960s. It was used experimentally in psychiatry for treating alcoholism and schizophrenia. However, its association with the counterculture movement of the 1960s led to its classification as a Schedule I drug in the U.S. in 1968. It was also listed as a Schedule I controlled substance by the United Nations in 1971 and remains without approved medical uses.

Despite its legal restrictions, LSD remains influential in scientific and cultural contexts. Its therapeutic potential has been explored, particularly in treating mental health disorders. As of 2017, about 10% of people in the U.S. had used LSD at some point, with 0.7% having used it in the past year. Usage rates have risen, with a 56.4% increase in adult use in the U.S. from 2015 to 2018.
==Uses==

===Recreational===
LSD is commonly used as a recreational drug.

===Spiritual===
LSD can catalyze intense spiritual experiences and is thus considered an entheogen. Some users have reported out of body experiences. In 1966, Timothy Leary established the League for Spiritual Discovery with LSD as its sacrament. Stanislav Grof has written that religious and mystical experiences observed during LSD sessions appear to be phenomenologically indistinguishable from similar descriptions in the sacred scriptures of the great religions of the world and the texts of ancient civilizations.

===Medical===

LSD currently has no approved uses in medicine. A meta analysis concluded that a single dose was shown to be effective at reducing alcohol consumption in people suffering from alcoholism. LSD has also been studied in depression, anxiety, and drug dependence, with positive preliminary results.

==Effects==
LSD is exceptionally potent, with as little as 20 μg capable of producing a noticeable effect.

===Physical===
LSD can induce physical effects such as pupil dilation, decreased appetite, increased sweating, and wakefulness. The physical reactions to LSD vary greatly and some may be a result of its psychological effects. Commonly observed symptoms include increased body temperature, blood sugar, and heart rate, as well as goose bumps, jaw clenching, dry mouth, and hyperreflexia. In cases of adverse reactions, users may experience numbness, weakness, nausea, and tremors.

===Psychological===
The primary immediate psychological effects of LSD are visual pseudo-hallucinations and altered thought, often referred to as &quot;trips&quot;. These sensory alterations are considered pseudohallucinations because the subject does not perceive the patterns seen as being located in three-dimensional space outside the body. LSD is not considered addictive. These effects typically begin within 20–30 minutes of oral ingestion, peak three to four hours after ingestion, and can last up to 20 hours, particularly with higher doses. An &quot;afterglow&quot; effect, characterized by an improved mood or perceived mental state, may persist for days or weeks following ingestion. Positive experiences, or &quot;good trips&quot;, are described as intensely pleasurable and can include feelings of joy, euphoria, an increased appreciation for life, decreased anxiety, a sense of spiritual enlightenment, and a feeling of interconnectedness with the universe.

Negative experiences, commonly known as &quot;bad trips&quot;, can induce feelings of fear, agitation, anxiety, panic, and paranoia. While the occurrence of a bad trip is unpredictable, factors such as mood, surroundings, sleep, hydration, and social setting, collectively referred to as &quot;set and setting&quot;, can influence the risk and are considered important in minimizing the likelihood of a negative experience.

===Sensory===
LSD induces an animated sensory experience affecting senses, emotions, memories, time, and awareness, lasting from 6 to 20 hours, with the duration dependent on dosage and individual tolerance. Effects typically commence within 30 to 90 minutes post-ingestion, ranging from subtle perceptual changes to profound cognitive shifts. Alterations in auditory and visual perception are common.

Users may experience enhanced visual phenomena, such as vibrant colors, objects appearing to morph, ripple or move, and geometric patterns on various surfaces. Changes in the perception of food&#x27;s texture and taste are also noted, sometimes leading to aversion towards certain foods.

There are reports of inanimate objects appearing animated, with static objects seeming to move in additional spatial dimensions. The auditory effects of LSD may include echo-like distortions of sounds, and an intensified experience of music. Basic visual effects often resemble phosphenes and can be influenced by concentration, thoughts, emotions, or music. Higher doses can lead to more intense sensory perception alterations, including synesthesia, perception of additional dimensions, and temporary dissociation.

==Adverse effects==


LSD, a classical psychedelic, is deemed physiologically safe at standard dosages (50–200 μg) and its primary risks lie in psychological effects rather than physiological harm. A 2010 study by David Nutt ranked LSD as significantly less harmful than alcohol, placing it near the bottom of a list assessing the harm of 20 drugs.

===Psychological effects===
====Mental disorders====
LSD can induce panic attacks or extreme anxiety, colloquially termed a &quot;bad trip&quot;. Despite lower rates of depression and substance abuse found in psychedelic drug users compared to controls, LSD presents heightened risks for individuals with severe mental illnesses like schizophrenia. These hallucinogens can catalyze psychiatric disorders in predisposed individuals, although they do not tend to induce illness in emotionally healthy people. 

====Suggestibility====
While research from the 1960s indicated increased suggestibility under the influence of LSD among both mentally ill and healthy individuals, recent documents suggest that the CIA and Department of Defense have discontinued research into LSD as a means of mind control.

====Flashbacks====
Flashbacks are psychological episodes where individuals re-experience some of LSD&#x27;s subjective effects after the drug has worn off, persisting for days or months post-hallucinogen use. These experiences are associated with hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD), where flashbacks occur intermittently or chronically, causing distress or functional impairment.

The etiology of flashbacks is varied. Some cases are attributed to somatic symptom disorder, where individuals fixate on normal somatic experiences previously unnoticed prior to drug consumption. Other instances are linked to associative reactions to contextual cues, similar to responses observed in individuals with past trauma or emotional experiences. The risk factors for flashbacks remain unclear, but pre-existing psychopathologies may be significant contributors.

Estimating the prevalence of HPPD is challenging. It is considered rare, with occurrences ranging from 1 in 20 users experiencing the transient and less severe type 1 HPPD, to 1 in 50,000 for the more concerning type 2 HPPD. Contrary to internet rumors, LSD is not stored long-term in the spinal cord or other body parts. Pharmacological evidence indicates LSD has a half-life of 175 minutes and is metabolized into water-soluble compounds like 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD, eliminated through urine without evidence of long-term storage. Clinical evidence also suggests that chronic use of SSRIs can potentiate LSD-induced flashbacks, even months after stopping LSD use.

===Drug interactions===
Several psychedelics, including LSD, are metabolized by CYP2D6. Concurrent use of SSRIs, potent inhibitors of CYP2D6, with LSD may heighten the risk of serotonin syndrome. Chronic usage of SSRIs, TCAs, and MAOIs is believed to diminish the subjective effects of psychedelics, likely due to SSRI-induced 5-HT2A receptor downregulation and MAOI-induced 5-HT2A receptor desensitization. Interactions between psychedelics and antipsychotics or anticonvulsants are not well-documented; however, co-use with mood stabilizers like lithium may induce seizures and dissociative effects, particularly in individuals with bipolar disorder. Lithium notably intensifies LSD reactions, potentially leading to acute comatose states when combined.

===Lethal dose===
The lethal oral dose of LSD in humans is estimated at 100 mg, based on LD50 and lethal blood concentrations observed in rodent studies.

===Tolerance===
LSD shows significant tachyphylaxis, with tolerance developing 24 hours after administration. The progression of tolerance at intervals shorter than 24 hours remains largely unknown. Tolerance typically resets to baseline after 3–4 days of abstinence. Significant cross-tolerance occurs between LSD, mescaline and psilocybin. A slight cross-tolerance to DMT is observed in humans highly tolerant to LSD. Tolerance to LSD also builds up with consistent use, and is believed to result from serotonin 5-HT2A receptor downregulation. Researchers believe that tolerance returns to baseline after two weeks of not using psychedelics.

===Addiction and dependence liability===
LSD is widely considered to be non-addictive, despite its potential for abuse. Attempts to train laboratory animals to self-administer LSD have been largely unsuccessful. Although tolerance to LSD builds up rapidly, a withdrawal syndrome does not appear, suggesting that a potential syndrome does not necessarily relate to the possibility of acquiring rapid tolerance to a substance. A report examining substance use disorder for DSM-IV noted that almost no hallucinogens produced dependence, unlike psychoactive drugs of other classes such as stimulants and depressants.

===Cancer and pregnancy===
The mutagenic potential of LSD is unclear. Overall, the evidence seems to point to limited or no effect at commonly used doses. Studies showed no evidence of teratogenic or mutagenic effects.

===Physical toxicity===
A potential risk of frequent repeated long-term use of LSD and other serotonergic psychedelics is cardiac fibrosis and valvulopathy due to serotonin 5-HT2B receptor agonism. This may also be the case with microdosing. However, the risks are theoretical, and more research is needed to see if these complications can actually occur with psychedelics. A preliminary animal study found that chronic microdosing of LSD did not result in heart structure changes or valvulopathy in rodents. Research appears to be mixed on whether LSD is a potent serotonin 5-HT2B receptor agonist or not, with some studies finding it to be essentially inactive.

==Overdose==
There have been no documented fatal human overdoses from LSD, although there has been no &quot;comprehensive review since the 1950s&quot; and &quot;almost no legal clinical research since the 1970s&quot;. Eight individuals who had accidentally consumed an exceedingly high amount of LSD, mistaking it for cocaine, and had gastric levels of 1000–7000 μg LSD tartrate per 100 mL and blood plasma levels up to 26 μg/ml, had suffered from comatose states, vomiting, respiratory problems, hyperthermia, and light gastrointestinal bleeding; however, all of them survived without residual effects upon hospital intervention.

Individuals experiencing a bad trip after LSD intoxication may present with severe anxiety and tachycardia, often accompanied by phases of psychotic agitation and varying degrees of delusions. Cases of death on a bad trip have been reported due to prone maximal restraint (commonly known as a hogtie) and positional asphyxia when the individuals were restrained by law enforcement personnel.

Massive doses are largely managed by symptomatic treatments, and agitation can be addressed with benzodiazepines. Reassurance in a calm, safe environment is beneficial. Antipsychotics such as haloperidol are not recommended as they may have adverse psychotomimetic effects. Gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal is of little use due to the rapid absorption of LSD, unless done within 30–60 minutes of ingesting exceedingly huge amounts. Administration of anticoagulants, vasodilators, and sympatholytics may be useful for treating ergotism.

===Designer drug overdose===
Many novel psychoactive substances of 25-NB (NBOMe) series, such as 25I-NBOMe and 25B-NBOMe, are regularly sold as LSD in blotter papers. NBOMe compounds are often associated with life-threatening toxicity and death. Fatalities involved in NBOMe intoxication suggest that a significant number of individuals ingested the substance which they believed was LSD, and researchers report that &quot;users familiar with LSD may have a false sense of security when ingesting NBOMe inadvertently&quot;. Researchers state that the alleged physiological toxicity of LSD is likely due to psychoactive substances other than LSD.

NBOMe compounds are reported to have a bitter taste, are not active orally, and are usually taken sublingually. When NBOMes are administered sublingually, numbness of the tongue and mouth followed by a metallic chemical taste was observed, and researchers describe this physical side effect as one of the main discriminants between NBOMe compounds and LSD. Despite its high potency, recreational doses of LSD have only produced low incidents of acute toxicity, but NBOMe compounds have extremely different safety profiles. Testing with Ehrlich&#x27;s reagent gives a positive result for LSD and a negative result for NBOMe compounds.

==Pharmacology==

===Pharmacodynamics===


Most serotonergic psychedelics are not significantly dopaminergic, and LSD is therefore atypical in this regard. The agonism of the D2 receptor by LSD may contribute to its psychoactive effects in humans.

LSD binds to most serotonin receptor subtypes except for the 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors. However, most of these receptors are affected at too low affinity to be sufficiently activated by the brain concentration of approximately 10–20 nM. In humans, recreational doses of LSD can affect 5-HT1A (Ki = 1.1 nM), 5-HT2A (Ki = 2.9 nM), 5-HT2B (Ki = 4.9 nM), 5-HT2C (Ki = 23 nM), 5-HT5A (Ki = 9 nM [in cloned rat tissues]), and 5-HT6 receptors (Ki = 2.3 nM). Although not present in humans, 5-HT5B receptors found in rodents also have a high affinity for LSD. The psychedelic effects of LSD are attributed to cross-activation of 5-HT2A receptor heteromers. Many but not all 5-HT2A agonists are psychedelics and 5-HT2A antagonists block the psychedelic activity of LSD. LSD exhibits functional selectivity at the 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors in that it activates the signal transduction enzyme phospholipase A2 instead of activating the enzyme phospholipase C as the endogenous ligand serotonin does.

Exactly how LSD produces its effects is unknown, but it is thought that it works by increasing glutamate release in the cerebral cortex and therefore excitation in this area, specifically in layer V. LSD, like many other drugs of recreational use, has been shown to activate DARPP-32-related pathways. The drug enhances dopamine D2 receptor protomer recognition and signaling of D2–5-HT2A receptor complexes, which may contribute to its psychotropic effects. LSD has been shown to have low affinity for H1 receptors, displaying antihistamine effects.

LSD is a biased agonist that induces a conformation in serotonin receptors that preferentially recruits β-arrestin over activating G proteins. LSD also has an exceptionally long residence time when bound to serotonin receptors lasting hours, consistent with the long-lasting effects of LSD despite its relatively rapid clearance. A crystal structure of 5-HT2B bound to LSD reveals an extracellular loop that forms a lid over the diethylamide end of the binding cavity which explains the slow rate of LSD unbinding from serotonin receptors. The related lysergamide lysergic acid amide (LSA) that lacks the diethylamide moiety is far less hallucinogenic in comparison.

LSD, like other psychedelics, has been found to increase the expression of genes related to synaptic plasticity. This is in part due to binding to brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) receptor TrkB.

====Mechanisms of action====
Neuroimaging studies using resting state fMRI recently suggested that LSD changes the cortical functional architecture. These modifications spatially overlap with the distribution of serotoninergic receptors. In particular, increased connectivity and activity were observed in regions with high expression of 5-HT2A receptor, while a decrease in activity and connectivity was observed in cortical areas that are dense with 5-HT1A receptor. Experimental data suggest that subcortical structures, particularly the thalamus, play a synergistic role with the cerebral cortex in mediating the psychedelic experience. LSD, through its binding to cortical 5-HT2A receptor, may enhance excitatory neurotransmission along frontostriatal projections and, consequently, reduce thalamic filtering of sensory stimuli towards the cortex. This phenomenon appears to selectively involve ventral, intralaminar, and pulvinar nuclei.

===Pharmacokinetics===
The acute effects of LSD normally last between 6 and 10 hours depending on dosage, tolerance, and age. Aghajanian and Bing (1964) found LSD had an elimination half-life of only 175 minutes (about 3 hours). However, using more accurate techniques, Papac and Foltz (1990) reported that 1 μg/kg oral LSD given to a single male volunteer had an apparent plasma half-life of 5.1 hours, with a peak plasma concentration of 5 ng/mL at 3 hours post-dose.

The pharmacokinetics of LSD were not properly determined until 2015, which is not surprising for a drug with the kind of low-μg potency that LSD possesses. In a sample of 16 healthy subjects, a single mid-range 200 μg oral dose of LSD was found to produce mean maximal concentrations of 4.5 ng/mL at a median of 1.5 hours (range 0.5–4 hours) post-administration. Concentrations of LSD decreased following first-order kinetics with a half-life of 3.6±0.9 hours and a terminal half-life of 8.9±5.9 hours.

The effects of the dose of LSD given lasted for up to 12 hours and were closely correlated with the concentrations of LSD present in circulation over time, with no acute tolerance observed. Only 1% of the drug was eliminated in urine unchanged, whereas 13% was eliminated as the major metabolite 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD (O-H-LSD) within 24 hours. O-H-LSD is formed by cytochrome P450 enzymes, although the specific enzymes involved are unknown, and it does not appear to be known whether O-H-LSD is pharmacologically active or not. The oral bioavailability of LSD was crudely estimated as approximately 71% using previous data on intravenous administration of LSD. The sample was equally divided between male and female subjects and there were no significant sex differences observed in the pharmacokinetics of LSD.

==Chemistry==
LSD is a chiral compound with two stereocenters at the carbon atoms C-5 and C-8, so that theoretically four different optical isomers of LSD could exist. LSD, also called (+)-&quot;d&quot;-LSD, has the absolute configuration (5&quot;R&quot;,8&quot;R&quot;). 5&quot;S&quot; stereoisomers of lysergamides do not exist in nature and are not formed during the synthesis from &quot;d&quot;-lysergic acid. Retrosynthetically, the C-5 stereocenter could be analysed as having the same configuration of the alpha carbon of the naturally occurring amino acid L-tryptophan, the precursor to all biosynthetic ergoline compounds.

However, LSD and iso-LSD, the two C-8 isomers, rapidly interconvert in the presence of bases, as the alpha proton is acidic and can be deprotonated and reprotonated. Non-psychoactive iso-LSD which has formed during the synthesis can be separated by chromatography and can be isomerized to LSD.

Pure salts of LSD are triboluminescent, emitting small flashes of white light when shaken in the dark. LSD is strongly fluorescent and will glow bluish-white under UV light.

===Synthesis===
LSD is an ergoline derivative. It is commonly synthesized by reacting diethylamine with an activated form of lysergic acid. Activating reagents include phosphoryl chloride and peptide coupling reagents. Lysergic acid is made by alkaline hydrolysis of lysergamides like ergotamine, a substance usually derived from the ergot fungus on agar plate. Lysergic acid can also be produced synthetically, although these processes are not used in clandestine manufacture due to their low yields and high complexity.

Albert Hofmann synthesized LSD in the following manner: (1) hydrazinolysis of ergotamine into D- and L-isolysergic acid hydrazide, (2) separation of the enantiomers with di-(&quot;p&quot;-toluyl)-D-tartaric acid to get D-isolysergic acid hydrazide, (3) enantiomerization into D-lysergic acid hydrazide, (4) substitution with HNO2 to D-lysergic acid azide and (5) finally substitution with diethylamine to form D-lysergic acid diethylamide.

====Research====
The precursor for LSD, lysergic acid, has been produced by GMO baker&#x27;s yeast.

===Dosage===

A single dose of LSD is typically between 40 and 500 micrograms—an amount roughly equal to one-tenth the mass of a grain of sand. Threshold effects can be felt with as little as 25 micrograms of LSD. The practice of using sub-threshold doses is called microdosing. Dosages of LSD are measured in micrograms (μg), or millionths of a gram.

In the mid-1960s, the most important black market LSD manufacturer (Owsley Stanley) distributed LSD at a standard concentration of 270 μg, while street samples of the 1970s contained 30 to 300 μg. By the 1980s, the amount had reduced to between 100 and 125 μg, dropping more in the 1990s to the 20–80 μg range, and even more in the 2000s (decade).

===Reactivity and degradation===
&quot;LSD,&quot; writes the chemist Alexander Shulgin, &quot;is an unusually fragile molecule ... As a salt, in water, cold, and free from air and light exposure, it is stable indefinitely.&quot;

LSD has two labile protons at the tertiary stereogenic C5 and C8 positions, rendering these centers prone to epimerisation. The C8 proton is more labile due to the electron-withdrawing carboxamide attachment, but the removal of the chiral proton at the C5 position (which was once also an alpha proton of the parent molecule tryptophan) is assisted by the inductively withdrawing nitrogen and pi electron delocalisation with the indole ring.

LSD also has enamine-type reactivity because of the electron-donating effects of the indole ring. Because of this, chlorine destroys LSD molecules on contact; even though chlorinated tap water contains only a slight amount of chlorine, the small quantity of compound typical to an LSD solution will likely be eliminated when dissolved in tap water. The double bond between the 8-position and the aromatic ring, being conjugated with the indole ring, is susceptible to nucleophilic attacks by water or alcohol, especially in the presence of UV or other kinds of light. LSD often converts to &quot;lumi-LSD,&quot; which is inactive in human beings.

A controlled study was undertaken to determine the stability of LSD in pooled urine samples.
The concentrations of LSD in urine samples were followed over time at various temperatures, in different types of storage containers, at various exposures to different wavelengths of light, and at varying pH values. These studies demonstrated no significant loss in LSD concentration at 25 °C for up to four weeks. After four weeks of incubation, a 30% loss in LSD concentration at 37 °C and up to a 40% at 45 °C were observed. Urine fortified with LSD and stored in amber glass or nontransparent polyethylene containers showed no change in concentration under any light conditions. The stability of LSD in transparent containers under light was dependent on the distance between the light source and the samples, the wavelength of light, exposure time, and the intensity of light. After prolonged exposure to heat in alkaline pH conditions, 10 to 15% of the parent LSD epimerized to iso-LSD. Under acidic conditions, less than 5% of the LSD was converted to iso-LSD. It was also demonstrated that trace amounts of metal ions in the buffer or urine could catalyze the decomposition of LSD and that this process can be avoided by the addition of EDTA.

===Detection===
LSD can be detected in concentrations larger than approximately 10% in a sample using Ehrlich&#x27;s reagent and Hofmann&#x27;s reagent. However, detecting LSD in human tissues is more challenging due to its active dosage being significantly lower (in micrograms) compared to most other drugs (in milligrams).

LSD may be quantified in urine for drug testing programs, in plasma or serum to confirm poisoning in hospitalized victims, or in whole blood for forensic investigations. The parent drug and its major metabolite are unstable in biofluids when exposed to light, heat, or alkaline conditions, necessitating protection from light, low-temperature storage, and quick analysis to minimize losses. Maximum plasma concentrations are typically observed 1.4 to 1.5 hours after oral administration of 100 μg and 200 μg, respectively, with a plasma half-life of approximately 2.6 hours (ranging from 2.2 to 3.4 hours among test subjects).

Due to its potency in microgram quantities, LSD is often not included in standard pre-employment urine or hair analyses. However, advanced liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry methods can detect LSD in biological samples even after a single use.

==History==

Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann first synthesized LSD in 1938 from lysergic acid, a chemical derived from the hydrolysis of ergotamine, an alkaloid found in ergot, a fungus that infects grain. LSD was the 25th of various lysergamides Hofmann synthesized from lysergic acid while trying to develop a new analeptic, hence the alternate name LSD-25. Hofmann discovered its effects in humans on April 16, in 1943, after unintentionally ingesting an unknown amount, possibly absorbing it through his skin. On April 19, 1943, Hofmann intentionaly ingested 0.25 milligrams (250 micrograms) of LSD. 

LSD was subject to exceptional interest within the field of psychiatry in the 1950s and early 1960s, with Sandoz distributing LSD to researchers under the trademark name Delysid in an attempt to find a marketable use for it. During this period, LSD was controversially administered to hospitalised schizophrenic autistic children, with varying degrees of therapeutic success.

LSD-assisted psychotherapy was used in the 1950s and early 1960s by psychiatrists such as Humphry Osmond, who pioneered the application of LSD to the treatment of alcoholism, with promising results. Osmond coined the term &quot;psychedelic&quot; (lit. &quot;mind manifesting&quot;) as a term for LSD and related hallucinogens, superseding the previously held &quot;psychotomimetic&quot; model in which LSD was believed to mimic schizophrenia. In contrast to schizophrenia, LSD can induce transcendent experiences, or mental states that transcend the experience of everyday consciousness, with lasting psychological benefit. During this time, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) began using LSD in the research project Project MKUltra, which used psychoactive substances to aid interrogation. The CIA administered LSD to unwitting test subjects to observe how they would react, the most well-known example of this being Operation Midnight Climax. LSD was one of several psychoactive substances evaluated by the U.S. Army Chemical Corps as possible non-lethal incapacitants in the Edgewood Arsenal human experiments.

In the 1960s, LSD and other psychedelics were adopted by and became synonymous with the counterculture movement due to their perceived ability to expand consciousness. This resulted in LSD being viewed as a cultural threat to American values and the Vietnam War effort, and it was designated as a Schedule I (illegal for medical as well as recreational use) substance in 1968. It was listed as a Schedule I controlled substance by the United Nations in 1971 and currently has no approved medical uses. , about 10% of people in the United States have used LSD at some point in their lives, while 0.7% have used it in the last year. It was most popular in the 1960s to 1980s. The use of LSD among US adults increased by 56.4% from 2015 to 2018.

LSD was first synthesized on November 16, 1938 by Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann at the Sandoz Laboratories in Basel, Switzerland as part of a large research program searching for medically useful ergot alkaloid derivatives. The abbreviation &quot;LSD&quot; is from the German &quot;Lysergsäurediethylamid&quot;.
LSD&#x27;s psychedelic properties were discovered 5 years later when Hofmann himself accidentally ingested an unknown quantity of the chemical. The first intentional ingestion of LSD occurred on April 19, 1943, when Hofmann ingested 250 μg of LSD. He said this would be a threshold dose based on the dosages of other ergot alkaloids. Hofmann found the effects to be much stronger than he anticipated. Sandoz Laboratories introduced LSD as a psychiatric drug in 1947 and marketed LSD as a psychiatric panacea, hailing it &quot;as a cure for everything from schizophrenia to criminal behavior, &#x27;sexual perversions&#x27;, and alcoholism.&quot; Sandoz would send the drug for free to researchers investigating its effects.
Beginning in the 1950s, the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) began a research program code-named Project MKUltra. The CIA introduced LSD to the United States, purchasing the entire world&#x27;s supply for $240,000 and propagating the LSD through CIA front organizations to American hospitals, clinics, prisons, and research centers. Experiments included administering LSD to CIA employees, military personnel, doctors, other government agents, prostitutes, mentally ill patients, and members of the general public to study their reactions, usually without the subjects&#x27; knowledge. The project was revealed in the US congressional Rockefeller Commission report in 1975. However, the extent of the experiments conducted under Project MKUltra are still mostly unknown, as acting CIA director Richard Helms destroyed many of the key documents related to MKUltra in 1973.

In 1963, the Sandoz patents on LSD expired and the Czech company Spofa began to produce the substance. Sandoz stopped the production and distribution in 1965.

Several figures, including Aldous Huxley, Timothy Leary, and Al Hubbard, had begun to advocate the consumption of LSD. LSD became central to the counterculture of the 1960s. In the early 1960s the use of LSD and other hallucinogens was advocated by new proponents of consciousness expansion such as Leary, Huxley, Alan Watts and Arthur Koestler, and according to L. R. Veysey they profoundly influenced the thinking of the new generation of youth.

On October 24, 1968, possession of LSD was made illegal in the United States. The last FDA approved study of LSD in patients ended in 1980, while a study in healthy volunteers was made in the late 1980s. Legally approved and regulated psychiatric use of LSD continued in Switzerland until 1993.

In November 2020, Oregon became the first US state to decriminalize possession of small amounts of LSD after voters approved Ballot Measure 110.

==Society and culture==
===Counterculture===
By the mid-1960s, the youth countercultures in California, particularly in San Francisco, had widely adopted the use of hallucinogenic drugs, including LSD. The first major underground LSD factory was established by Owsley Stanley. Around this time, the Merry Pranksters, associated with novelist Ken Kesey, organized the Acid Tests, events in San Francisco involving LSD consumption, accompanied by light shows and improvised music. Their activities, including cross-country trips in a psychedelically decorated bus and interactions with major figures of the beat movement, were later documented in Tom Wolfe&#x27;s &quot;The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test&quot; (1968).

In San Francisco&#x27;s Haight-Ashbury neighborhood, the Psychedelic Shop was opened in January 1966 by brothers Ron and Jay Thelin to promote the safe use of LSD. This shop played a significant role in popularizing LSD in the area and establishing Haight-Ashbury as the epicenter of the hippie counterculture. The Thelins also organized the Love Pageant Rally in Golden Gate Park in October 1966, protesting against California&#x27;s ban on LSD.

A similar movement developed in London, led by British academic Michael Hollingshead, who first tried LSD in America in 1961. After experiencing LSD and interacting with notable figures such as Aldous Huxley, Timothy Leary, and Richard Alpert, Hollingshead played a key role in the famous LSD research at Millbrook before moving to New York City for his experiments. In 1965, he returned to the UK and founded the World Psychedelic Center in Chelsea, London.

===Music and Art===

The influence of LSD in the realms of music and art became pronounced in the 1960s, especially through the Acid Tests and related events involving bands like the Grateful Dead, Jefferson Airplane, and Big Brother and the Holding Company. San Francisco-based artists such as Rick Griffin, Victor Moscoso, and Wes Wilson contributed to this movement through their psychedelic poster and album art. The Grateful Dead, in particular, became central to the culture of &quot;Deadheads,&quot; with their music heavily influenced by LSD.

In the United Kingdom, Michael Hollingshead, reputed for introducing LSD to various artists and musicians like Storm Thorgerson, Donovan, Keith Richards, and members of the Beatles, played a significant role in the drug&#x27;s proliferation in the British art and music scene. Despite LSD&#x27;s illegal status from 1966, it was widely used by groups including the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, and the Moody Blues. Their experiences influenced works such as the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; and Cream&#x27;s &quot;Disraeli Gears&quot;, featuring psychedelic-themed music and artwork.

Psychedelic music of the 1960s often sought to replicate the LSD experience, incorporating exotic instrumentation, electric guitars with effects pedals, and elaborate studio techniques. Artists and bands utilized instruments like sitars and tablas, and employed studio effects such as backward tapes, panning, and phasing. Songs such as John Prine&#x27;s &quot;Illegal Smile&quot; and the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; have been associated with LSD, although the latter&#x27;s authors denied such claims.

Contemporary artists influenced by LSD include Keith Haring in the visual arts, various electronic dance music creators, and the jam band Phish. The 2018 Leo Butler play &quot;All You Need is LSD&quot; is inspired by the author&#x27;s interest in the history of LSD.

===Legal status===
The United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 mandates that signing parties, including the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and most of Europe, prohibit LSD. Enforcement of these laws varies by country. The convention allows medical and scientific research with LSD.

====Australia====
In Australia, LSD is classified as a Schedule 9 prohibited substance under the Poisons Standard (February 2017), indicating it may be abused or misused and its manufacture, possession, sale, or use should be prohibited except for approved research purposes. In Western Australia, the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981 provides guidelines for possession and trafficking of substances like LSD.

====Canada====
In Canada, LSD is listed under Schedule III of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. Unauthorized possession and trafficking of the substance can lead to significant legal penalties.

====United Kingdom====
In the United Kingdom, LSD is a Class A drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, making unauthorized possession and trafficking punishable by severe penalties. The Runciman Report and Transform Drug Policy Foundation have made recommendations and proposals regarding the legal regulation of LSD and other psychedelics.

====United States====
In the United States, LSD is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance under the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, making its manufacture, possession, and distribution illegal without a DEA license. The law considers LSD to have a high potential for abuse, no legitimate medical use, and to be unsafe even under medical supervision. The US Supreme Court case Neal v. United States (1995) clarified the sentencing guidelines related to LSD possession.

Oregon decriminalized personal possession of small amounts of drugs, including LSD, in February 2021, and California has seen legislative efforts to decriminalize psychedelics.

====Mexico====
Mexico decriminalized the possession of small amounts of drugs, including LSD, for personal use in 2009. The law specifies possession limits and establishes that possession is not a crime within designated quantities.

====Czech Republic====
In the Czech Republic, possession of &quot;amount larger than small&quot; of LSD is criminalized, while possession of smaller amounts is a misdemeanor. The definition of &quot;amount larger than small&quot; is determined by judicial practice and specific regulations.

===Economics===

====Production====
An active dose of LSD is very minute, allowing a large number of doses to be synthesized from a comparatively small amount of raw material. Twenty-five kilograms of precursor ergotamine tartrate can produce 5–6 kg of pure crystalline LSD; this corresponds to around 50–60 million doses at 100 μg. Because the masses involved are so small, concealing and transporting illicit LSD is much easier than smuggling cocaine, cannabis, or other illegal drugs.

Manufacturing LSD requires laboratory equipment and experience in the field of organic chemistry. It takes two to three days to produce 30 to 100 grams of pure compound. It is believed that LSD is not usually produced in large quantities, but rather in a series of small batches. This technique minimizes the loss of precursor chemicals in case a step does not work as expected. Ali Altaft, the lead chemist at the University of Okara, in Punjab, Pakistan, performed the synthesis of LSD on video.

=====Forms=====
LSD is produced in crystalline form and is then mixed with excipients or redissolved for production in ingestible forms. Liquid solution is either distributed in small vials or, more commonly, sprayed onto or soaked into a distribution medium. Historically, LSD solutions were first sold on sugar cubes, but practical considerations forced a change to tablet form. Appearing in 1968 as an orange tablet measuring about 6 mm across, &quot;Orange Sunshine&quot; acid was the first largely available form of LSD after its possession was made illegal. Tim Scully, a prominent chemist, made some of these tablets, but said that most &quot;Sunshine&quot; in the USA came by way of Ronald Stark, who imported approximately thirty-five million doses from Europe.

Over some time, tablet dimensions, weight, shape and concentration of LSD evolved from large (4.5–8.1 mm diameter), heavyweight (≥150 mg), round, high concentration (90–350 μg/tab) dosage units to small (2.0–3.5 mm diameter) lightweight (as low as 4.7 mg/tab), variously shaped, lower concentration (12–85 μg/tab, average range 30–40 μg/tab) dosage units. LSD tablet shapes have included cylinders, cones, stars, spacecraft, and heart shapes. The smallest tablets became known as &quot;Microdots.&quot;

After tablets came &quot;computer acid&quot; or &quot;blotter paper LSD,&quot; typically made by dipping a preprinted sheet of blotting paper into an LSD/water/alcohol solution. More than 200 types of LSD tablets have been encountered since 1969 and more than 350 blotter paper designs have been observed since 1975. About the same time as blotter paper LSD came &quot;Windowpane&quot; (AKA &quot;Clearlight&quot;), which contained LSD inside a thin gelatin square a quarter of an inch (6 mm) across. LSD has been sold under a wide variety of often short-lived and regionally restricted street names including Acid, Trips, Uncle Sid, Blotter, Lucy, Alice and doses, as well as names that reflect the designs on the sheets of blotter paper. Authorities have encountered the drug in other forms—including powder or crystal, and capsule.

=====Modern distribution=====
LSD manufacturers and traffickers in the United States can be categorized into two groups: A few large-scale producers, and an equally limited number of small, clandestine chemists, consisting of independent producers who, operating on a comparatively limited scale, can be found throughout the country.

As a group, independent producers are of less concern to the Drug Enforcement Administration than the large-scale groups because their product reaches only local markets.

Many LSD dealers and chemists describe a religious or humanitarian purpose that motivates their illicit activity. Nicholas Schou&#x27;s book &quot;Orange Sunshine: The Brotherhood of Eternal Love and Its Quest to Spread Peace, Love, and Acid to the World&quot; describes one such group, the Brotherhood of Eternal Love. The group was a major American LSD trafficking group in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

In the second half of the 20th century, dealers and chemists loosely associated with the Grateful Dead like Owsley Stanley, Nicholas Sand, Karen Horning, Sarah Maltzer, &quot;Dealer McDope,&quot; and Leonard Pickard played an essential role in distributing LSD.

===== Mimics=====

Since 2005, law enforcement in the United States and elsewhere has seized several chemicals and combinations of chemicals in blotter paper which were sold as LSD mimics, including DOB, a mixture of DOC and DOI, 25I-NBOMe, and a mixture of DOC and DOB. Many mimics are toxic in comparatively small doses, or have extremely different safety profiles. Many street users of LSD are often under the impression that blotter paper which is actively hallucinogenic can only be LSD because that is the only chemical with low enough doses to fit on a small square of blotter paper. While it is true that LSD requires lower doses than most other hallucinogens, blotter paper is capable of absorbing a much larger amount of material. The DEA performed a chromatographic analysis of blotter paper containing 2C-C which showed that the paper contained a much greater concentration of the active chemical than typical LSD doses, although the exact quantity was not determined. Blotter LSD mimics can have relatively small dose squares; a sample of blotter paper containing DOC seized by Concord, California police had dose markings approximately 6 mm apart. Several deaths have been attributed to 25I-NBOMe.

==Research==
In the United States, the earliest research began in the 1950s. Albert Kurland and his colleagues published research on LSD&#x27;s therapeutic potential to treat schizophrenia. In Canada, Humphry Osmond and Abram Hoffer completed LSD studies as early as 1952. By the 1960s, controversies surrounding &quot;hippie&quot; counterculture began to deplete institutional support for continued studies.

Currently, several organizations—including the Beckley Foundation, MAPS, Heffter Research Institute and the Albert Hofmann Foundation—exist to fund, encourage and coordinate research into the medicinal and spiritual uses of LSD and related psychedelics. New clinical LSD experiments in humans started in 2009 for the first time in 35 years. As it is illegal in many areas of the world, potential medical uses are difficult to study.

In 2001 the United States Drug Enforcement Administration stated that LSD &quot;produces no aphrodisiac effects, does not increase creativity, has no lasting positive effect in treating alcoholics or criminals, does not produce a &quot;model psychosis&quot;, and does not generate immediate personality change.&quot; More recently, experimental uses of LSD have included the treatment of alcoholism, pain and cluster headache relief, and prospective studies on depression. 

A 2020 meta-review indicated possible positive effects of LSD in reducing psychiatric symptoms, mainly in cases of alcoholism. There is evidence that psychedelics induce molecular and cellular adaptations related to neuroplasticity and that these could potentially underlie therapeutic benefits.

===Psychedelic therapy===

In the 1950s and 1960s, LSD was used in psychiatry to enhance psychotherapy, known as psychedelic therapy. Some psychiatrists, such as Ronald A. Sandison, who pioneered its use at Powick Hospital in England, believed LSD was especially useful at helping patients to &quot;unblock&quot; repressed subconscious material through other psychotherapeutic methods, and also for treating alcoholism. One study concluded, &quot;The root of the therapeutic value of the LSD experience is its potential for producing self-acceptance and self-surrender,&quot; presumably by forcing the user to face issues and problems in that individual&#x27;s psyche.

Two recent reviews concluded that conclusions drawn from most of these early trials are unreliable due to serious methodological flaws. These include the absence of adequate control groups, lack of follow-up, and vague criteria for therapeutic outcome. In many cases, studies failed to convincingly demonstrate whether the drug or the therapeutic interaction was responsible for any beneficial effects.

In recent years, organizations like the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) have renewed clinical research of LSD.

It has been proposed that LSD be studied for use in the therapeutic setting, particularly in anxiety. In 2024, the FDA designated a form of LSD as a breakthrough therapy to treat generalized anxiety disorder which is being developed by MindMed.

===Other uses===
In the 1950s and 1960s, some psychiatrists (e.g., Oscar Janiger) explored the potential effect of LSD on creativity. Experimental studies attempted to measure the effect of LSD on creative activity and aesthetic appreciation. In 1966 Dr. James Fadiman conducted a study with the central question &quot;How can psychedelics be used to facilitate problem solving?&quot; This study attempted to solve 44 different problems and had 40 satisfactory solutions when the FDA banned all research into psychedelics. LSD was a key component of this study.

Since 2008 there has been ongoing research into using LSD to alleviate anxiety for terminally ill cancer patients coping with their impending deaths.

A 2012 meta-analysis found evidence that a single dose of LSD in conjunction with various alcoholism treatment programs was associated with a decrease in alcohol abuse, lasting for several months, but no effect was seen at one year. Adverse events included seizure, moderate confusion and agitation, nausea, vomiting, and acting in a bizarre fashion.

LSD has been used as a treatment for cluster headaches with positive results in some small studies.

LSD is a potent psychoplastogen, a compound capable of promoting rapid and sustained neural plasticity that may have wide-ranging therapeutic benefit. LSD has been shown to increase markers of neuroplasticity in human brain organoids and improve memory performance in human subjects.

LSD may have analgesic properties related to pain in terminally ill patients and phantom pain and may be useful for treating inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis.

==Notable individuals==
Some notable individuals have commented publicly on their experiences with LSD. Some of these comments date from the era when it was legally available in the US and Europe for non-medical uses, and others pertain to psychiatric treatment in the 1950s and 1960s. Still others describe experiences with illegal LSD, obtained for philosophic, artistic, therapeutic, spiritual, or recreational purposes.
* W. H. Auden, the poet, said, &quot;I myself have taken mescaline once and L.S.D. once. Aside from a slight schizophrenic dissociation of the I from the Not-I, including my body, nothing happened at all.&quot; He also said, &quot;LSD was a complete frost. … What it does seem to destroy is the power of communication. I have listened to tapes done by highly articulate people under LSD, for example, and they talk absolute drivel. They may have seen something interesting, but they certainly lose either the power or the wish to communicate.&quot; He also said, &quot;Nothing much happened but I did get the distinct impression that some birds were trying to communicate with me.&quot;
* Daniel Ellsberg, an American peace activist, says he has had several hundred experiences with psychedelics.
* Richard Feynman, a notable physicist at California Institute of Technology, tried LSD during his professorship at Caltech. Feynman largely sidestepped the issue when dictating his anecdotes; he mentions it in passing in the &quot;O Americano, Outra Vez&quot; section.
* Jerry Garcia stated in a July 3, 1989 interview for &quot;Relix Magazine&quot;, in response to the question &quot;Have your feelings about LSD changed over the years?,&quot; &quot;They haven&#x27;t changed much. My feelings about LSD are mixed. It&#x27;s something that I both fear and that I love at the same time. I never take any psychedelic, have a psychedelic experience, without having that feeling of, &quot;I don&#x27;t know what&#x27;s going to happen.&quot; In that sense, it&#x27;s still fundamentally an enigma and a mystery.&quot;
* Bill Gates implied in an interview with &quot;Playboy&quot; that he tried LSD during his youth.
* Aldous Huxley, author of &quot;Brave New World&quot;, became a user of psychedelics after moving to Hollywood. He was at the forefront of the counterculture&#x27;s use of psychedelic drugs, which led to his 1954 work &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot;. Dying from cancer, he asked his wife on 22 November 1963 to inject him with 100 μg of LSD. He died later that day.
* Steve Jobs, co-founder and former CEO of Apple Inc., said, &quot;Taking LSD was a profound experience, one of the most important things in my life.&quot;
* Ernst Jünger, German writer and philosopher, throughout his life had experimented with drugs such as ether, cocaine, and hashish; and later in life he used mescaline and LSD. These experiments were recorded comprehensively in &quot;Annäherungen&quot; (1970, &quot;Approaches&quot;). The novel &quot;Besuch auf Godenholm&quot; (1952, &quot;Visit to Godenholm&quot;) is clearly influenced by his early experiments with mescaline and LSD. He met with LSD inventor Albert Hofmann and they took LSD together several times. Hofmann&#x27;s memoir &quot;LSD, My Problem Child&quot; describes some of these meetings.
* In a 2004 interview, Paul McCartney said that The Beatles&#x27; songs &quot;Day Tripper&quot; and &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; were inspired by LSD trips. Nonetheless, John Lennon consistently stated over the course of many years that the fact that the initials of &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; spelled out L-S-D was a coincidence (he stated that the title came from a picture drawn by his son Julian) and that the band members did not notice until after the song had been released, and Paul McCartney corroborated that story. John Lennon, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr also used the drug, although McCartney cautioned that &quot;it&#x27;s easy to overestimate the influence of drugs on the Beatles&#x27; music.&quot;
*Michel Foucault had an LSD experience with Simeon Wade in Death Valley and later wrote &quot;it was the greatest experience of his life, and that it profoundly changed his life and his work.&quot; According to Wade, as soon as he came back to Paris, Foucault scrapped the second History of Sexuality&#x27;s manuscript, and totally rethought the whole project.
* Kary Mullis is reported to credit LSD with helping him develop DNA amplification technology, for which he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1993.
* Carlo Rovelli, an Italian theoretical physicist and writer, has credited his use of LSD with sparking his interest in theoretical physics.
* Oliver Sacks, a neurologist famous for writing best-selling case histories about his patients&#x27; disorders and unusual experiences, talks about his own experiences with LSD and other perception altering chemicals, in his book, &quot;Hallucinations&quot;.
* Alexander Shulgin, American chemist, told Albert Hofmann that he preferred LSD to 2C-B.
* Matt Stone and Trey Parker, creators of the TV series &quot;South Park&quot;, claimed to have shown up at the 72nd Academy Awards, at which they were nominated for Best Original Song, under the influence of LSD.

== See also ==
* 1P-LSD
* 1cP-LSD
* 1D-LSD
* 1S-LSD
* &quot;Claviceps purpurea&quot; (ergot)
* LSD art
* LSZ
* Psychoplastogen
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* LSD-25 at Erowid
* LSD at TiHKAL by Alexander Shulgin
* LSD at PsychonautWiki
===Documentaries===
* &quot;Hofmann&#x27;s Potion&quot; a documentary on the origins of LSD, 2002
* &quot;Inside LSD&quot; National Geographic Channel, 2009
* &quot;How to Change Your Mind &quot; Netflix docuseries, 2022</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="0" end="26" title="LSD" label="Lysergic acid diethylamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="46" end="49" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="78" end="94" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="177" end="181" title="LSD" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="185" end="189" title="LSD" label="lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001920" start="585" end="628" title="hallucinogen persisting perception disorder" label="hallucinogen persisting perception disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q415837" start="854" end="867" title="lysergic acid" label="lysergic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="1006" end="1013" title="agonist" label="agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182555" start="1105" end="1125" title="default mode network" label="default mode network"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="1221" end="1235" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="1324" end="1334" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="1348" end="1358" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="1363" end="1376" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="1412" end="1435" title="counterculture movement" label="counterculture movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1480" end="1490" title="Controlled Substances Act#Schedule I controlled substances" label="Schedule I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429332" start="1541" end="1572" title="Schedule 1 controlled substance" label="Schedule I controlled substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1580" end="1594" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="2204" end="2213" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q790012" start="2240" end="2251" title="out of body" label="out of body"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="2274" end="2287" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756621" start="2304" end="2334" title="League for Spiritual Discovery" label="League for Spiritual Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="2351" end="2360" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q508620" start="2362" end="2376" title="Stanislav Grof" label="Stanislav Grof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155640" start="2471" end="2489" title="Empirical research" label="phenomenologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="2541" end="2558" title="Sacred Scriptures" label="sacred scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="2620" end="2632" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2689" end="2697" title="Clinical practice" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="2701" end="2714" title="meta analysis" label="meta analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="2827" end="2837" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="2868" end="2878" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="2880" end="2887" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378593" start="2893" end="2908" title="drug dependence" label="drug dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128283" start="3109" end="3123" title="Mydriasis" label="pupil dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28578" start="3135" end="3143" title="appetite" label="appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="3155" end="3163" title="sweating" label="sweating"/>
<link wikidata="Q246710" start="3169" end="3180" title="wakefulness" label="wakefulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="3325" end="3341" title="body temperature" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="3343" end="3354" title="blood sugar" label="blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="3360" end="3370" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q684782" start="3383" end="3394" title="goose bumps" label="goose bumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q994942" start="3396" end="3409" title="Bruxism" label="jaw clenching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="3411" end="3420" title="dry mouth" label="dry mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429154" start="3426" end="3439" title="hyperreflexia" label="hyperreflexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641556" start="3493" end="3501" title="numbness" label="numbness"/>
<link wikidata="Q102186689" start="3503" end="3511" title="weakness" label="weakness"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="3513" end="3519" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="3525" end="3532" title="Tremor" label="tremors"/>
<link wikidata="Q108598184" start="3610" end="3637" title="visual hallucination" label="visual pseudo-hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690719" start="4095" end="4104" title="afterglow (drug culture)" label="afterglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q622106" start="4555" end="4563" title="bad trip" label="bad trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752960" start="4803" end="4818" title="set and setting" label="set and setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141243" start="5260" end="5275" title="cognitive shift" label="cognitive shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q182767" start="5795" end="5799" title="echo" label="echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072103" start="5904" end="5914" title="phosphenes" label="phosphenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="6129" end="6141" title="Dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277223" start="6358" end="6368" title="David Nutt" label="David Nutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="6415" end="6422" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q696490" start="6562" end="6575" title="panic attacks" label="panic attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q622106" start="6624" end="6632" title="bad trip" label="bad trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="6828" end="6841" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938569" start="7315" end="7325" title="Flashback (psychology)" label="Flashbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="7487" end="7499" title="hallucinogen" label="hallucinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001920" start="7543" end="7586" title="hallucinogen persisting perception disorder" label="hallucinogen persisting perception disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q936549" start="7760" end="7784" title="somatic symptom disorder" label="somatic symptom disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q505535" start="7821" end="7828" title="Somatic nervous system" label="somatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="8455" end="8466" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="8748" end="8752" title="SSRI" label="SSRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271142" start="8910" end="8916" title="CYP2D6" label="CYP2D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="8936" end="8941" title="SSRIs" label="SSRIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q616181" start="9006" end="9024" title="serotonin syndrome" label="serotonin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q908843" start="9050" end="9053" title="Tricyclic antidepressant" label="TCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="9060" end="9064" title="MAOI" label="MAOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="9276" end="9289" title="antipsychotic" label="antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="9294" end="9308" title="anticonvulsant" label="anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q152763" start="9378" end="9385" title="Lithium (medication)" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="9397" end="9404" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627467" start="9410" end="9430" title="Dissociative disorder" label="dissociative effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="9465" end="9481" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464757" start="9780" end="9793" title="tachyphylaxis" label="tachyphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="10058" end="10067" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q208118" start="10072" end="10082" title="psilocybin" label="psilocybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="10112" end="10115" title="DMT" label="DMT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10263" end="10286" title="Downregulation and upregulation#Downregulation and upregulation of receptors" label="receptor downregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="10500" end="10505" title="Substance abuse" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448011" start="10547" end="10562" title="self-administer" label="self-administer"/>
<link wikidata="Q498902" start="10646" end="10665" title="withdrawal syndrome" label="withdrawal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="10831" end="10853" title="substance use disorder" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="10858" end="10864" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="DSM-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="10972" end="10982" title="stimulants" label="stimulants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976211" start="10987" end="10997" title="depressant" label="depressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q149299" start="11032" end="11041" title="Mutagenesis" label="mutagenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="11186" end="11197" title="teratogenic" label="teratogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038318" start="11343" end="11359" title="cardiac fibrosis" label="cardiac fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038318" start="11364" end="11376" title="cardiac valvulopathy" label="valvulopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="11384" end="11393" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639596" start="11394" end="11409" title="5-HT2B receptor" label="5-HT2B receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="11410" end="11417" title="agonist" label="agonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839483" start="11450" end="11461" title="microdosing" label="microdosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38344" start="11609" end="11621" title="animal study" label="animal study"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="12280" end="12292" title="blood plasma" label="blood plasma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12334" end="12349" title="Coma#Causes" label="comatose states"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="12383" end="12395" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495657" start="12407" end="12432" title="gastrointestinal bleeding" label="gastrointestinal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12766" end="12789" title="hogtie#Human uses" label="prone maximal restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q507377" start="12823" end="12842" title="positional asphyxia" label="positional asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503343" start="12883" end="12908" title="law enforcement personnel" label="law enforcement personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q621558" start="12948" end="12969" title="symptomatic treatment" label="symptomatic treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="13008" end="13022" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752960" start="13042" end="13064" title="Set and setting" label="calm, safe environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554162" start="13080" end="13094" title="Typical antipsychotic" label="Antipsychotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q251347" start="13103" end="13114" title="haloperidol" label="haloperidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256512" start="13160" end="13183" title="Psychotomimetism" label="psychotomimetic effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957662" start="13223" end="13241" title="Activated charcoal (medication)" label="activated charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="13385" end="13399" title="anticoagulants" label="anticoagulants"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="13401" end="13413" title="vasodilators" label="vasodilators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752522" start="13419" end="13433" title="sympatholytics" label="sympatholytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q955948" start="13461" end="13469" title="ergotism" label="ergotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200715" start="13506" end="13535" title="Designer drug" label="novel psychoactive substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q39090943" start="13539" end="13544" title="25-NB" label="25-NB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632141" start="13569" end="13578" title="25I-NBOMe" label="25I-NBOMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632126" start="13583" end="13592" title="25B-NBOMe" label="25B-NBOMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641556" start="14274" end="14282" title="numbness" label="numbness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348626" start="14655" end="14677" title="Ehrlich&amp;#x27;s reagent" label="Ehrlich&amp;#x27;s reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="14802" end="14826" title="serotonergic psychedelic" label="serotonergic psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q461076" start="14850" end="14862" title="dopaminergic" label="dopaminergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15335165" start="14929" end="14940" title="dopamine receptor D2" label="D2 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454515" start="15064" end="15069" title="5-HT3 receptor" label="5-HT3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027442" start="15074" end="15088" title="5-HT4 receptor" label="5-HT4 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="15236" end="15238" title="Molar concentration" label="nM"/>
<link wikidata="Q21115043" start="15288" end="15294" title="5-HT1A receptor" label="5-HT1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q14891424" start="15310" end="15316" title="5-HT2A receptor" label="5-HT2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639596" start="15332" end="15338" title="5-HT2B receptor" label="5-HT2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027437" start="15354" end="15360" title="5-HT2C receptor" label="5-HT2C"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027445" start="15375" end="15381" title="5-HT5A receptor" label="5-HT5A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027448" start="15423" end="15438" title="5-HT6 receptor" label="5-HT6 receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639603" start="15486" end="15502" title="5-HT5B receptor" label="5-HT5B receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188862" start="15604" end="15620" title="Crosstalk (biology)" label="cross-activation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486416" start="15631" end="15650" title="GPCR oligomer" label="receptor heteromers"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="15676" end="15683" title="agonist" label="agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="15689" end="15701" title="psychedelics" label="psychedelics"/>
<link wikidata="Q410943" start="15713" end="15724" title="Receptor antagonist" label="antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258877" start="15777" end="15799" title="functional selectivity" label="functional selectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="15860" end="15879" title="signal transduction" label="signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768001" start="15887" end="15903" title="phospholipase A2" label="phospholipase A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q420248" start="15937" end="15952" title="phospholipase C" label="phospholipase C"/>
<link wikidata="Q120785193" start="16090" end="16099" title="Glutamate (neurotransmitter)" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="16115" end="16130" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207387" start="16145" end="16155" title="Excitatory postsynaptic potential" label="excitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="16186" end="16193" title="Cortical layers" label="layer V"/>
<link wikidata="Q18047432" start="16270" end="16278" title="DARPP-32" label="DARPP-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408140" start="16336" end="16344" title="protomer" label="protomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210973" start="16361" end="16370" title="cell signaling" label="signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q309513" start="16498" end="16510" title="H1 receptors" label="H1 receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258877" start="16556" end="16570" title="biased agonist" label="biased agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q905671" start="16651" end="16661" title="β-arrestin" label="β-arrestin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513929" start="16667" end="16687" title="Gs alpha subunit" label="activating G protein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16725" end="16739" title="residence time#Pharmacology" label="residence time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163287" start="16866" end="16875" title="clearance (pharmacology)" label="clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q546242" start="17099" end="17110" title="lysergamide" label="lysergamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041643" start="17111" end="17130" title="lysergic acid amide" label="lysergic acid amide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23005640" start="17165" end="17171" title="Moiety (chemistry)" label="moiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316120" start="17475" end="17488" title="resting state" label="resting state"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="17489" end="17493" title="fMRI" label="fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14891424" start="17757" end="17763" title="5-HT2A receptor" label="5-HT2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q21115043" start="17871" end="17877" title="5-HT1A receptor" label="5-HT1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q14891424" start="18097" end="18103" title="5-HT2A receptor" label="5-HT2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="18839" end="18855" title="pharmacokinetics" label="pharmacokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137311" start="19096" end="19117" title="Cmax (pharmacology)" label="maximal concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q904041" start="19240" end="19260" title="first-order kinetics" label="first-order kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="19268" end="19277" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="19301" end="19319" title="terminal half-life" label="terminal half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425425" start="19509" end="19518" title="drug tolerance" label="tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="19567" end="19572" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="19624" end="19634" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="19703" end="19718" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="19719" end="19725" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="19876" end="19891" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailability"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="19965" end="19976" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q214514" start="20175" end="20181" title="chirality (chemistry)" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q902071" start="20200" end="20212" title="stereocenter" label="stereocenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="20221" end="20227" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q494483" start="20284" end="20299" title="optical isomerism" label="optical isomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052053" start="20368" end="20390" title="absolute configuration" label="absolute configuration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20537" end="20550" title="Descriptor (chemistry)#dl" label="&amp;quot;d&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q902227" start="20566" end="20584" title="Retrosynthesis" label="Retrosynthetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="20718" end="20728" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="20872" end="20877" title="base (chemistry)" label="bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686738" start="20920" end="20932" title="deprotonated" label="deprotonated"/>
<link wikidata="Q170050" start="21034" end="21048" title="chromatography" label="chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q682321" start="21102" end="21118" title="triboluminescent" label="triboluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="21199" end="21210" title="fluorescent" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="21244" end="21252" title="UV light" label="UV light"/>
<link wikidata="Q424432" start="21281" end="21289" title="ergoline" label="ergoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q414196" start="21341" end="21353" title="diethylamine" label="diethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415837" start="21380" end="21393" title="lysergic acid" label="lysergic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q898387" start="21423" end="21442" title="phosphoryl chloride" label="phosphoryl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q110820614" start="21447" end="21471" title="peptide coupling reagent" label="peptide coupling reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="21508" end="21518" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419186" start="21540" end="21550" title="ergotamine" label="ergotamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445454" start="21589" end="21594" title="ergot" label="ergot"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="21595" end="21601" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q574816" start="21605" end="21615" title="agar plate" label="agar plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q211891" start="22103" end="22107" title="Nitrous acid" label="HNO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q414196" start="22167" end="22179" title="diethylamine" label="diethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415837" start="22259" end="22272" title="lysergic acid" label="lysergic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182726" start="22295" end="22298" title="GMO" label="GMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q911712" start="22299" end="22317" title="baker&amp;#x27;s yeast" label="baker&amp;#x27;s yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q29525998" start="22586" end="22597" title="Psychedelic microdosing" label="microdosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645498" start="22630" end="22640" title="micrograms" label="micrograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="22710" end="22722" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q746458" start="22741" end="22755" title="Owsley Stanley" label="Owsley Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q506336" start="23091" end="23108" title="Alexander Shulgin" label="Alexander Shulgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630168" start="23264" end="23270" title="labile" label="labile"/>
<link wikidata="Q926272" start="23361" end="23374" title="epimerisation" label="epimerisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188777" start="23437" end="23448" title="carboxamide" label="carboxamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="23484" end="23490" title="chiral" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="23577" end="23587" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319541" start="23681" end="23687" title="indole" label="indole"/>
<link wikidata="Q408018" start="23708" end="23715" title="enamine" label="enamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="23810" end="23818" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="24048" end="24059" title="covalent bond" label="double bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="24091" end="24104" title="aromatic hydrocarbon" label="aromatic ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="24163" end="24175" title="nucleophilic" label="nucleophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="24196" end="24203" title="alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q408032" start="25581" end="25585" title="EDTA" label="EDTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348626" start="25690" end="25712" title="Ehrlich&amp;#x27;s reagent" label="Ehrlich&amp;#x27;s reagent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25717" end="25739" title="Hofmann&amp;#x27;s reagent" label="Hofmann&amp;#x27;s reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645498" start="25856" end="25866" title="micrograms" label="micrograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="25901" end="25911" title="milligrams" label="milligrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q873864" start="26682" end="26721" title="liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry" label="liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="26820" end="26834" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q415837" start="26870" end="26883" title="lysergic acid" label="lysergic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="26913" end="26923" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419186" start="26927" end="26937" title="ergotamine" label="ergotamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="26942" end="26950" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445454" start="26960" end="26965" title="ergot" label="ergot"/>
<link wikidata="Q546242" start="27024" end="27036" title="lysergamides" label="lysergamides"/>
<link wikidata="Q484731" start="27106" end="27115" title="analeptic" label="analeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="27456" end="27466" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q528468" start="27502" end="27508" title="Sandoz" label="Sandoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="27786" end="27799" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275370" start="27863" end="27877" title="Humphry Osmond" label="Humphry Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="27936" end="27946" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="28085" end="28097" title="hallucinogen" label="hallucinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256512" start="28138" end="28153" title="psychotomimetic" label="psychotomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="28201" end="28214" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28261" end="28273" title="Transcendence (philosophy)#Contemporary philosophy" label="transcendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="28419" end="28446" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q815614" start="28493" end="28508" title="Project MKUltra" label="Project MKUltra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="28521" end="28544" title="psychoactive substances" label="psychoactive substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q327018" start="28552" end="28565" title="interrogation" label="interrogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354769" start="28694" end="28719" title="Operation Midnight Climax" label="Operation Midnight Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093909" start="28785" end="28809" title="U.S. Army Chemical Corps" label="U.S. Army Chemical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337881" start="28854" end="28888" title="Edgewood Arsenal human experiments" label="Edgewood Arsenal human experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="28979" end="29002" title="counterculture movement" label="counterculture movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="29141" end="29152" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596473" start="29188" end="29198" title="List of Schedule I drugs (US)" label="Schedule I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29287" end="29318" title="Convention on Psychotropic Substances#Schedule I" label="Schedule I controlled substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="29326" end="29340" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="29699" end="29713" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q528468" start="29721" end="29727" title="Sandoz" label="Sandoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="29744" end="29749" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q424432" start="29830" end="29844" title="ergot alkaloid" label="ergot alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="29957" end="29968" title="psychedelic" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645498" start="30183" end="30185" title="μg" label="μg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="30701" end="30728" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q815614" start="30771" end="30786" title="Project MKUltra" label="Project MKUltra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="30924" end="30943" title="front organizations" label="front organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634303" start="31309" end="31338" title="United States President&amp;#x27;s Commission on CIA activities within the United States" label="Rockefeller Commission report"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="31734" end="31747" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="31749" end="31762" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723138" start="31768" end="31778" title="Alfred Matthew Hubbard" label="Al Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q354867" start="32021" end="32031" title="Alan Watts" label="Alan Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494" start="32036" end="32051" title="Arthur Koestler" label="Arthur Koestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="32243" end="32246" title="FDA" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q101150483" start="32577" end="32595" title="Oregon Ballot Measure 110" label="Ballot Measure 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="32671" end="32685" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q746458" start="32859" end="32873" title="Owsley Stanley" label="Owsley Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q661922" start="32897" end="32913" title="Merry Pranksters" label="Merry Pranksters"/>
<link wikidata="Q244390" start="32940" end="32949" title="Ken Kesey" label="Ken Kesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282623" start="32965" end="32975" title="Acid Tests" label="Acid Tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q216195" start="33243" end="33252" title="Tom Wolfe" label="Tom Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424625" start="33266" end="33297" title="The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test" label="The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027700" start="33562" end="33576" title="Haight-Ashbury" label="Haight-Ashbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691141" start="33655" end="33673" title="Love Pageant Rally" label="Love Pageant Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750476" start="33825" end="33845" title="Michael Hollingshead" label="Michael Hollingshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="33955" end="33968" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="33970" end="33983" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q290536" start="33989" end="34003" title="Richard Alpert" label="Richard Alpert"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="34404" end="34417" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q488260" start="34419" end="34437" title="Jefferson Airplane" label="Jefferson Airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q858688" start="34443" end="34478" title="Big Brother and the Holding Company" label="Big Brother and the Holding Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431550" start="34516" end="34528" title="Rick Griffin" label="Rick Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7583727" start="34530" end="34544" title="Victor Moscoso" label="Victor Moscoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567371" start="34550" end="34560" title="Wes Wilson" label="Wes Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="34638" end="34655" title="The Grateful Dead" label="The Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q724003" start="34884" end="34900" title="Storm Thorgerson" label="Storm Thorgerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q317427" start="34902" end="34909" title="Donovan" label="Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189599" start="34911" end="34925" title="Keith Richards" label="Keith Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="34942" end="34953" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="35134" end="35145" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="35147" end="35165" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q211965" start="35171" end="35186" title="the Moody Blues" label="the Moody Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="35255" end="35297" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q269211" start="35327" end="35341" title="Disraeli Gears" label="Disraeli Gears"/>
<link wikidata="Q520296" start="35735" end="35745" title="John Prine" label="John Prine"/>
<link wikidata="Q723178" start="35807" end="35836" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" label="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q485635" start="35977" end="35989" title="Keith Haring" label="Keith Haring"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="36018" end="36040" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="36059" end="36067" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q921267" start="36068" end="36073" title="Phish" label="Phish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523601" start="36084" end="36094" title="Leo Butler" label="Leo Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q124338865" start="36106" end="36125" title="All You Need is LSD" label="All You Need is LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="36221" end="36235" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429332" start="36236" end="36273" title="Convention on Psychotropic Substances" label="Convention on Psychotropic Substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q419186" start="38854" end="38864" title="ergotamine" label="ergotamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425046" start="38865" end="38873" title="tartrate" label="tartrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="39088" end="39095" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="39097" end="39105" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="39211" end="39228" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593798" start="39547" end="39566" title="University of Okara" label="University of Okara"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="39571" end="39577" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="39579" end="39587" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902638" start="39706" end="39715" title="excipient" label="excipient"/>
<link wikidata="Q206077" start="39999" end="40005" title="Tablet (pharmacy)" label="tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804249" start="40195" end="40205" title="Tim Scully" label="Tim Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q19805" start="41034" end="41048" title="blotting paper" label="blotting paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="41357" end="41364" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q723178" start="41550" end="41554" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="42139" end="42170" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336403" start="42537" end="42568" title="the Brotherhood of Eternal Love" label="the Brotherhood of Eternal Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="42748" end="42761" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q746458" start="42767" end="42781" title="Owsley Stanley" label="Owsley Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339672" start="42783" end="42796" title="Nicholas Sand" label="Nicholas Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700208" start="42859" end="42874" title="Leonard Pickard" label="Leonard Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q209241" start="43121" end="43124" title="2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine" label="DOB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029756" start="43139" end="43142" title="2,5-Dimethoxy-4-chloroamphetamine" label="DOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q209251" start="43147" end="43150" title="2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine" label="DOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632141" start="43152" end="43161" title="25I-NBOMe" label="25I-NBOMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029756" start="43180" end="43183" title="2,5-Dimethoxy-4-chloroamphetamine" label="DOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q209241" start="43188" end="43191" title="2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine" label="DOB"/>
<link wikidata="Q170050" start="43683" end="43698" title="chromatographic" label="chromatographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q114905" start="43736" end="43740" title="2C-C" label="2C-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029756" start="43999" end="44002" title="2,5-Dimethoxy-4-chloroamphetamine" label="DOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q490441" start="44013" end="44032" title="Concord, California" label="Concord, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q62767962" start="44212" end="44226" title="Albert Kurland" label="Albert Kurland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275370" start="44336" end="44350" title="Humphry Osmond" label="Humphry Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878750" start="44588" end="44610" title="Beckley Foundation" label="the Beckley Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934663" start="44612" end="44616" title="Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies" label="MAPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948437" start="44618" end="44644" title="Heffter Research Institute" label="Heffter Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="44653" end="44667" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="44991" end="45036" title="United States Drug Enforcement Administration" label="United States Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="45165" end="45175" title="alcoholics" label="alcoholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="45215" end="45230" title="model psychosis" label="model psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760918" start="45864" end="45883" title="psychedelic therapy" label="psychedelic therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364622" start="45913" end="45931" title="Ronald A. Sandison" label="Ronald A. Sandison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145287" start="45958" end="45973" title="Powick Hospital" label="Powick Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="46110" end="46127" title="psychotherapeutic" label="psychotherapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267564" start="46285" end="46300" title="self-acceptance" label="self-acceptance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="46535" end="46549" title="methodological" label="methodological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836899" start="46595" end="46609" title="control groups" label="control groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="46653" end="46664" title="therapeutic" label="therapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934663" start="46865" end="46918" title="Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies" label="Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q845224" start="47145" end="47173" title="generalized anxiety disorder" label="generalized anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q107571756" start="47202" end="47209" title="MindMed Inc." label="MindMed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106060" start="47279" end="47292" title="Oscar Janiger" label="Oscar Janiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364787" start="47858" end="47872" title="terminally ill" label="terminally ill"/>
<link wikidata="Q557945" start="48201" end="48210" title="confusion" label="confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="48234" end="48242" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q166907" start="48315" end="48331" title="cluster headache" label="cluster headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q112623431" start="48395" end="48410" title="psychoplastogen" label="psychoplastogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="48464" end="48481" title="neural plasticity" label="neural plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11293125" start="48603" end="48611" title="organoid" label="organoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202906" start="48745" end="48757" title="phantom pain" label="phantom pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="49084" end="49095" title="psychiatric" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="49270" end="49281" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q431085" start="49957" end="49972" title="Daniel Ellsberg" label="Daniel Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="50067" end="50082" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="50107" end="50141" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q312870" start="50337" end="50349" title="Jerry Garcia" label="Jerry Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311430" start="50395" end="50409" title="Relix Magazine" label="Relix Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="50883" end="50893" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="50929" end="50936" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="50981" end="50994" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="51012" end="51027" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="51081" end="51090" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215450" start="51204" end="51227" title="The Doors of Perception" label="The Doors of Perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="51352" end="51362" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="51393" end="51403" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q76727" start="51508" end="51520" title="Ernst Jünger" label="Ernst Jünger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="51595" end="51600" title="Psychoactive drug" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="51609" end="51614" title="diethyl ether" label="ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="51616" end="51623" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="51629" end="51636" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="51664" end="51673" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51740" end="51752" title="Annäherungen" label="Annäherungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q830701" start="51807" end="51827" title="Besuch auf Godenholm" label="Besuch auf Godenholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="51969" end="51983" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="52139" end="52153" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="52164" end="52175" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q901761" start="52194" end="52205" title="Day Tripper" label="Day Tripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q723178" start="52222" end="52251" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" label="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="52299" end="52310" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q357974" start="52537" end="52543" title="Julian Lennon" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="52670" end="52681" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="52683" end="52698" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="52704" end="52715" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="52865" end="52880" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="52923" end="52935" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q157224" start="53227" end="53238" title="Kary Mullis" label="Kary Mullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="53290" end="53307" title="Polymerase chain reaction" label="DNA amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="53346" end="53370" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042470" start="53382" end="53395" title="Carlo Rovelli" label="Carlo Rovelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="53408" end="53429" title="theoretical physicist" label="theoretical physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q258662" start="53523" end="53535" title="Oliver Sacks" label="Oliver Sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="53539" end="53550" title="neurologist" label="neurologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643203" start="53759" end="53773" title="Hallucinations (book)" label="Hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q506336" start="53783" end="53800" title="Alexander Shulgin" label="Alexander Shulgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229942" start="53865" end="53869" title="2C-B" label="2C-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="53873" end="53883" title="Matt Stone" label="Matt Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="53888" end="53899" title="Trey Parker" label="Trey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="53933" end="53943" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q429319" start="53983" end="54002" title="72nd Academy Awards" label="72nd Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096201" start="54103" end="54109" title="1P-LSD" label="1P-LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q88200590" start="54112" end="54119" title="1cP-LSD" label="1cP-LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q114748403" start="54122" end="54128" title="1D-LSD" label="1D-LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q126749016" start="54131" end="54137" title="1S-LSD" label="1S-LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q217227" start="54146" end="54164" title="Claviceps purpurea" label="Claviceps purpurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459933" start="54181" end="54188" title="LSD art" label="LSD art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710118" start="54191" end="54194" title="LSZ" label="LSZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q112623431" start="54197" end="54212" title="Psychoplastogen" label="Psychoplastogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430691" start="54298" end="54304" title="Erowid" label="Erowid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367117" start="54314" end="54320" title="TiHKAL" label="TiHKAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q506336" start="54324" end="54341" title="Alexander Shulgin" label="Alexander Shulgin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17539" wikidata="Q10372154" url="?curid=17539" title="Linnaean taxonomy">
<text>Linnaean taxonomy can mean either of two related concepts:
# The particular form of biological classification (taxonomy) set up by Carl Linnaeus, as set forth in his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; (1735) and subsequent works. In the taxonomy of Linnaeus there are three kingdoms, divided into &quot;classes&quot;, and the classes divided into lower ranks in a hierarchical order.
# A term for rank-based classification of organisms, in general. That is, taxonomy in the traditional sense of the word: rank-based scientific classification. This term is especially used as opposed to cladistic systematics, which groups organisms into clades. It is attributed to Linnaeus, although he neither invented the concept of ranked classification (it goes back to Plato and Aristotle) nor gave it its present form. In fact, it does not have an exact present form, as &quot;Linnaean taxonomy&quot; as such does not really exist: it is a collective (abstracting) term for what actually are several separate fields, which use similar approaches.

Linnaean name also has two meanings, depending on the context: it may either refer to a formal name given by Linnaeus (personally), such as &quot;Giraffa camelopardalis&quot; Linnaeus, 1758; or a formal name in the accepted nomenclature (as opposed to a modernistic clade name).

== The taxonomy of Linnaeus ==

In his &quot;Imperium Naturae&quot;, Linnaeus established three kingdoms, namely &quot;Regnum Animale&quot;, &quot;Regnum Vegetabile&quot; and &quot;Regnum Lapideum&quot;. This approach, the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, survives today in the popular mind, notably in the form of the parlour game question: &quot;Is it animal, vegetable or mineral?&quot;. The work of Linnaeus had a huge impact on science; it was indispensable as a foundation for biological nomenclature, now regulated by the nomenclature codes. Two of his works, the first edition of the &quot;Species Plantarum&quot; (1753) for plants and the tenth edition of the &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; (1758), are accepted as part of the starting points of nomenclature; his binomials (names for species) and generic names take priority over those of others. However, the impact he had on science was not because of the value of his taxonomy.

Linnaeus&#x27; kingdoms were in turn divided into &quot;classes&quot;, and they, in turn, into &quot;orders&quot;, &quot;genera&quot; (singular: &quot;genus&quot;), and &quot;species&quot; (singular: &quot;species&quot;), with an additional rank lower than species, though these do not precisely correspond to the use of these terms in modern taxonomy.

=== Classification of plants ===

In &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; (1735), his classes and orders of plants, according to his &quot;Systema Sexuale&quot;, were not intended to represent natural groups (as opposed to his &quot;ordines naturales&quot; in his &quot;Philosophia Botanica&quot;) but only for use in identification. However, in 1737 he published &quot;Genera Plantarum&quot; in which he claimed that his classification of genera was a natural system. His botanical classification and sexual system were used well into the nineteenth century. Within each class were several orders. This system is based on the number and arrangement of male (stamens) and female (pistils) organs.

The Linnaean classes for plants, in the Sexual System, were (page numbers refer to &quot;Species plantarum&quot;):
* Classis 1. Monandria: flowers with 1 stamen
* Classis 2. Diandria: flowers with 2 stamens
* Classis 3. Triandria: flowers with 3 stamens
* Classis 4. Tetrandria: flowers with 4 stamens
* Classis 5. Pentandria: flowers with 5 stamens
* Classis 6. Hexandria: flowers with 6 stamens
** Hexandria monogynia pp. 285–352
** Hexandria polygynia pp. 342–343
* Classis 7. Heptandria: flowers with 7 stamens
* Classis 8. Octandria: flowers with 8 stamens
* Classis 9. Enneandria: flowers with 9 stamens
* Classis 10. Decandria: flowers with 10 stamens
* Classis 11. Dodecandria: flowers with 11 to 19 stamens
* Classis 12. Icosandria: flowers with 20 (or more) stamens, perigynous
* Classis 13. Polyandria: flowers with many stamens, inserted on the receptacle
* Classis 14. Didynamia: flowers with 4 stamens, 2 long and 2 short
** Gymnospermia
** Angiospermia
* Classis 15. Tetradynamia: flowers with 6 stamens, 4 long and 2 short
* Classis 16. Monadelphia; flowers with the anthers separate, but the filaments united, at least at the base
** Pentandria
** Decandria
** Polyandria
* Classis 17. Diadelphia; flowers with the stamens united in two separate groups
** Hexandria
** Octandria
** Decandria
* Classis 18. Polyadelphia; flowers with the stamens united in several separate groups
** Pentandria
** Icosandria
** Polyandria
* Classis 19. Syngenesia; flowers with stamens united by their anthers
** Polygamia aequalis
** Polygamia superba
** Polygamia frustranea
** Polygamia necessaria
** Monogamia
* Classis 20. Gynandria; flowers with the stamens united to the pistils
* Classis 21. Monoecia: monoecious plants
* Classis 22. Dioecia: dioecious plants
* Classis 23. Polygamia: polygamodioecious plants
* Classis 24. Cryptogamia: the &quot;flowerless&quot; plants, including ferns, fungi, algae, and bryophytes

The classes based on the number of stamens were then subdivided by the number of pistils, e.g. &quot;Hexandria monogynia&quot; with six stamens and one pistil. Index to genera p. 1201

By contrast his &quot;ordines naturales&quot; numbered 69, from Piperitae to Vagae.

=== Classification for animals ===
Only in the Animal Kingdom is the higher taxonomy of Linnaeus still more or less recognizable and some of these names are still in use, but usually not quite for the same groups. He divided the Animal Kingdom into six classes. In the tenth edition, of 1758, these were:
* Classis 1. Mammalia (mammals)
* Classis 2. Aves (birds)
* Classis 3. Amphibia (amphibians)
* Classis 4. Pisces (fishes)
* Classis 5. Insecta (arthropods)
* Classis 6. Vermes (worms)

=== Classification for minerals ===
His taxonomy of minerals has long since been dropped from use. In the tenth edition, 1758, of the &quot;Systema Naturae&quot;, the Linnaean classes were:
* Classis 1. Petræ
* Classis 2. Mineræ
* Classis 3. Fossilia
* Classis 4. Vitamentra

== Rank-based scientific classification ==
This rank-based method of classifying living organisms was originally popularized by (and much later named for) Linnaeus, although it has changed considerably since his time. The greatest innovation of Linnaeus, and still the most important aspect of this system, is the general use of binomial nomenclature, the combination of a genus name and a second term, which together uniquely identify each species of organism within a kingdom. For example, the human species is uniquely identified within the animal kingdom by the name &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;. No other species of animal can have this same binomen (the technical term for a binomial in the case of animals). Prior to Linnaean taxonomy, animals were classified according to their mode of movement.

Linnaeus&#x27;s use of binomial nomenclature was anticipated by the theory of definition used in Scholasticism. Scholastic logicians and philosophers of nature defined the species human, for example, as &quot;Animal rationalis&quot;, where &quot;animal&quot; was considered a genus and &quot;rationalis&quot; (Latin for &quot;rational&quot;) the characteristic distinguishing humans from all other animals. Treating &quot;animal&quot; as the immediate genus of the species human, horse, etc. is of little practical use to the biological taxonomist, however. Accordingly, Linnaeus&#x27;s classification treats &quot;animal&quot; as a class including many genera (subordinated to the animal &quot;kingdom&quot; via intermediary classes such as &quot;orders&quot;), and treats &quot;homo&quot; as the genus of a species &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;, with &quot;sapiens&quot; (Latin for &quot;knowing&quot; or &quot;understanding&quot;) playing a differentiating role analogous to that played, in the Scholastic system, by &quot;rationalis&quot; (the word &quot;homo&quot;, Latin for &quot;human being&quot;, was used by the Scholastics to denote a species, not a genus).

A strength of Linnaean taxonomy is that it can be used to organize the different kinds of living organisms, simply and practically. Every species can be given a unique (and, one hopes, stable) name, as compared with common names that are often neither unique nor consistent from place to place and language to language. This uniqueness and stability are, of course, a result of the acceptance by working systematists (biologists specializing in taxonomy), not merely of the binomial names themselves, but of the rules governing the use of these names, which are laid down in formal nomenclature codes.

Species can be placed in a ranked hierarchy, starting with either &quot;domains&quot; or &quot;kingdoms&quot;. Domains are divided into kingdoms. Kingdoms are divided into &quot;phyla&quot; (singular: &quot;phylum&quot;) — for animals; the term &quot;division&quot;, used for plants and fungi, is equivalent to the rank of phylum (and the current International Code of Botanical Nomenclature allows the use of either term). Phyla (or divisions) are divided into &quot;classes&quot;, and they, in turn, into &quot;orders&quot;, &quot;families&quot;, &quot;genera&quot; (singular: &quot;genus&quot;), and &quot;species&quot; (singular: &quot;species&quot;). There are ranks below species: in zoology, &quot;subspecies&quot; (but see &quot;form&quot; or &quot;morph&quot;); in botany, &quot;variety&quot; (varietas) and &quot;form&quot; (forma), etc.

Groups of organisms at any of these ranks are called &quot;taxa&quot; (singular: &quot;taxon&quot;) or &quot;taxonomic groups&quot;.

The Linnaean system has proven robust and it remains the only extant working classification system at present that enjoys universal scientific acceptance. However, although the number of ranks is unlimited, in practice any classification becomes more cumbersome the more ranks are added. Among the later subdivisions that have arisen are such entities as phyla, families, and tribes, as well as any number of ranks with prefixes (superfamilies, subfamilies, etc.). The use of newer taxonomic tools such as cladistics and phylogenetic nomenclature has led to a different way of looking at evolution (expressed in many nested clades) and this sometimes leads to a desire for more ranks. An example of such complexity is the scheme for mammals proposed by McKenna and Bell.

=== Alternatives ===
Over time, understanding of the relationships between living things has changed. Linnaeus could only base his scheme on the structural similarities of the different organisms. The greatest change was the widespread acceptance of evolution as the mechanism of biological diversity and species formation, following the 1859 publication of Charles Darwin&#x27;s &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;. It then became generally understood that classifications ought to reflect the phylogeny of organisms, their descent by evolution. This led to evolutionary taxonomy, where the various extant and extinct are linked together to construct a phylogeny. This is largely what is meant by the term &#x27;Linnaean taxonomy&#x27; when used in a modern context.
In cladistics, originating in the work of Willi Hennig, 1950 onwards, each taxon is grouped so as to include the common ancestor of the group&#x27;s members (and thus to avoid phylogeny). Such taxa may be either monophyletic (including all descendants) such as genus &quot;Homo&quot;, or paraphyletic (excluding some descendants), such as genus &quot;Australopithecus&quot;.

Originally, Linnaeus established three kingdoms in his scheme, namely for Plants, Animals and an additional group for minerals, which has long since been abandoned. Since then, various life forms have been moved into three new kingdoms: Monera, for prokaryotes (i.e., bacteria); Protista, for protozoans and most algae; and Fungi. This five-kingdom scheme is still far from the phylogenetic ideal and has largely been supplanted in modern taxonomic work by a division into three domains: Bacteria and Archaea, which contain the prokaryotes, and Eukaryota, comprising the remaining forms. These arrangements should not be seen as definitive. They are based on the genomes of the organisms; as knowledge on this increases, classifications will change.

Representing presumptive evolutionary relationships within the framework of Linnaean taxonomy is sometimes seen as problematic, especially given the wide acceptance of cladistic methodology and numerous molecular phylogenies that have challenged long-accepted classifications. Therefore, some systematists have proposed a PhyloCode to replace it.

== See also ==
* History of plant systematics
* Linnaean Herbarium
* Phylogenetic tree – a way to express insights into evolutionary relationships
* Zoology mnemonic for a list of mnemonic sentences used to help people remember the list of Linnaean ranks.

== References ==
== Bibliography ==

;Books
* 
* 
* Dawkins, Richard. 2004. &quot;The Ancestor&#x27;s Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Life&quot;. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
* Ereshefsky, Marc. 2000. &quot;The Poverty of the Linnaean Hierarchy: A Philosophical Study of Biological Taxonomy&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Gould, Stephen Jay. 1989. &quot;Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History&quot;. W. W. Norton &amp; Co. 
* Pavord, Anna. &quot;The Naming of Names: The Search for Order in the World of Plants&quot;. Bloomsbury. 
;Articles
* 
;Websites


== External links ==
* International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Saint Louis Code), Electronic version
* International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code, 2011), Electronic version
* ICZN website, for zoological nomenclature
* Text of the ICZN, Electronic version
* ZooBank: The World Register of Animal Names
* International Committee on Systematics of Prokaryotes for bacteria
* International Code of Zoological Nomenclature. 4th Edition. By the International Union of Biological Sciences
* ICTVdB website, for virus nomenclature by the International Union of Microbiological Societies
* Tree of Life
* European Species Names in Linnaean, Czech, English, German and French</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10372154" start="0" end="17" title="Linnaean taxonomy" label="Linnaean taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="84" end="109" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="biological classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="131" end="144" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="172" end="187" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="509" end="534" title="scientific classification" label="scientific classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="579" end="588" title="cladistics" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="630" end="635" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="751" end="756" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="761" end="770" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372154" start="1031" end="1044" title="Linnaean taxonomy" label="Linnaean name"/>
<link wikidata="Q15083" start="1171" end="1220" title="Giraffa camelopardalis" label="&amp;quot;Giraffa camelopardalis&amp;quot; Linnaeus, 1758"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="1297" end="1302" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1380" end="1388" title="Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302368" start="1672" end="1700" title="animal, vegetable or mineral" label="animal, vegetable or mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673092" start="1801" end="1824" title="biological nomenclature" label="biological nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673092" start="1847" end="1865" title="nomenclature codes" label="nomenclature codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="1916" end="1933" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110868" start="2141" end="2149" title="Priority (biology)" label="priority"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="2313" end="2320" title="Class (biology)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="2358" end="2364" title="Order (biology)" label="orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="2378" end="2384" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="2432" end="2439" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782808" start="2829" end="2858" title="ordo naturalis" label="&amp;quot;ordines naturales&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010244" start="2872" end="2892" title="Philosophia Botanica" label="Philosophia Botanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="3261" end="3267" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="3282" end="3288" title="Gynoecium" label="pistil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4077" end="4087" title="Ovary (plants)#Half-inferior ovary" label="perigynous"/>
<link wikidata="Q497512" start="4157" end="4167" title="Receptacle (botany)" label="receptacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q66368485" start="5009" end="5019" title="monoecious" label="monoecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="5050" end="5059" title="dioecious" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5092" end="5109" title="Plant sexual morphology#Plant population" label="polygamodioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="5189" end="5193" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="5196" end="5201" title="fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="5203" end="5208" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q29993" start="5214" end="5223" title="bryophyte" label="bryophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745752" start="5814" end="5822" title="Mammalia in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="Mammalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828425" start="5846" end="5850" title="Aves in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="Aves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748172" start="5872" end="5880" title="Amphibia in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="Amphibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198245" start="5907" end="5913" title="Pisces in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="Pisces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313630" start="5936" end="5943" title="Insecta in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="Insecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921548" start="5970" end="5976" title="Vermes in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="Vermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="6038" end="6045" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="6591" end="6612" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="6635" end="6640" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="6703" end="6710" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="6758" end="6763" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="6905" end="6912" title="binomen" label="binomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="7160" end="7173" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="8325" end="8333" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516404" start="8632" end="8644" title="Systematics" label="systematists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673092" start="8810" end="8827" title="nomenclature code" label="nomenclature code"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="8858" end="8864" title="taxonomic rank" label="ranked"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="8865" end="8874" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q146481" start="8903" end="8910" title="Domain (biology)" label="domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q36732" start="8967" end="8975" title="Kingdom (biology)" label="kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="9009" end="9014" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="9058" end="9064" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="9107" end="9112" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="9118" end="9123" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q693148" start="9178" end="9222" title="International Code of Botanical Nomenclature" label="International Code of Botanical Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="9299" end="9306" title="Class (biology)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="9344" end="9350" title="Order (biology)" label="orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="9364" end="9372" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="9386" end="9392" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="9440" end="9447" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469884" start="9568" end="9572" title="form (zoology)" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="9588" end="9593" title="morph (zoology)" label="morph"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="9767" end="9772" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="10320" end="10330" title="cladistics" label="cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="10335" end="10360" title="phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="10438" end="10443" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10536" end="10554" title="Mammal classification#McKenna.2FBell classification" label="scheme for mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="10836" end="10845" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="10972" end="10996" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="11082" end="11091" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q430465" start="11146" end="11167" title="evolutionary taxonomy" label="evolutionary taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="11187" end="11193" title="extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="11198" end="11205" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="11358" end="11368" title="cladistics" label="cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q57999" start="11397" end="11409" title="Willi Hennig" label="Willi Hennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="11531" end="11540" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="11567" end="11579" title="monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="11628" end="11632" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="11643" end="11655" title="paraphyly" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103237" start="11706" end="11722" title="Australopithecus" label="Australopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="11805" end="11810" title="Plant" label="Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="11813" end="11819" title="Animal" label="Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="11849" end="11857" title="minerals" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q97263158" start="11968" end="11974" title="Monera" label="Monera"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="11980" end="11990" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="12010" end="12017" title="Protist" label="Protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="12055" end="12060" title="fungus" label="Fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="12109" end="12121" title="phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="12219" end="12227" title="Bacterium" label="Bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="12232" end="12239" title="Archaea" label="Archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="12276" end="12285" title="Eukaryote" label="Eukaryota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="12394" end="12400" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="12650" end="12659" title="cladistic" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="12685" end="12706" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189395" start="12804" end="12813" title="PhyloCode" label="PhyloCode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868368" start="12847" end="12875" title="History of plant systematics" label="History of plant systematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55829174" start="12878" end="12896" title="Linnaean Herbarium" label="Linnaean Herbarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="12899" end="12916" title="Phylogenetic tree" label="Phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074128" start="12979" end="12995" title="Zoology mnemonic" label="Zoology mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="13139" end="13155" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Dawkins, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512370" start="13169" end="13193" title="The Ancestor&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Ancestor&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="13426" end="13444" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Gould, Stephen Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544945" start="13458" end="13472" title="Wonderful Life (book)" label="Wonderful Life"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17541" wikidata="Q40348" url="?curid=17541" title="Lawyer">
<text>A lawyer is a person who is qualified to offer advice about the law, draft legal documents, or represent individuals in legal matters.

The exact nature of a lawyer&#x27;s work varies depending on the legal jurisdiction and the legal system, as well as the lawyer&#x27;s area of practice. In many jurisdictions, the legal profession is divided into various branches — including barristers, solicitors, conveyancers, notaries, canon lawyer — who perform different tasks related to the law.

Historically, the role of lawyers can be traced back to ancient civilizations such as Greece and Rome. In modern times, the practice of law includes activities such as representing clients in criminal or civil court, advising on business transactions, protecting intellectual property, and ensuring compliance with laws and regulations. 

Depending on the country, the education required to become a lawyer can range from completing an undergraduate law degree to undergoing postgraduate education and professional training. In many jurisdictions, passing a bar examination is also necessary before one can practice law.

Working as a lawyer generally involves the practical application of abstract legal theories and knowledge to solve specific problems. Some lawyers also work primarily in upholding the rule of law, human rights, and the interests of the legal profession.

==Terminology==
Some jurisdictions have multiple types of lawyers, while others only have two or one. 

England, the mother of the common law jurisdictions, emerged from the Middle Ages with a complexity in its legal professions similar to that of civil law jurisdictions, but then evolved by the 19th century to a single division between barristers and solicitors. 

Several countries that originally had two or more legal professions have since &quot;fused&quot; or &quot;united&quot; their professions into a single type of lawyer. Most countries in this category are common law countries, though France, a civil law country, merged its jurists in 1990 and 1991 in response to Anglo-American competition. In countries with fused professions, a lawyer is usually permitted to carry out all or nearly all the responsibilities listed below. 

In some jurisdictions descended from the English common law tradition, including England and Wales, there are often two kinds of lawyers. A barrister (also known as an advocate or counselor) is a lawyer who typically specializes in arguing before courts, particularly in higher courts. A solicitor (or attorney) is a lawyer who prepares cases and gives advice on legal subjects. In some jurisdictions, solicitors also represent people in court. Fused professions, where lawyers have rights of both barristers and solicitors, have emerged in other former English common law jurisdictions, such as the United States, India, and Pakistan.

On the other hand, civil law jurisdictions do not have &quot;lawyers&quot; in terms of a single general-purpose legal services provider. Rather, their legal professions consist of a large number of different kinds of legally-trained persons, known as jurists, some of whom are advocates who are licensed to practice in the courts. In some civil law countries, a similar distinction to the common law tradition exists between advocates and procurators.

Because each country has traditionally had its own method of dividing up legal work among its legal professionals, it has been difficult to formulate accurate generalizations that cover all the countries with multiple legal professions. Other kinds of legal practitioners include:

* Patent attorneys
* Trademark attorneys
* Conveyancers
* Notaries
* Scriveners
* Legal executives

While some jurisdictions regulate the use of the title &quot;lawyer&quot;, others do not.

=== Titles ===

Historically, lawyers in most European countries were addressed with the title of doctor. The first university degrees, starting with the law school of the University of Bologna in the 11th century, were all law degrees and doctorates. Therefore, in many southern European countries, including Portugal, Italy and Malta, lawyers have traditionally been addressed as &quot;doctor&quot;, a practice which was transferred to many countries in South America and Macau. In some jurisdictions, the term &quot;doctor&quot; has since fallen into disuse, but it is still in use in many countries within and outside of Europe.

The title of doctor has traditionally not been used to address lawyers in England or other common law countries. Until 1846, lawyers in England were trained by apprenticeship or in the Inns of Court, with no undergraduate degree being required. Although the most common law degree in the United States is the Juris Doctor, most J.D. holders in the United States do not use the title &quot;doctor&quot;. It is, however, common for lawyers in the United States to use the honorific suffix &quot;Esq.&quot; (for &quot;Esquire&quot;).

In French (France, Quebec, Belgium, Luxembourg, French-speaking area of Switzerland) and Dutch-speaking countries (Netherlands, Belgium), legal professionals are addressed as , abbreviated to (in French) or , abbreviated to (in Dutch). In Poland, the title is used to refer to advocates and attorneys at law, although as an informal title its status is not protected by law.

In South Africa and India, lawyers who have been admitted to the bar may use the title &quot;Advocate&quot;, abbreviated to &quot;Adv&quot; in written correspondence. Lawyers who have completed two years of clerkship with a principal Attorney and passed all four board exams may be admitted as an &quot;Attorney&quot;. Likewise, Italian law graduates who have qualified for the bar use the title &quot;Avvocato&quot;, abbreviated in &quot;Avv.&quot;

==Responsibilities==
===Oral Arguments in a Courtroom===

Some lawyers, particularly barristers and advocates, argue the legal cases of clients case before a judge or jury in a court of law. 

In some jurisdictions, there are specialist lawyers who have exclusive rights of audience before a court. In others, particularly fused legal jurisdictions, there are lawyers who specialize in courtroom advocacy but who do not have a legal monopoly over the profession.

In some countries, litigants have the option of arguing on their own behalf. In other countries, like Venezuela, no one may appear before a judge unless represented by a lawyer. The advantage of the latter regime is that lawyers are familiar with the court&#x27;s customs and procedures, making the legal system more efficient for all involved. Unrepresented parties often damage their own credibility or slow the court down as a result of their inexperience.

===Research and drafting of court papers===
Often, lawyers brief a court in writing on the issues in a case before the issues can be orally argued. They may have to perform extensive research into relevant facts. Also, they draft legal papers and prepare for an oral argument.

In split common law jurisdictions, the usual division of labor is that a solicitor will obtain the facts of the case from the client and then brief a barrister, usually in writing. The barrister then researches and drafts the necessary court pleadings, which will be filed and served by the solicitor, and orally argues the case.

In Spanish civil law, the procurator merely signs and presents the papers to the court, but it is the advocate who drafts the papers and argues the case. In other civil law jurisdictions, like Japan, a scrivener or clerk may fill out court forms and draft simple papers for laypersons who cannot afford or do not need attorneys, and advise them on how to manage and argue their own cases.

===Advocacy in administrative hearings===
In most developed countries, the legislature has granted original jurisdiction over highly technical matters to executive branch administrative agencies which oversee such things. As a result, some lawyers have become specialists in administrative law. In a few countries, there is a special category of jurists with a monopoly over this form of advocacy; for example, France formerly had &quot;conseils juridiques&quot; (who were merged into the main legal profession in 1991). In other countries, like the United States, lawyers have been effectively barred by statute from certain types of administrative hearings in order to preserve their informality.

===Client intake and counseling===
In some fused common law jurisdictions, the client-lawyer relationship begins with an intake interview where the lawyer gets to know the client personally, following which the lawyer discovers the facts of the client&#x27;s case, clarifies what the client wants to accomplish, and shapes the client&#x27;s expectations as to what actually can be accomplished. The second to last step begins to develop various claims or defenses for the client. Lastly, the lawyer explains her or his fees to the client.

In England, only solicitors were traditionally in direct contact with the client, but barristers nowadays may apply for rights to liaise with clients directly. The solicitor retained a barrister if one was necessary and acted as an intermediary between the barrister and the client. In most cases barristers were obliged, under what is known as the &quot;cab rank rule&quot;, to accept instructions for a case in an area in which they held themselves out as practicing, at a court at which they normally appeared and at their usual rates.

===Legal advice===

Legal advice is the application of abstract principles of law to the concrete facts of the client&#x27;s case to advise the client about what they should do next. In some jurisdictions, only a properly licensed lawyer may provide legal advice to clients for good consideration, even if no lawsuit is contemplated or is in progress. In these jurisdictions, even conveyancers and corporate in-house counsel must first get a license to practice, though they may actually spend very little of their careers in court. Some jurisdictions have made the violation of such a rule the crime of unauthorized practice of law.

In other countries, jurists who hold law degrees are allowed to provide legal advice to individuals or to corporations, and it is irrelevant if they lack a license and cannot appear in court. Some countries go further; in England and Wales, there is &quot;no&quot; general prohibition on the giving of legal advice. Singapore does not have any admission requirements for in-house counsel. Sometimes civil law notaries are allowed to give legal advice, as in Belgium.

In many countries, non-jurist accountants may provide what is technically legal advice in tax and accounting matters.

===Protecting intellectual property===
In virtually all countries, patents, trademarks, industrial designs and other forms of intellectual property must be formally registered with a government agency in order to receive maximum protection under the law. The division of such work among lawyers, licensed non-lawyer jurists/agents, and ordinary clerks or scriveners varies greatly from one country to the next.

=== Negotiating and drafting contracts ===
In some countries, the negotiating and drafting of contracts is considered to be similar to the provision of legal advice, so that it is subject to the licensing requirement explained above. In others, jurists or notaries may negotiate or draft contracts.

===Conveyancing===
Conveyancing is the drafting of the documents necessary for the transfer of real property, such as deeds and mortgages. In some jurisdictions, all real estate transactions must be carried out by a lawyer. Historically, conveyancing accounted for about half of English solicitors&#x27; income, though this has since changed, and a 1978 study showed that conveyancing &quot;accounts for as much as 80 percent of solicitor-client contact in New South Wales.&quot; In most common law jurisdictions outside of the United States, this monopoly arose from an 1804 law that was introduced by William Pitt the Younger as a &quot;quid pro quo&quot; for the raising of fees on the certification of legal professionals such as barristers, solicitors, attorneys, and notaries.

In others, the use of a lawyer is optional and banks, title companies, or realtors may be used instead. In some civil law jurisdictions, real estate transactions are handled by civil law notaries. In England and Wales, a special class of legal professionals–the licensed conveyancer–is also allowed to carry out conveyancing services for reward.

===Carrying out the intent of the deceased===
In many countries, only lawyers have the legal authority to draft wills, trusts, and any other documents that ensure the efficient disposition of a person&#x27;s property after death. In some civil law countries, this responsibility is handled by civil law notaries.

===Prosecution and defense of criminal suspects===
In many civil law countries, prosecutors are trained and employed as part of the judiciary. They are law-trained jurists, but may not necessarily be lawyers in the sense that the word is used in the common law world. In common law countries, prosecutors are usually lawyers holding regular licenses who work for the government office that files criminal charges against suspects. Criminal defense lawyers specialize in the defense of those charged with any crimes.

==Education and training==
The educational prerequisites for becoming a lawyer vary greatly across countries. In some countries, law is an undergraduate degree culminating in a bachelors or master&#x27;s degree in law. In some of these jurisdictions, it is common or even required for students to earn another bachelor&#x27;s degree at the same time. Where law is taught as an undergraduate degree, legal training after law school may comprise advanced examinations, apprenticeships, and additional coursework at special government institutes. For example, in many English common law jurisdictions, individuals with a law degree have to undergo further education and professional training before qualifying as a lawyer, such as the Bar Professional Training Course. 

In other jurisdictions, particularly the United States and Canada, law is taught at the graduate level following the completion of an unrelated bachelor&#x27;s degree. In America, the Americans Bar Association decides which law schools to approve for the purposes of admission to the bar. Law schools in the United States and Canada award graduating students a J.D. (Juris Doctor) as a professional law degree. In a handful of U.S. states, one may become an attorney (a so-called country lawyer) by simply &quot;reading law&quot; and passing the bar examination, without having to attend law school first, although very few people actually become lawyers that way.

The methods and quality of legal education vary widely. Some countries require extensive clinical training in the form of apprenticeships or special clinical courses. Others, like Venezuela, do not. A few countries prefer to teach through assigned readings of judicial opinions (the casebook method) followed by intense in-class cross-examination by the professor (the Socratic method). Many others focus on theoretical aspects of law, leaving the professional and practical training of lawyers to apprenticeship and employment contexts.

Some countries, particularly industrialized ones, have a traditional preference for full-time law programs, while in developing countries, students often work full- or part-time to pay the tuition and fees of their part-time law programs. Law schools in developing countries share several common problems, such as an over reliance on practicing judges and lawyers who treat teaching as a part-time commitment, a concomitant scarcity of full-time law professors), incompetent faculty with underqualified credentials, and textbooks that lag behind the current state of the law.

===Earning the right to practice law===

Some jurisdictions grant a &quot;diploma privilege&quot; to certain institutions, so that merely earning a degree or credential from those institutions is the primary qualification for practicing law. Mexico allows anyone with a law degree to practice law. However, in a large number of countries, a law student must pass a bar examination (or a series of such examinations) before receiving a license to practice.

Some countries require a formal apprenticeship with an experienced practitioner, while others do not. A few jurisdictions still allow an apprenticeship in place of any kind of formal legal education, though the number of persons who actually become lawyers that way is increasingly rare.

==Career structure==

The career structure of lawyers varies widely from one country to the next.

===Common and civil law===
In most common law countries, especially those with fused professions, lawyers have many options over the course of their careers. Besides private practice, they can become a prosecutor, government counsel, corporate in-house counsel, administrative law judge, judge, arbitrator, or law professor. There are also many non-legal jobs for which legal training is good preparation, such as politician, corporate executive, government administrator, investment banker, entrepreneur, or journalist. In developing countries like India, a large majority of law students never actually practice, but simply use their law degree as a foundation for careers in other fields.

In most civil law countries, lawyers generally structure their legal education around their chosen specialty; the boundaries between different types of lawyers are carefully defined and hard to cross. After one earns a law degree, career mobility may be severely constrained. For example, unlike their Anglo-American counterparts, it is difficult for German judges to leave the bench and become advocates in private practice. Another interesting example is France, where for much of the 20th century, all judiciary officials were graduates of an elite professional school for judges.

In a few civil law countries, such as Sweden, the legal profession is not rigorously bifurcated and everyone within it can easily change roles and arenas.

===Specialization===
In many countries, lawyers are general practitioners who represent clients in a broad field of legal matters. In others, there has been a tendency since the start of the 20th century for lawyers to specialize early in their careers. In countries where specialization is prevalent, many lawyers specialize in representing one side in one particular area of the law; thus, it is common in the United States to hear of plaintiffs&#x27; personal injury attorneys. 

===Organizations===
Lawyers in private practice generally work in specialized businesses known as law firms, with the exception of English barristers. The vast majority of law firms worldwide are small businesses that range in size from 1 to 10 lawyers. The United States, United Kingdom and Australia are exceptions, home to several firms with more than 1,000 lawyers after a wave of mergers in the late 1990s.

Notably, barristers in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and some states in Australia do &quot;not&quot; work in law firms. Those who offer their services to members of the general public—as opposed to those working in-house — are generally self-employed. Most work in groupings known as &quot;sets&quot; or &quot;chambers&quot;, where some administrative and marketing costs are shared. An important effect of this different organizational structure is that there is no conflict of interest where barristers in the same chambers work for opposing sides in a case, and in some specialized chambers this is commonplace. 

Some large businesses employ their own legal staff in a legal department. Other organizations buy in legal services from outside companies.

==Professional associations and regulation==
===Mandatory licensing and membership in professional organizations===
In some jurisdictions, either the judiciary or the Ministry of Justice directly supervises the admission, licensing, and regulation of lawyers.

Other jurisdictions, by statute, tradition, or court order, have granted such powers to a professional association which all lawyers must belong to. In the U.S., such associations are known as mandatory, integrated, or unified bar associations. In the Commonwealth of Nations, similar organizations are known as Inns of Court, bar councils or law societies. In civil law countries, comparable organizations are known as Orders of Advocates, Chambers of Advocates, Colleges of Advocates, Faculties of Advocates, or similar names. Generally, a nonmember caught practicing law may be liable for the crime of unauthorized practice of law.

In common law countries with divided legal professions, barristers traditionally belong to the bar council (or an Inn of Court) and solicitors belong to the law society. In the English-speaking world, the largest mandatory professional association of lawyers is the State Bar of California, with 230,000 members.

Some countries admit and regulate lawyers at the national level, so that a lawyer, once licensed, can argue cases in any court in the land. This can be seen in countries including New Zealand, Japan, and Belgium. Others, especially those with federal governments, tend to regulate lawyers at the state or provincial level; this is the case in the United States, Canada, Australia, and Switzerland, to name a few. Brazil is the most well-known federal government that regulates lawyers at the national level.

Some countries, like Italy, regulate lawyers at the regional level, and a few, like Belgium, even regulate them at the local level (that is, they are licensed and regulated by the local equivalent of bar associations but can advocate in courts nationwide). In Germany, lawyers are admitted to regional bars and may appear for clients before all courts nationwide with the exception of the Federal Court of Justice of Germany (&quot;Bundesgerichtshof&quot; or BGH.

Generally, geographic limitations can be troublesome for a lawyer who discovers that his client&#x27;s cause requires him to litigate in a court beyond the normal geographic scope of his license. Although most courts have special &quot;pro hac vice&quot; rules for such occasions, the lawyer will still have to deal with a different set of professional responsibility rules, as well as the possibility of other differences in substantive and procedural law.

Some countries grant licenses to non-resident lawyers, who may then appear regularly on behalf of foreign clients. Others require all lawyers to live in the jurisdiction or to even hold national citizenship as a prerequisite for receiving a license to practice. But the trend in industrialized countries since the 1970s has been to abolish citizenship and residency restrictions. For example, the Supreme Court of Canada struck down a citizenship requirement on equality rights grounds in 1989, and similarly, American citizenship and residency requirements were struck down as unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1973 and 1985, respectively. The European Court of Justice made similar decisions in 1974 and 1977 striking down citizenship restrictions in Belgium and France.

===Regulation of lawyers===
A key difference among countries is whether lawyers should be regulated solely by an independent judiciary and its subordinate institutions (a self-regulating legal profession), or whether lawyers should be subject to supervision by the Ministry of Justice in the executive branch.

In most civil law countries, the government has traditionally exercised tight control over the legal profession in order to ensure a steady supply of loyal judges and bureaucrats. That is, lawyers were expected first and foremost to serve the state, and the availability of counsel for private litigants was an afterthought. Even in civil law countries like Norway which have partially self-regulating professions, the Ministry of Justice is the sole issuer of licenses, and makes its own independent re-evaluation of a lawyer&#x27;s fitness to practice after a lawyer has been expelled from the Advocates&#x27; Association. Brazil is an unusual exception in that its national Order of Advocates has become a fully self-regulating institution with direct control over licensing and has successfully resisted government attempts to place it under the control of the Ministry of Labor.

Of all the civil law countries, communist countries historically went the farthest towards total state control, with all communist lawyers forced to practice in collectives by the mid-1950s. China is a prime example: technically, the People&#x27;s Republic of China did not have lawyers, and instead had only poorly trained, state-employed &quot;legal workers&quot; prior to the enactment of a comprehensive reform package in 1996 by the Standing Committee of the National People&#x27;s Congress.

In contrast, common law lawyers have traditionally regulated themselves through institutions where the influence of non-lawyers, if any, was weak and indirect, despite nominal state control. Such institutions have been traditionally dominated by private practitioners who opposed strong state control of the profession on the grounds that it would endanger the ability of lawyers to zealously and competently advocate their clients&#x27; causes in the adversarial system of justice. However, the concept of the self-regulating profession has been criticized as a sham which serves to legitimize the professional monopoly while protecting the profession from public scrutiny. In some jurisdictions, mechanisms have been astonishingly ineffective, and penalties have been light or nonexistent.

===Voluntary associations===
Voluntary lawyer associations may exist at all geographic levels from the provincial to the global. Some associations are termed voluntary bar associations. In some countries, lawyers have also formed trade unions.

==Cultural perception==

Hostility towards the legal profession is a widespread phenomenon. For example, William Shakespeare famously wrote, &quot;The first thing we do, let&#x27;s kill all the lawyers&quot; in &quot;Henry VI, Part 2&quot;, Act IV, Scene 2. The legal profession was abolished in Prussia in 1780 and in France in 1789, though both countries eventually realized that their judicial systems could not function efficiently without lawyers. Complaints about too many lawyers were common in both England and the United States in the 1840s, Germany in the 1910s, and in Australia, Canada, the United States, and Scotland in the 1980s.

Public distrust of lawyers reached record heights in the United States after the Watergate scandal. In the aftermath of Watergate, legal self-help books became popular among those who wished to solve their legal problems without having to deal with lawyers. Lawyer jokes also soared in popularity in English-speaking North America as a result of Watergate. 

In &quot;Adventures in Law and Justice&quot;, legal researcher Bryan Horrigan dedicated a chapter to &quot;Myths, Fictions, and Realities&quot; about law and illustrated the perennial criticism of lawyers as &quot;amoral [...] guns for hire&quot; with a quote from Ambrose Bierce&#x27;s satirical &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Dictionary&quot; that summarized the noun as: &quot;LAWYER, n. One skilled in circumvention of the law.&quot;

More generally, in &quot;Legal Ethics: A Comparative Study&quot;, law professor Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr. with Angelo Dondi briefly examined the &quot;regulations attempting to suppress lawyer misconduct&quot; and noted that their similarity around the world was paralleled by a &quot;remarkable consistency&quot; in certain &quot;persistent grievances&quot; about lawyers that transcends both time and locale, from the Bible to medieval England to dynastic China. The authors then generalized these common complaints about lawyers as being classified into five &quot;general categories&quot; as follows:

* abuse of litigation in various ways, including using dilatory tactics and false evidence and making frivolous arguments to the courts
* preparation of false documentation, such as false deeds, contracts, or wills
* deceiving clients and other persons and misappropriating property
* procrastination in dealings with clients
* charging excessive fees.

Some studies have shown that suicide rates among lawyers in certain jurisdictions may be as much as six times higher than the average population, and commentators suggest that the low opinion the public has of lawyers, combined with their own high ideals of justice, which in practice they may see denied, increase the depression rates of those in this profession. Additionally, lawyers are twice as likely to suffer from addiction to alcohol and other drugs.

==Compensation==
In the United States, lawyers typically earn between $45,000 and $160,000 per year, although earnings vary by age, experience, and practice setting. Solo practitioners typically earn less than lawyers in corporate law firms but more than those working for state or local government.

Lawyers are paid for their work in a variety of ways. In private practice, they may work for an hourly fee according to a billable hour structure, a contingency fee, or a lump sum payment. Normally, most lawyers negotiate a written fee agreement up front and may require a non-refundable retainer in advance. Recent studies suggest that when lawyers charge a fixed fee rather than billing by the hour, they work less hard on behalf of clients, and clients get worse outcomes. In many countries there are fee-shifting arrangements by which the loser must pay the winner&#x27;s fees and costs; the United States is the major exception, although in turn, its legislators have carved out many exceptions to the so-called &quot;American Rule&quot; of no fee shifting.

Lawyers working directly on the payroll of governments, nonprofits, and corporations usually earn a regular annual salary. In many countries, lawyers can also volunteer their labor in the service of worthy causes through an arrangement called &quot;pro bono&quot; (short for &quot;pro bono publico&quot;, &quot;for the common good&quot;). Traditionally such work was performed on behalf of the poor, but in some countries it has now expanded to many other causes such as environmental law.

In some countries, there are legal aid lawyers who specialize in providing legal services to the indigent. France and Spain even have formal fee structures by which lawyers are compensated by the government for legal aid cases on a per-case basis. A similar system, though not as extensive or generous, operates in Australia, Canada, and South Africa.

In other countries, legal aid specialists are practically nonexistent. This may be because non-lawyers are allowed to provide such services; in both Italy and Belgium, trade unions and political parties provide what can be characterized as legal aid services. Some legal aid in Belgium is also provided by young lawyer apprentices subsidized by local bar associations (known as the &quot;pro deo&quot; system), as well as consumer protection nonprofit organizations and Public Assistance Agencies subsidized by local governments. In Germany, mandatory fee structures have enabled widespread implementation of affordable legal expense insurance.

==History==
===Ancient Greece===
The earliest people who could be described as &quot;lawyers&quot; were probably the orators of ancient Athens. However, Athenian orators faced serious structural obstacles. First, there was a rule that individuals were supposed to plead their own cases, which was soon bypassed by the increasing tendency of individuals to ask a &quot;friend&quot; for assistance. However, around the middle of the fourth century, the Athenians disposed of the perfunctory request for a friend. Second, a more serious obstacle, which the Athenian orators never completely overcame, was the rule that no one could take a fee to plead the cause of another. This law was widely disregarded in practice, but was never abolished, which meant that orators could &quot;never&quot; present themselves as legal professionals or experts. They had to uphold the legal fiction that they were merely an ordinary citizen generously helping out a friend for free, and thus they could never organize into a real profession. If one narrows the definition of lawyers to people who could practice the legal profession openly and legally, then the first lawyers would be the orators of ancient Rome.

===Ancient Rome===
A law enacted in 204 BC barred Roman advocates from taking fees, but the law was widely ignored. The ban on fees was abolished by Emperor Claudius, who legalized advocacy as a profession and allowed the Roman advocates to become the first lawyers who could practice openly—but he also imposed a fee ceiling of 10,000 sesterces. This was apparently not much money; the Satires of Juvenal complained that there was no money in working as an advocate.

Like their Greek contemporaries, early Roman advocates were trained in rhetoric, not law, and the judges before whom they argued were also not legally trained. But very early on, unlike Athens, Rome developed a class of specialists who were learned in the law, known as jurisconsults (&quot;iuris consulti&quot;). Jurisconsults were wealthy amateurs who dabbled in law as an intellectual hobby; they did not make their primary living from it. They gave legal opinions (&quot;responsa&quot;) on legal issues to all comers (a practice known as &quot;publice respondere&quot;). Roman judges and governors would routinely consult with an advisory panel of jurisconsults before rendering a decision, and advocates and ordinary people also went to jurisconsults for legal opinions. The Romans were the first to have a class of people who spent their days thinking about legal problems, and this is why their law developed in a systematic and technical way.
During the Roman Republic and the early Roman Empire, jurisconsults and advocates were unregulated, since the former were amateurs and the latter were technically illegal. Any citizen could call himself an advocate or a legal expert, though whether people believed him would depend upon his personal reputation. This changed once Claudius legalized the legal profession. By the start of the Byzantine Empire, the legal profession had become well-established, heavily regulated, and highly stratified. The centralization and bureaucratization of the profession was apparently gradual at first, but accelerated during the reign of Emperor Hadrian. At the same time, the jurisconsults went into decline during the imperial period.

By the fourth century, advocates had to be enrolled on the bar of a court to argue before it, they could only be attached to one court at a time, and there were restrictions on how many advocates could be enrolled at a particular court. By the 380s, advocates were studying law in addition to rhetoric, thus reducing the need for a separate class of jurisconsults; in 460, Emperor Leo imposed a requirement that new advocates seeking admission had to produce testimonials from their teachers; and by the sixth century, a regular course of legal study lasting about four years was required for admission. Claudius&#x27;s fee ceiling lasted all the way into the Byzantine period, though by then it was measured at 100 solidi. It was widely evaded, either through demands for maintenance and expenses or a &quot;sub rosa&quot; barter transaction. The latter was cause for disbarment.

The notaries (&quot;tabelliones&quot;) appeared in the late Roman Empire. Like their modern-day descendants, the civil law notaries, they were responsible for drafting wills, conveyances, and contracts. They were ubiquitous and most villages had one. In Roman times, notaries were widely considered to be inferior to advocates and jury consults.

===Middle Ages===

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the legal profession of Western Europe collapsed. As James Brundage has explained: &quot;[by 1140], no one in Western Europe could properly be described as a professional lawyer or a professional canonist in anything like the modern sense of the term &#x27;professional.&#x27; &quot; However, from 1150 (when was compiled) onward, a small but increasing number of men became experts in canon law but only in furtherance of other occupational goals, such as serving the Catholic Church as priests. From 1190 to 1230, however, there was a crucial shift in which some men began to practice canon law as a lifelong profession in itself.

The legal profession&#x27;s return was marked by the renewed efforts of church and state to regulate it. In 1231, two French councils mandated that lawyers had to swear an oath of admission before practicing before the bishop&#x27;s courts in their regions, and a similar oath was promulgated by the papal legate in London in 1237. During the same decade, the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire Frederick II, the king of the Kingdom of Sicily, imposed a similar oath in his civil courts. By 1250, the nucleus of a new legal profession had clearly formed. The new trend towards professionalization culminated in a controversial proposal at the Second Council of Lyon in 1275 that &quot;all&quot; ecclesiastical courts should require an oath of admission. Although not adopted by the council, it was highly influential in many such courts throughout Europe. The civil courts in England also joined the trend towards professionalization; in 1275 a statute was enacted that prescribed punishment for professional lawyers guilty of deceit, and in 1280 the mayor&#x27;s court of the city of London promulgated regulations concerning admission procedures, including the administering of an oath. And in 1345, the French crown promulgated a royal ordinance which set forth 24 rules governing advocates, of which 12 were integrated into the oath to be taken by them.

The French medieval oaths were widely influential and of enduring importance; for example, they directly influenced the structure of the advocates&#x27; oath adopted by the Canton of Geneva in 1816. In turn, the 1816 Geneva oath served as the inspiration for the attorney&#x27;s oath drafted by David Dudley Field as Section 511 of the proposed New York Code of Civil Procedure of 1848, which was the first attempt in the United States at a comprehensive statement of a lawyer&#x27;s professional duties.

==See also==

* Avocats Sans Frontières
* Cause lawyer
* Counsel
* Corporate lawyer
* Court dress
* Fiduciary
* Ghost lawyer
* Law broker
* Lawyer-supported mediation
* Legalese
* List of jurists
* Notary public
* Privilege of the predecessors
* Public defender
* Rules lawyer
* Shyster
* Sole practitioner (lawyer) 
* St. Ivo of Kermartin (patron saint of lawyers)
* Trainee solicitor

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="2" end="8" title="Lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="64" end="67" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="201" end="219" title="Jurisdiction" label="legal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005600" start="228" end="240" title="List of national legal systems" label="legal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="378" end="388" title="Barrister" label="barristers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="390" end="400" title="Solicitor" label="solicitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166535" start="402" end="414" title="Conveyancer" label="conveyancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23838068" start="416" end="424" title="Civil law notary" label="notaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="426" end="438" title="canonist" label="canon lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q907666" start="1048" end="1063" title="bar examination" label="bar examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1498" end="1508" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1541" end="1552" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="1706" end="1715" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="1721" end="1730" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509998" start="1814" end="1831" title="Fused profession" label="&amp;quot;fused&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="3098" end="3104" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q380075" start="3124" end="3132" title="advocate" label="advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517562" start="3286" end="3297" title="Legal procurator" label="procurators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144892" start="3584" end="3600" title="Patent attorney" label="Patent attorneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832134" start="3603" end="3622" title="Trademark attorney" label="Trademark attorneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166535" start="3625" end="3637" title="Conveyancer" label="Conveyancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189010" start="3640" end="3648" title="Notary" label="Notaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318187" start="3651" end="3661" title="Scrivener" label="Scriveners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517506" start="3664" end="3680" title="Legal executive" label="Legal executives"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="3889" end="3907" title="University degree" label="university degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="3945" end="3966" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="4247" end="4252" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="4716" end="4728" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q286449" start="4922" end="4929" title="Esquire" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4942" end="4948" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4950" end="4956" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="4958" end="4964" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="4966" end="4973" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="4975" end="4985" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q214086" start="4987" end="5022" title="French-speaking area of Switzerland" label="French-speaking area of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="5028" end="5033" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5054" end="5065" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="5067" end="5074" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="5178" end="5184" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="5924" end="5929" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="5933" end="5937" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135431" start="6193" end="6207" title="legal monopoly" label="legal monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="7042" end="7051" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318187" start="7502" end="7511" title="scrivener" label="scrivener"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="7789" end="7810" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="7844" end="7860" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171251" start="7965" end="7983" title="administrative law" label="administrative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047953" start="8511" end="8527" title="intake interview" label="intake interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344851" start="9753" end="9766" title="consideration" label="consideration"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="9779" end="9786" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116200" start="10074" end="10102" title="unauthorized practice of law" label="unauthorized practice of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="10421" end="10430" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="10759" end="10765" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="10768" end="10777" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12177414" start="10780" end="10798" title="Industrial design rights" label="industrial designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="10818" end="10839" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="11499" end="11512" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q705914" start="11522" end="11526" title="deed" label="deed"/>
<link wikidata="Q111699874" start="11532" end="11541" title="mortgage law" label="mortgages"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="11570" end="11581" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="11861" end="11876" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="12007" end="12031" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="12043" end="12055" title="quid pro quo" label="quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q519076" start="12262" end="12269" title="realtor" label="realtor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543044" start="12450" end="12470" title="licensed conveyancer" label="licensed conveyancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="12647" end="12652" title="Will (law)" label="wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="12654" end="12660" title="Trust law" label="trusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="12929" end="12939" title="prosecutor" label="prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q512345" start="13280" end="13303" title="Criminal defense lawyer" label="Criminal defense lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q940984" start="14098" end="14130" title="Bar Professional Training Course" label="Bar Professional Training Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="14501" end="14513" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="14561" end="14571" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177513" start="14614" end="14628" title="country lawyer" label="country lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300597" start="14646" end="14657" title="reading law" label="reading law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048385" start="15083" end="15098" title="casebook method" label="casebook method"/>
<link wikidata="Q839475" start="15169" end="15184" title="Socratic method" label="Socratic method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279892" start="15990" end="16007" title="diploma privilege" label="diploma privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="16158" end="16164" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q907666" start="16281" end="16296" title="bar examination" label="bar examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="16796" end="16806" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="16963" end="16973" title="prosecutor" label="prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683585" start="17023" end="17047" title="administrative law judge" label="administrative law judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="17049" end="17054" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q105580910" start="17056" end="17066" title="arbitrator" label="arbitrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="17071" end="17084" title="law professor" label="law professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="17175" end="17185" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11488158" start="17187" end="17206" title="corporate executive" label="corporate executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="17234" end="17251" title="investment banker" label="investment banker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="17253" end="17265" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="17270" end="17280" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="18607" end="18620" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459068" start="18649" end="18664" title="personal injury" label="personal injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="18756" end="18764" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="18776" end="18784" title="law firm" label="law firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109680" start="18874" end="18888" title="small business" label="small business"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="19100" end="19109" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="19561" end="19581" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865205" start="20340" end="20355" title="bar association" label="bar association"/>
<link wikidata="Q278697" start="20425" end="20438" title="Inns of Court" label="Inns of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857984" start="20440" end="20451" title="bar council" label="bar council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503534" start="20456" end="20469" title="law society" label="law societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116200" start="20718" end="20746" title="unauthorized practice of law" label="unauthorized practice of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603078" start="21015" end="21038" title="State Bar of California" label="State Bar of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q687323" start="21961" end="21996" title="Federal Court of Justice of Germany" label="Federal Court of Justice of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935245" start="22273" end="22285" title="pro hac vice" label="pro hac vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q729832" start="22377" end="22404" title="professional responsibility" label="professional responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="22893" end="22916" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="23098" end="23116" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="23153" end="23178" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413677" start="23547" end="23566" title="Ministry of Justice" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="23574" end="23590" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="24510" end="24519" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19214" start="24916" end="24973" title="Standing Committee of the National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="Standing Committee of the National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="25428" end="25446" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="25999" end="26010" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="26310" end="26317" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="26636" end="26644" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="26741" end="26758" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="26960" end="26967" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="26977" end="26990" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980167" start="27082" end="27096" title="Bryan Horrigan" label="Bryan Horrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191050" start="27284" end="27298" title="Ambrose Bierce" label="Ambrose Bierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147121" start="27322" end="27349" title="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534492" start="27530" end="27553" title="Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr." label="Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5432699" start="28207" end="28226" title="false documentation" label="false documentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="28271" end="28280" title="deceiving" label="deceiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q330104" start="28339" end="28354" title="procrastination" label="procrastination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11765" start="28401" end="28404" title="fee" label="fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165361" start="29319" end="29334" title="contingency fee" label="contingency fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q848378" start="29458" end="29466" title="advance payment" label="retainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127537" start="30183" end="30191" title="pro bono publico" label="pro bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="30405" end="30422" title="environmental law" label="environmental law"/>
<link wikidata="Q707748" start="30454" end="30463" title="legal aid" label="legal aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="30763" end="30775" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="30927" end="30932" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="30937" end="30944" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q620405" start="31398" end="31421" title="legal expense insurance" label="legal expense insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342738" start="31541" end="31548" title="orators" label="orators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="31560" end="31566" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q931483" start="32291" end="32304" title="legal fiction" label="legal fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="32606" end="32618" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="32770" end="32786" title="Claudius" label="Emperor Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q208041" start="32957" end="32966" title="sestertius" label="sesterces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707099" start="33008" end="33026" title="Satires of Juvenal" label="Satires of Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="33161" end="33169" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="34052" end="34066" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="34081" end="34093" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="34432" end="34448" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="34678" end="34685" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183776" start="35143" end="35154" title="Leo I (emperor)" label="Emperor Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q231455" start="35486" end="35492" title="Solidus (coin)" label="solidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164209" start="35579" end="35587" title="sub rosa" label="sub rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="35594" end="35600" title="barter (economics)" label="barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="36487" end="36496" title="canon law of the Catholic Church" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="36570" end="36585" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="37035" end="37047" title="papal legate" label="papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="37128" end="37140" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="37158" end="37175" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951" start="37376" end="37398" title="Second Council of Lyon" label="Second Council of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="37581" end="37587" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="37760" end="37766" title="Deception" label="deceit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="38265" end="38281" title="Canton of Geneva" label="Canton of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q352906" start="38387" end="38405" title="David Dudley Field" label="David Dudley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478166" start="38614" end="38637" title="Avocats Sans Frontières" label="Avocats Sans Frontières"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054606" start="38640" end="38652" title="Cause lawyer" label="Cause lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131110" start="38655" end="38662" title="Counsel" label="Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262551" start="38665" end="38681" title="Corporate lawyer" label="Corporate lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351030" start="38684" end="38695" title="Court dress" label="Court dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q537098" start="38698" end="38707" title="Fiduciary" label="Fiduciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557261" start="38710" end="38722" title="Ghost lawyer" label="Ghost lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503181" start="38725" end="38735" title="Law broker" label="Law broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505095" start="38738" end="38764" title="Lawyer-supported mediation" label="Lawyer-supported mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713997" start="38767" end="38775" title="Legalese" label="Legalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380174" start="38778" end="38793" title="List of jurists" label="List of jurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q15479268" start="38796" end="38809" title="Notary public" label="Notary public"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180132" start="38812" end="38841" title="Privilege of the predecessors" label="Privilege of the predecessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528049" start="38844" end="38859" title="Public defender" label="Public defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379020" start="38862" end="38874" title="Rules lawyer" label="Rules lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q615641" start="38877" end="38884" title="Shyster" label="Shyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245620" start="38887" end="38913" title="Sole practitioner (lawyer)" label="Sole practitioner (lawyer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q358325" start="38917" end="38937" title="St. Ivo of Kermartin" label="St. Ivo of Kermartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832920" start="38966" end="38983" title="Trainee solicitor" label="Trainee solicitor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17542" wikidata="Q1791216" url="?curid=17542" title="Logrolling">
<text>Logrolling is the trading of favors, or &quot;quid pro quo&quot;, such as vote trading by legislative members to obtain passage of actions of interest to each legislative member. In organizational analysis, it refers to a practice in which different organizations promote each other&#x27;s agendas, each in the expectation that the other will reciprocate. In an academic context, the &quot;Nuttall Encyclopedia&quot; describes logrolling as &quot;mutual praise by authors of each other&#x27;s work&quot;. Where intricate tactics or strategy are involved, the process may be called horse trading.

== Concept and origin ==
There are three types of logrolling:

* Logrolling in direct democracies: a few individuals vote openly, and votes are easy to trade, rearrange, and observe. Direct democracy is pervasive in representative assemblies and small-government units
* Implicit logrolling: large bodies of voters decide complex issues and trade votes without a formal vote trade (Buchanan and Tullock 1962)
* Distributive logrolling: enables policymakers to achieve their public goals. These policymakers logroll to ensure that their district policies and pork barrel packages are put into practice regardless of whether their policies are actually efficient (Evans 1994 and Buchanan and Tullock 1962).

Distributive logrolling is the most prevalent kind of logrolling found in a democratic system of governance.

&quot;Quid pro quo&quot; sums up the concept of logrolling in the United States&#x27; political process today. Logrolling is the process by which politicians trade support for one issue or piece of legislation in exchange for another politician&#x27;s support, especially by means of legislative votes (Holcombe 2006). If a legislator logrolls, he initiates the trade of votes for one particular act or bill in order to secure votes on behalf of another act or bill. Logrolling means that two parties will pledge their mutual support, so both bills can attain a simple majority. For example, a vote on behalf of a tariff may be traded by a congressman for a vote from another congressman on behalf of an agricultural subsidy to ensure that both acts will gain a majority and pass through the legislature (Shughart 2008). Logrolling cannot occur during presidential elections, where a vast voting population necessitates that individual votes have little political power, or during secret-ballot votes (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Because logrolling is pervasive in the political process, it is important to understand which external situations determine when, why, and how logrolling will occur, and whether it is beneficial, efficient, or neither.

===Origins===
The widest accepted origin is the old custom of neighbors assisting each other with the moving of logs. If two neighbors had cut a lot of timber that needed to be moved, it made more sense for them to work together to roll the logs. In this way, it is similar to a barn-raising where a neighbor comes and helps a family build their barn, and, in turn, that family goes and returns the favor, helping him build his. Here is an example of the term&#x27;s original use:

&quot;A family comes to sit in the forest,&quot; wrote an observer in 1835; &quot;Their neighbors lay down their employments, shoulder their axes, and come in to the log-rolling. They spend the day in hard labor, and then retire, leaving the newcomers their good wishes, and a habitation.&quot;

American frontiersman Davy Crockett was one of the first to apply the term to legislation:

The first known use of the term was by Congressman Davy Crockett, who said on the floor (of the U.S. House of Representatives) in 1835, &quot;my people don&#x27;t like me to log-roll in their business, and vote away pre-emption rights to fellows in other states that never kindle a fire on their own land.&quot;

=== Choice to logroll ===
Human beings, whether ignorant or informed, rational or irrational, logical or illogical, determine individual and group action through choices. Economics studies these choices, including the choice to logroll, and their particular influence within the market sector (Schwartz 1977). In America, political and economic decisions are usually made by politicians elected to legislative assemblies, and not directly by the citizenry (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Although legislative votes are recorded and are available to the American public, legislators can exchange their votes on issues they do not care much about for votes on other issues that are more important to their personal agendas (Holcombe 2006). In &quot;The Calculus of Consent&quot;, James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock explore the relationship between individual choice in the voting process and in the marketplace, specifically within logrolling. Logrolling vote trades, like any activity within the marketplace, must be mutually beneficial (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).

A vote trade is like a legislative IOU. When a legislator needs a few more votes to acquire a simple majority, he will seek support through a vote exchange. He will promise a fellow legislator an IOU vote for another piece of legislation in return for a vote on his own act or bill. Legislators who logroll within a small body, for example, the U.S. House or Senate, have incentive to honor their IOU votes because they cannot have their reputations tainted if they wish to be effective politicians (Holcombe 2006).

===Logrolling and the role of preference===
People have varying preferences, and make decisions at the margin to maximize their utility and improve their welfare. The same is true for legislators, who all enter office with different agendas, passions, and goals. Ideological diversity plays a significant role in the result of a vote and carries with it a significant cost. In addition, legislators will favor interests that offer them the most support. Legislative votes are determined by the intensity of personal preference, desires of constituents, and, ultimately, what will lead to the particular legislator&#x27;s greatest utility. When people have ideologies at opposite ends of the political spectrum, it&#x27;s difficult to ensure a simple majority, so buying a supermajority vote through logrolling may be the most cost effective (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).

In the General Possibility Theorem, Kenneth Arrow argues that if a legislative consensus can be reached through a simple majority, then minimum conditions must be satisfied, and these conditions must provide a superior ranking to any subset of alternative votes (Arrow 1963). A bill must be attractive to a legislator, or else he will not cast his vote for it. A vote, by the pure nature of the voting process, demonstrates explicit interest in whatever is voted upon. In logrolling, a superior ranking means that the marginal benefit of the vote is greater than any alternatives, so exchanging votes is worthwhile. The General Possibility Theorem necessitates that allocating one vote for another must constitute true utility and a sincere vote. Arrow&#x27;s theory may place more restrictions and limitations on an individual voter&#x27;s preferences than Buchanan and Tullock&#x27;s; regardless, individuals will always choose the option they value most.

=== Logrolling to reach the optimal decision ===
Decisions reach an optimum only when they are unanimous, when votes are not coerced and everyone has veto power (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Unanimous votes, however, are not required for the American voting process. This is why some logrolling advocates argue that logrolling must be allowed within a democracy—sometimes there may not be a &quot;best&quot; or &quot;most efficient&quot; option on a vote.

Logrolling creates a market within which votes are exchanged as a sort of currency, and thus, facilitates the political process that produces the highest valued outcomes (Holcombe 2006). If individual participants recognize the value of their own vote, they are motivated to trade. When methods of trade do not conflict with given standards or ethical procedures, individuals naturally seek mutually advantageous vote trades. An individual may effectually, but imperfectly, &quot;sell&quot; his vote on a particular issue to, in return, secure votes from other individuals on behalf of legislation he prefers (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).

Logrolling has one necessary condition: benefits from the public activity must be significantly more concentrated or localized than the costs. In economics, decisions are made at the margin. Logrolling depends on the reality that the marginal benefit (or utility) of at least some elected officials, or the citizenry, will increase when the legislation is passed (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Any economist will consider the immediate opportunity cost of the logrolling procedure within the legislative body, as well as the external cost of the vote (the cost to enact and see the bill through to fruition).

When transaction costs are low and parties involved are perfectly informed, a mutually beneficial agreement will occur: whoever values the property the highest will end up with it. This is what Ronald H. Coase proposed in his &quot;Theory of Property Rights&quot; in 1960. This theory holds true within the world of economics. In the American system of government, legislators have the incentive to logroll because transaction costs are low. When transaction costs are low, the Coase theorem says that the political marketplace (the decisions of the legislatures) will allocate resources to the highest valued point (Coase 1960).

Typically, logrolling is a mechanism used to gain support for special interest and minority groups. However, because of the ideological mix that already exists within the legislature itself, minority views are often represented, even if only marginally. With low transaction costs, the Coase theorem will come into play. The highest valued outcome is chosen by the legislature, regardless the member&#x27;s ideological stance or political affiliation (Holcombe 2006).

The problem of cyclical majorities may arise with the absence of logrolling. The cyclical majority problem occurs when voters are faced with multiple voting options but cannot choose the option they most prefer, since it is not available. Voters must consider whether the alternative option is closer to their original preference (Bara and Weale 2006). However, when logrolling is allowed, the highest valued outcome is secure without the threat of a cyclical majority. For example, suppose a country road in West Virginia is in disrepair. The local congressman proposes a bill to have the main road in his community resurfaced and paved. The road leads to a town of merely 600 residents. Thus, the other legislators will vote against the measure because the funding is not worthwhile to their constituents. In a logrolling system, the local legislator can use his vote to bargain with his fellow legislators. He will exchange his vote for his fellow legislators&#x27; bills to promote, for instance, the construction of new hospitals and the increase of veteran&#x27;s benefits, in return for their votes to repair the road (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).

=== Logrolling: An example ===
Table 1-1 explains another example of logrolling. In the example, we have three individuals: Tanya, Alvin, and Rebecca. Tanya favors subsidies for agriculture, Alvin favors school construction, and Rebecca favors the recruitment of more firefighters. It seems as if the proposals are doomed to fail because each is opposed by a majority of voters. Even so, this may not be the outcome. Tanya may visit Rebecca and tell her that she will vote for Rebecca&#x27;s bill to recruit more firefighters so long as Rebecca votes for her policy, subsidies for agriculture, in return. Now both proposals will win because they have gained a simple majority (Table 1-2), even though in reality the subsidy is opposed by two of the three voters. It&#x27;s easy to see the Coase theorem at work in examples like this. Here, transaction costs are low, so mutually beneficial agreements are found, and the person who values the service the most will hold it (Browning and Browning 1979). Still, outcomes may be inefficient. |last1= |first1= |last2=
=== Efficient logrolling ===
If the sum of the total benefit of the legislation for all the voters is less than the cost of the legislation itself, the legislation is inefficient. Despite its inefficiency, however, it still may pass if logrolling is permitted. If Tanya trades her vote to recruit more firemen to Rebecca in exchange for Rebecca&#x27;s vote in favor of agriculture subsidies, a mutually beneficial agreement will be reached, even though the outcome is inefficient. On the other hand, if the sum of the total benefit of the legislation for all voters is greater than the cost of the legislation itself, the legislation is efficient. If Tanya trades her vote once again for Rebecca&#x27;s vote, both parties will reach a mutually beneficial agreement and an efficient outcome.

=== Minimum winning coalitions and logrolling ===
A minimum winning coalition is the smallest number of votes required to win the passage of a piece of legislation. Minimum winning coalitions demonstrate the importance of logrolling within a democracy, because the minimal winning coalition may be overthrown with the sway of a single vote. As previously mentioned, coalitions will buy a supermajority of votes if the support for the proposed legislation sways. If a legislator logrolls a few votes beyond the minimal winning coalition to his side, he will ensure that the final vote will be in favor of his legislation. In a way, vote trading does combine positions on distinct issues to form single legislative votes and packages (Stratmann 1992). Logrolled votes transcend affiliations and party lines and become feasible outcomes preferred by a majority or winning coalition (Schwartz 1977).

=== Logrolling in real politics ===
A problem in research is that it is impossible to identify vote trading directly within the House of Representatives or the Senate because roll call votes on specific goods are not observed (Irwin and Kroszner 1996). However, examples of refurbished bills can shed some light on the working-out of logrolling within the legislature. For example, in 1930, the Smoot-Hawley tariff, the second-highest tariff in U.S. history, passed the House and Senate. Congress voted to increase tariffs exponentially, which worked to push the United States from a stagnant recession into a plummeting depression (Irwin and Kroszner 1996). Strict party line votes suggest that partisan polarization in 1929 prevented the Smoot-Hawley bill from passing through Congress. The bill, however, was revamped, and legislators used logrolling to pass it through both chambers in 1930.

Omnibus bills can be an alternative market to logrolling. Various clauses are added to a bill to satisfy all involved parties sufficiently. However, large bills, like the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, require an in depth knowledge of 1,000 plus pages. Many sections of these types of bills are initially opposed but are later supported because of special benefit clauses (Evans 1994).

Because logrolling allows special-interest groups a voice in the political process, programs that benefit a minority group can get the approval of a majority. However, this may not be in the best interest of the majority. Special-interest groups typically do not represent the typical voter, but rather, small branches of minority ideologies (Holcombe 2006). Voting results with or without logrolling will differ only if the minority is more interested in an issue than the majority, enough to separate the marginal voters from the majority. Studies show that lobbying and political pressure exerted by special-interest groups are not atypical behavior in a modern democracy (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Conditions imposed upon the social choice of the legislature imply a more severe restriction on the individual voter&#x27;s preferences than the theory of logrolling presented by Buchanan and Tullock and presumed by Arrow&#x27;s General Possibility Theory (Wilson 1969).

Critics reproach members of Congress for protecting their own electoral interests at the expense of the general welfare. Congressmen tend to distribute specialized benefits at a great cost and ignore the particular costs the legislation bears upon the taxpayers (Evans 1994). Legislators, who seek their personal benefit via logrolling even though it may not benefit those who must pay for the measure, are known as maximizers. Maximizers only take into account their personal cost and electability, instead of the effects of their actions on other parties involved. In short, other taxpayers will pay for the policy even if it does not affect them (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Initially, maximizers will encourage other legislators to have the same selfish behavior because significant gains can be accrued in the short run. Buchanan and Tullock state that within a system of maximizers, all individuals are worse off than if they had all adopted Kantian norms of behavior.

Legislative bodies can expect higher government spending and taxation when logrolling is allowed to flourish. Logrolling does not imply excessive spending; members can trade tax reductions just as easily as they can trade pork barrel policies. The problem is that benefits of a vote only reach a particular portion of the population, while the tax costs that pay for the vote are spread throughout the entire populace, especially when the act depends on revenue from sales or income taxes. Benefits are concentrated in localities, and the costs are dispersed throughout the nation. Committee members can thus exploit pork barrel projects for electoral purposes. The citizenry is seen as a &quot;common pool,&quot; used to finance projects through taxes. Somehow the citizens end up paying higher taxes than those who are not in a logroll system (Dalenberg and Duffy-Deno 1991 and Gilligan and Matsusaka 1995). In a system where logrolling is permitted, a third party may bear the cost of the project, rather than those who receive the full benefit of the legislation. This is always inefficient.

The logic of collective action shows that votes for bills are motivated by politicians and are determined by a simple majority (Olson 1971). Politicians are in the game to win it. Collective effort explains why farms acquire government subsidies at the expense of millions of consumers and why those in the textile industry benefit at the expense of clothing buyers (Shughart 2008). Congressional committees ensure that each committee leader will create legislative coalitions to push his policies to fruition. Thus, ceteris paribus, members who receive such projects, are likely to vote in support of their leader&#x27;s wishes (Evans 1994).

Policymakers and congressmen have goals of power, and making their own mark in public policy, not pure aims of reelection (Dodd 1977). Reelection does play a great part in the legislative process as a condition to achieving any other political goal. Thus, logrolling can be a powerful tool for committee chairs, who control the voting agendas (Evans 1994). While committee leaders create the supermajority, they try to achieve their personal goals and help a bare majority of members achieve theirs. A skilled policy-oriented committee leader often seeks to exploit the goals of other members in order to construct legislation he or she will prefer (Arnold 1979 and Strahan 1989).

====Wafelijzerpolitiek====

&quot;Wafelijzerpolitiek&quot; (lit. waffle iron politics) is a form of logrolling used in Belgium. Until the split of the unitary Belgium in several parts, the unitary government decided on the funds given to big projects. As there were usually two opposing groups of about equal size in Belgium, this norm resulted in the approval of two equally sized projects in the two parts of the country, with the funds given to the two projects being equal. As a result, one project was always overfunded. Many see &quot;wafelijzerpolitiek&quot; as the source of Belgium&#x27;s high debt.

After the first state reformation in 1988, many big projects were decided regionally, so the number of &quot;wafelijzer&quot; projects went down. There are still some things that fall under the supervision of the federal government, where &quot;wafelijzerpolitiek&quot; still happens. One example is the Belgian railway network.

Another result of the &quot;wafelijzerpolitiek&quot; is the big useless works. As Flanders is a part of Belgium with many ports (e.g., big ports in Antwerp and Zeebrugge), for every investment in Flemish waterways there had to be an investment in Walloon waterways. Some results are the Ronquières inclined plane and the Strépy-Thieu boat lift.

=== Simple referendums ===
In a referendum on a simple issue, the voter cannot easily trade his own vote for a vote on a reciprocal favor. This is because first, he is unsure as to when and how the other issues will be voted upon, and second, he and his immediate neighbors represent a fraction of the total electorate. Thus, trading may not be worthwhile (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).

Vote trading under a democratic, majority-rule institution is sometimes considered morally reprehensible behavior. However, the only perfect solution to rid the political system of distributive logrolling would be to develop a specific formula to weigh the costs and benefits of legislation perfectly and only allow efficient programs to be enacted (This is inconceivable. Therefore, logrolling must occur, but only by observing the constitutional rules that have been laid down as safeguards of democracy (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).

=== Summary ===
The reality is that transaction costs are high, and most voters, who are ignorant of political issues and the political process, see little incentive to attempt to influence their local legislator&#x27;s political decisions (Holcombe 2006). It is also difficult for voters to be informed of their legislator&#x27;s voting habits. Because of this, distributive logrolling will occur in democratic systems. Furthermore, it is the responsibility of the legislator to measure the costs and benefits of legislation and determine what is most efficient for his constituents. Logrolling will occur only if members of the legislature fail to gather enough votes for the passage of specific legislation. In essence, logrolling is a legal way to manipulate voter preference toward either an efficient or an inefficient outcome that would not otherwise be enacted (Browning 1979).

==Legality==
Logrolling is illegal in numerous jurisdictions, and in some instances is a crime. Sophisticated computational techniques have been developed for the detection and prosecution of this crime.

==Other usages==
&quot;Spy Magazine&quot; ran a feature entitled &quot;Logrolling in Our Time&quot; that cited suspicious or humorous examples of mutually admiring book jacket blurbs by pairs of authors. &quot;Private Eye&quot; magazine regularly draws attention to alleged logrolling by authors in &quot;books of the year&quot; features published by British newspapers and magazines.

Log rolling or a hodgepodge legislation in the Philippines also refers to any legislation that have several subjects on unrelated matters combined together. It is expressed in Article 6 Section 26.1 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution as a guarantee to prevent surprise or fraud from the legislature.

==See also==
* Barn raising
* Bee (gathering)
* Blog roll
* Political corruption, which can overlap in instances where logrolling is corrupted by personal gain
** Pay to play
* Vote trading

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1791216" start="0" end="10" title="Logrolling" label="Logrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="46" end="58" title="quid pro quo" label="quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942137" start="74" end="86" title="vote trading" label="vote trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="90" end="101" title="legislative" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="120" end="127" title="passage (legislature)" label="passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102006" start="182" end="205" title="organizational analysis" label="organizational analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181656" start="390" end="410" title="Nuttall Encyclopedia" label="Nuttall Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905705" start="581" end="594" title="horse trading" label="horse trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="676" end="694" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429998" start="1155" end="1166" title="pork barrel" label="pork barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="1419" end="1431" title="Quid pro quo" label="Quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="2715" end="2721" title="Norm (sociology)" label="custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="2725" end="2734" title="neighbourhood" label="neighbors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="2815" end="2821" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861314" start="2942" end="2954" title="barn-raising" label="barn-raising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355821" start="3450" end="3462" title="frontiersman" label="frontiersman"/>
<link wikidata="Q311070" start="3463" end="3476" title="Davy Crockett" label="Davy Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="3572" end="3583" title="member of Congress" label="Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q311070" start="3584" end="3597" title="Davy Crockett" label="Davy Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3629" end="3658" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390678" start="4590" end="4613" title="The Calculus of Consent" label="The Calculus of Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q205353" start="4621" end="4638" title="James M. Buchanan" label="James M. Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q518859" start="4643" end="4657" title="Gordon Tullock" label="Gordon Tullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q534910" start="4946" end="4949" title="IOU" label="IOU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="6200" end="6213" title="supermajority" label="supermajority"/>
<link wikidata="Q33481" start="6306" end="6333" title="General Possibility Theorem" label="General Possibility Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="8787" end="8803" title="opportunity cost" label="opportunity cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050037" start="9081" end="9140" title="Coase theorem" label="whoever values the property the highest will end up with it"/>
<link wikidata="Q188113" start="9155" end="9170" title="Ronald H. Coase" label="Ronald H. Coase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050037" start="9234" end="9245" title="Coase theorem" label="This theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050037" start="9439" end="9452" title="Coase theorem" label="Coase theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="9855" end="9871" title="transaction cost" label="transaction cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="10570" end="10583" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050037" start="12005" end="12018" title="Coase theorem" label="Coase theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q396268" start="12648" end="12669" title="agricultural subsidy" label="agriculture subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585491" start="14363" end="14382" title="Smoot-Hawley tariff" label="Smoot-Hawley tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="15036" end="15078" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="17189" end="17196" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107443" start="19674" end="19692" title="Wafelijzerpolitiek" label="Wafelijzerpolitiek"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="19759" end="19766" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="20728" end="20735" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q184383" start="20740" end="20749" title="Zeebrugge" label="Zeebrugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q99464" start="20867" end="20892" title="Ronquières inclined plane" label="Ronquières inclined plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q99495" start="20901" end="20923" title="Strépy-Thieu boat lift" label="Strépy-Thieu boat lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494289" start="22963" end="22975" title="Spy Magazine" label="Spy Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434845" start="23104" end="23115" title="book jacket" label="book jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402271" start="23116" end="23121" title="blurb" label="blurb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195701" start="23150" end="23161" title="Private Eye (magazine)" label="Private Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="23228" end="23235" title="authors" label="authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="23291" end="23298" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="23299" end="23309" title="newspapers" label="newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="23314" end="23323" title="magazines" label="magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861314" start="23643" end="23655" title="Barn raising" label="Barn raising"/>
<link wikidata="Q280377" start="23658" end="23673" title="Bee (gathering)" label="Bee (gathering)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571768" start="23676" end="23685" title="Blog roll" label="Blog roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="23688" end="23708" title="Political corruption" label="Political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q594235" start="23791" end="23802" title="Pay to play" label="Pay to play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942137" start="23805" end="23817" title="Vote trading" label="Vote trading"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17544" wikidata="Q6510187" url="?curid=17544" title="Playing by ear">
<text>Playing or learning by ear is the ability of a performing musician to reproduce a piece of music they have heard, without having seen it notated in any form of sheet music. It is considered to be a desirable skill among musical performers, especially for those that play in a musical tradition where notating music is not the norm.

It is a misconception that musicians who play by ear do not have or do not require musical education, or have no theoretical understanding of the music they are playing.

Playing by ear is often also used to refer more generally to making music without using musical notation, perhaps using (elements of) improvisation and instant composition.

Blues, pop, jazz, and many forms of non-western music are fundamentally rooted in the concept of playing by ear, where musical compositions are passed down from generation to generation. In this respect, playing by ear can also be seen as a music-specific example of oral tradition.

The concept of playing by ear has led to the development of the idiom to or &quot;play &quot;it&quot; by ear.&quot;

== Method ==
One learns a piece of music by ear by repeatedly listening to it performed, memorizing it, and then trying to recreate what one has heard. This requires the use of several related skills such as ear training, musical perception, tonal memory, audiation, music theory, techniques, and knowledge about the culture of the music one is trying to learn. As such, learning to play by ear involves training those skills as well.

To practice playing music by ear, music teachers often have a student listen to short musical examples which the student will have to write out in musical notation, play back on an instrument, sing, or describe using note names or a solfège system. Musicians will also train their playing by ear skills by taking recordings of full songs and pieces, figuring out the notes by ear, and either transcribing or memorizing them. According to studies playing by ear is associated with a higher level of creativity and musical intelligence. 

Audiation is a vital skill for playing music by ear. Edwin Gordon, originator of the term, describes audiation as: &quot;the foundation of musicianship. It takes place when we hear and comprehend music for which the sound is no longer or may never have been present.&quot; It is often described as the ability to hear music in your head. In this sense, audiation is to music what thought is to language. 

Learning to play by ear, in the sense of making music without notation, is often compared to learning to speak a language. When sufficiently mastered, playing music by ear should be as comfortable and easy as having a conversation. We speak and react to what we hear, without having to think too deeply about every word we use. The same would be true when playing by ear. A musician can produce a sound at the same time they think of it, without having to consider every separate note they play.

== Existence in musical traditions ==
In most instances, traditions in which music is primarily learned by ear do not use musical notation in any form. Some examples are early Blues guitarists and pianists, Romani fiddlers, and folk music guitarists.

One particularly prominent example is Indian classical music: the teaching methods of its two major strands (&quot;Hindustani&quot; and &quot;Carnatic&quot;) are almost exclusively oral.

=== In the West ===

Historically, the Western classical music tradition has been based on the process of learning new pieces from musical notation, and hence playing by ear has a lower importance in musical training. Before the widespread use of sheet music, much early medieval Western music was learnt by ear, particularly in monasteries.

However, many teaching methods in this tradition incorporate playing by ear in some form. For instance, &quot;ear training&quot; courses are a standard part of conservatory or college music programs (including use of Solfège), and the Suzuki method, which incorporates a highly developed focus on playing by ear from a very young age.

In the West, learning by ear is also used heavily in the genres of folk music, blues, rock, pop, funk, reggae, and jazz. While most professional musicians currently active in these genres are capable of reading musical notation, playing by ear is still widely practiced for a number of reasons. Among those are ease and speed of learning songs, flexibility while improvising and playing variations, and working around the limitations of western musical notation. 

Since western musical notation was developed for classical music, musicians sometimes run into issues when musical expressions are commonly used in the genre they are performing but not in classical music. Examples of this are percussion instruments in Afro-Cuban music, where different strokes and techniques are used to produce different tones and timbres, or improvised music like jazz and classical Indian music, where large parts of the composition consists of guidelines for improvisation. Western musical notation can be ill-suited for these situations, and although supplements to musical notation can be invented to try to accommodate this, playing by ear and oral learning are often preferred because of readability, ease, and tradition.

==See also==
* Fiddle
* Tonal memory
* Ear training
* Musical aptitude 
* Music education for young children
* Absolute pitch

==Notes and references==
==External links==
* Description of Audiation from the Gordon Institute for Music Learning
* Basic introduction to playing by ear by Allan Jeong Professor of Instructional Systems &amp; Learning Technology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6510187" start="0" end="7" title="Playing by ear" label="Playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510187" start="11" end="26" title="Playing by ear" label="learning by ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="58" end="66" title="musician" label="musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="91" end="96" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="137" end="144" title="Musical notation" label="notated"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="160" end="171" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="945" end="959" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124586" start="1287" end="1299" title="ear training" label="ear training"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820723" start="1321" end="1333" title="tonal memory" label="tonal memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21983372" start="1335" end="1344" title="audiation" label="audiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="1346" end="1358" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="1662" end="1678" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="1732" end="1742" title="Musical note" label="note names"/>
<link wikidata="Q159563" start="1748" end="1755" title="solfège" label="solfège"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458203" start="1907" end="1919" title="Transcription (music)" label="transcribing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21983372" start="2105" end="2117" title="Gordon music learning theory" label="Edwin Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="2432" end="2439" title="thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="2446" end="2454" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="3077" end="3093" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="3131" end="3136" title="Blues" label="Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246706" start="3162" end="3168" title="Romani society and culture" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="3169" end="3176" title="fiddler" label="fiddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="3183" end="3193" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="3245" end="3267" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="3316" end="3338" title="Hindustani classical music" label="&amp;quot;Hindustani&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q956883" start="3343" end="3363" title="Carnatic classical music" label="&amp;quot;Carnatic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="3434" end="3457" title="Western Classical Music" label="Western classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="3526" end="3542" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124586" start="3848" end="3860" title="ear training" label="ear training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="3898" end="3910" title="music school" label="conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q159563" start="3955" end="3962" title="Solfège" label="Solfège"/>
<link wikidata="Q675475" start="3973" end="3986" title="Suzuki method" label="Suzuki method"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="4081" end="4085" title="western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="4141" end="4151" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="4153" end="4158" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="4160" end="4164" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="4166" end="4169" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="4171" end="4175" title="funk music" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="4177" end="4183" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="4189" end="4193" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="4437" end="4448" title="Musical improvisation" label="improvising"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="4511" end="4535" title="Musical notation" label="western musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="4588" end="4603" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942545" start="4646" end="4665" title="Musical expression" label="musical expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="4766" end="4788" title="Percussion instrument" label="percussion instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715191" start="4792" end="4808" title="Music of African heritage in Cuba" label="Afro-Cuban music"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="5303" end="5309" title="Fiddle" label="Fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820723" start="5312" end="5324" title="Tonal memory" label="Tonal memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124586" start="5327" end="5339" title="Ear training" label="Ear training"/>
<link wikidata="Q476590" start="5342" end="5358" title="Musical aptitude" label="Musical aptitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740344" start="5362" end="5396" title="Music education for young children" label="Music education for young children"/>
<link wikidata="Q213250" start="5399" end="5413" title="Absolute pitch" label="Absolute pitch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17546" wikidata="Q19675" url="?curid=17546" title="Louvre">
<text>The Louvre ( ), or the Louvre Museum ( ), is a national art museum in Paris, France, and one of the most famous museums in the world. It is located on the Right Bank of the Seine in the city&#x27;s 1st arrondissement (district or ward) and home to some of the most canonical works of Western art, including the &quot;Mona Lisa,&quot; &quot;Venus de Milo,&quot; and &quot;Winged Victory&quot;. The museum is housed in the Louvre Palace, originally built in the late 12th to 13th century under Philip II. Remnants of the Medieval Louvre fortress are visible in the basement of the museum. Due to urban expansion, the fortress eventually lost its defensive function, and in 1546 Francis I converted it into the primary residence of the French kings.

The building was redesigned and extended many times to form the present Louvre Palace. In 1682, Louis XIV chose the Palace of Versailles for his household, leaving the Louvre primarily as a place to display the royal collection, including, from 1692, a collection of ancient Greek and Roman sculpture. In 1692, the building was occupied by the and the Académie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture, which in 1699 held the first of a series of salons. The Académie remained at the Louvre for 100 years. During the French Revolution, the National Assembly decreed that the Louvre should be used as a museum to display the nation&#x27;s masterpieces.

The museum opened on 10 August 1793 with an exhibition of 537 paintings, the majority of the works being royal and confiscated church property. Because of structural problems with the building, the museum was closed from 1796 until 1801. The collection was increased under Napoleon, after the Napoleonic looting of art in Europe, Egypt, and Syria, and the museum was renamed &quot;Musée Napoléon&quot;, but after Napoleon&#x27;s abdication, many works seized by his armies were returned to their original owners. The collection was further increased during the reigns of Louis XVIII and Charles X, and during the Second French Empire the museum gained 20,000 pieces. Holdings have grown steadily through donations and bequests since the Third Republic. The collection is divided among eight curatorial departments: Egyptian Antiquities; Near Eastern Antiquities; Greek, Etruscan, and Roman Antiquities; Islamic Art; Sculpture; Decorative Arts; Paintings; Prints and Drawings.

The Musée du Louvre contains approximately 500,000 objects and displays 35,000 works of art in eight curatorial departments with more than dedicated to the permanent collection. The Louvre exhibits sculptures, objets d&#x27;art, paintings, drawings, and archaeological finds. At any given point in time, approximately 38,000 objects from prehistory to the 21st century are being exhibited over an area of , making it the largest museum in the world. It received 8.7 million visitors in 2024, 200,000 less than 2023, due largely to competition from the 2024 Paris Olympics. In 2023 it was the most-visited museum in the world, ahead of the Vatican Museums.

== Location and visiting ==
The Louvre museum is located inside the Louvre Palace, in the center of Paris, adjacent to the Tuileries Gardens. The two nearest Métro stations are Louvre-Rivoli and Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre, the latter having a direct underground access to the Carrousel du Louvre commercial mall.

Before the Grand Louvre overhaul of the late 1980s and 1990s, the Louvre had several street-level entrances, most of which are now permanently closed. Since 1993, the museum&#x27;s main entrance has been the underground space under the Louvre Pyramid, or &quot;Hall Napoléon&quot;, which can be accessed from the Pyramid itself, from the underground Carrousel du Louvre, or (for authorized visitors) from the connecting to the nearby rue de Rivoli. A secondary entrance at the , near the western end of the Denon Wing, was created in 1999 but is not permanently open.

The museum&#x27;s entrance conditions have varied over time. Prior to the 1850s, artists and foreign visitors had privileged access. At the time of initial opening in 1793, the French Republican calendar had imposed ten-day &quot;weeks&quot; (), the first six days of which were reserved for visits by artists and foreigners and the last three for visits by the general public. In the early 1800s, after the seven-day week had been reinstated, the general public had only four hours of museum access per weeks, between 2pm and 4pm on Saturdays and Sundays. In 1824, a new regulation allowed public access only on Sundays and holidays; the other days the museum was open only to artists and foreigners, except for closure on Mondays. That changed in 1855 when the museum became open to the public all days except Mondays. It was free until 1922, when an entrance fee was introduced except on Sundays. Since its post-World War II reopening in 1946, the Louvre has been closed on Tuesdays, and habitually open to the public the rest of the week except for some holidays.

The use of cameras and video recorders is permitted inside, but flash photography is forbidden.

Beginning in 2012, Nintendo 3DS portable video game systems were used as the official museum audio guides. The following year, the museum contracted Nintendo to create a 3DS-based audiovisual visitor guide. Entitled &quot;Nintendo 3DS Guide: Louvre&quot;, it contains over 30 hours of audio and over 1,000 photographs of artwork and the museum itself, including 3D views, and also provides navigation thanks to differential GPS transmitters installed within the museum.

The upgraded 2013 Louvre guide was also announced in a special Nintendo Direct featuring Satoru Iwata and Shigeru Miyamoto demonstrating it at the museum, and 3DS XLs pre-loaded with the guide are available to rent at the museum. As of August 2023, there are virtual tours through rooms and galleries accessible online.

== History ==
=== Before the museum ===
The Louvre Palace, which houses the museum, was begun by King Philip II in the late 12th century to protect the city from the attack from the West, as the Kingdom of England still held Normandy at the time. Remnants of the Medieval Louvre are still visible in the crypt. Whether this was the first building on that spot is not known, and it is possible that Philip modified an existing tower.

The origins of the name &quot;Louvre&quot; are somewhat disputed. According to the authoritative &quot;Grand Larousse encyclopédique&quot;, the name derives from an association with a wolf hunting den (via Latin: &quot;lupus&quot;, lower Empire: &quot;lupara&quot;). In the 7th century, Burgundofara (also known as Saint Fare), abbess in Meaux, is said to have given part of her &quot;Villa called Luvra situated in the region of Paris&quot; to a monastery, even though it is doubtful that this land corresponded exactly to the present site of the Louvre.

The Louvre Palace has been subject to numerous renovations since its construction. In the 14th century, Charles V converted the building from its military role into a residence. In 1546, Francis I started its rebuilding in French Renaissance style. After Louis XIV chose Versailles as his residence in 1682, construction works slowed to a halt. The royal move away from Paris resulted in the Louvre being used as a residence for artists, under Royal patronage. For example, four generations of craftsmen-artists from the Boulle family were granted Royal patronage and resided in the Louvre.

Meanwhile, the collections of the Louvre originated in the acquisitions of paintings and other artworks by the monarchs of the House of France. At the Palace of Fontainebleau, Francis collected art that would later be part of the Louvre&#x27;s art collections, including Leonardo da Vinci&#x27;s &quot;Mona Lisa&quot;.

The Cabinet du Roi consisted of seven rooms west of the Galerie d&#x27;Apollon on the upper floor of the remodeled Petite Galerie. Many of the king&#x27;s paintings were placed in these rooms in 1673, when it became an art gallery, accessible to certain art lovers as a kind of museum. In 1681, after the court moved to Versailles, 26 of the paintings were transferred there, somewhat diminishing the collection, but it is mentioned in Paris guide books from 1684 on, and was shown to ambassadors from Siam in 1686.

By the mid-18th century there were an increasing number of proposals to create a public gallery in the Louvre. Art critic Étienne La Font de Saint-Yenne in 1747 published a call for a display of the royal collection. On 14 October 1750, Louis XV decided on a display of 96 pieces from the royal collection, mounted in the Galerie royale de peinture of the Luxembourg Palace. A hall was opened by Le Normant de Tournehem and the Marquis de Marigny for public viewing of the &quot;king&#x27;s paintings&quot; (&quot;Tableaux du Roy&quot;) on Wednesdays and Saturdays. The Luxembourg gallery included Andrea del Sarto&#x27;s &quot;Charity&quot; and works by Raphael; Titian; Veronese; Rembrandt; Poussin or Van Dyck. It closed in 1780 as a result of the royal gift of the Luxembourg palace to the Count of Provence (the future king, Louis XVIII) by the king in 1778. Under Louis XVI, the idea of a royal museum in the Louvre came closer to fruition. The comte d&#x27;Angiviller broadened the collection and in 1776 proposed to convert the of the Louvre – which at that time contained the &quot;plans-reliefs&quot; or 3D models of key fortified sites in and around France – into the &quot;French Museum&quot;. Many design proposals were offered for the Louvre&#x27;s renovation into a museum, without a final decision being made on them. Hence the museum remained incomplete until the French Revolution.
=== Revolutionary opening ===
The Louvre finally became a public museum during the French Revolution. In May 1791, the National Constituent Assembly declared that the Louvre would be &quot;a place for bringing together monuments of all the sciences and arts&quot;. On 10 August 1792, Louis XVI was imprisoned and the royal collection in the Louvre became national property. Because of fear of vandalism or theft, on 19 August, the National Assembly pronounced the museum&#x27;s preparation urgent. In October, a committee to &quot;preserve the national memory&quot; began assembling the collection for display.

The museum opened on 10 August 1793, the first anniversary of the monarchy&#x27;s demise, as &quot;Muséum central des Arts de la République&quot;. The public was given free accessibility on three days per week, which was &quot;perceived as a major accomplishment and was generally appreciated&quot;. The collection showcased 537 paintings and 184 objects of art. Three-quarters were derived from the royal collections, the remainder from confiscated émigrés and Church property (&quot;biens nationaux&quot;). To expand and organize the collection, the Republic dedicated 100,000 livres per year. In 1794, France&#x27;s revolutionary armies began bringing pieces from Northern Europe, augmented after the Treaty of Tolentino (1797) by works from the Vatican, such as the &quot;Laocoön&quot; and &quot;Apollo Belvedere&quot;, to establish the Louvre as a museum and as a &quot;sign of popular sovereignty&quot;.

The early days were hectic. Privileged artists continued to live in residence, and the unlabeled paintings hung &quot;frame to frame from floor to ceiling&quot;. The structure itself closed in May 1796 due to structural deficiencies. It reopened on 14 July 1801, arranged chronologically and with new lighting and columns. On 15 August 1797, the Galerie d&#x27;Apollon was opened with an exhibition of drawings. Meanwhile, the Louvre&#x27;s Gallery of Antiquity sculpture (&quot;musée des Antiques&quot;), with artefacts brought from Florence and the Vatican, had opened in November 1800 in Anne of Austria&#x27;s former summer apartment, located on the ground floor just below the Galerie d&#x27;Apollon.

=== Napoleonic era ===
On 19 November 1802, Napoleon appointed Dominique Vivant Denon, a scholar and polymath who had participated in the Egyptian campaign of 1798–1801, as the museum&#x27;s first director, in preference to alternative contenders such as antiquarian Ennio Quirino Visconti, painter Jacques-Louis David, sculptor Antonio Canova and architects Léon Dufourny or Pierre Fontaine. On Denon&#x27;s suggestion in July 1803, the museum itself was renamed &quot;Musée Napoléon&quot;.

The collection grew through successful military campaigns. Acquisitions were made of Spanish, Austrian, Dutch, and Italian works, either as the result of war looting or formalized by treaties such as the Treaty of Tolentino. At the end of Napoleon&#x27;s First Italian Campaign in 1797, the Treaty of Campo Formio was signed with Count Philipp von Cobenzl of the Austrian Monarchy. This treaty marked the completion of Napoleon&#x27;s conquest of Italy and the end of the first phase of the French Revolutionary Wars. It compelled Italian cities to contribute pieces of art and heritage to Napoleon&#x27;s &quot;parades of spoils&quot; through Paris before being put into the Louvre Museum. The Horses of Saint Mark, which had adorned the basilica of San Marco in Venice after the sack of Constantinople in 1204, were brought to Paris where they were placed atop Napoleon&#x27;s Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel in 1797. Under the Treaty of Tolentino, the two statues of the Nile and Tiber were taken to Paris from the Vatican in 1797, and were both kept in the Louvre until 1815. (The Nile was later returned to Rome, whereas the Tiber has remained in the Louvre to this day.) The despoilment of Italian churches and palaces outraged the Italians and their artistic and cultural sensibilities.

After the French defeat at Waterloo, the looted works&#x27; former owners sought their return. The Louvre&#x27;s administrator, Denon, was loath to comply in absence of a treaty of restitution. In response, foreign states sent emissaries to London to seek help, and many pieces were returned, though far from all. In 1815 Louis XVIII finally concluded agreements with the Austrian government for the keeping of works such as Veronese&#x27;s &quot;Wedding at Cana&quot; which was exchanged for a large Le Brun or the repurchase of the Albani collection.
=== From 1815 to 1852 ===

For most of the 19th century, from Napoleon&#x27;s time to the Second Empire, the Louvre and other national museums were managed under the monarch&#x27;s civil list and thus depended much on the ruler&#x27;s personal involvement. Whereas the most iconic collection remained that of paintings in the , a number of other initiatives mushroomed in the vast building, named as if they were separate museums even though they were generally managed under the same administrative umbrella. Correspondingly, the museum complex was often referred to in the plural (&quot;&quot;) rather than singular.

During the Bourbon Restoration (1814–1830), Louis XVIII and Charles X added to the collections. The Greek and Roman sculpture gallery on the ground floor of the southwestern side of the Cour Carrée was completed on designs by Percier and Fontaine. In 1819 an exhibition of manufactured products was opened in the first floor of the Cour Carrée&#x27;s southern wing and would stay there until the mid-1820s. Charles X in 1826 created the and in 1827 included it in his broader , a new section of the museum complex located in a suite of lavishly decorated rooms on the first floor of the South Wing of the Cour Carrée. The Egyptian collection, initially curated by Jean-François Champollion, formed the basis for what is now the Louvre&#x27;s Department of Egyptian Antiquities. It was formed from the purchased collections of Edmé-Antoine Durand, Henry Salt and the second collection of Bernardino Drovetti (the first one having been purchased by Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia to form the core of the present Museo Egizio in Turin). The Restoration period also saw the opening in 1824 of the , a section of largely French sculptures on the ground floor of the Northwestern side of the Cour Carrée, many of whose artefacts came from the Palace of Versailles and from Alexandre Lenoir&#x27;s Musée des Monuments Français following its closure in 1816. Meanwhile, the French Navy created an exhibition of ship models in the Louvre in December 1827, initially named in honor of Dauphin Louis Antoine, building on an 18th-century initiative of Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau. This collection, renamed in 1833 and later to develop into the Musée national de la Marine, was initially located on the first floor of the Cour Carrée&#x27;s North Wing, and in 1838 moved up one level to the 2nd-floor attic, where it remained for more than a century.


Following the July Revolution, King Louis Philippe focused his interest on the repurposing of the Palace of Versailles into a Museum of French History conceived as a project of national reconciliation, and the Louvre was kept in comparative neglect. Louis-Philippe did, however, sponsor the creation of the to host the monumental Assyrian sculpture works brought to Paris by Paul-Émile Botta, in the ground-floor gallery north of the eastern entrance of the Cour Carrée. The Assyrian Museum opened on 1 May 1847. Separately, Louis-Philippe had his Spanish gallery displayed in the Louvre from 7 January 1838, in five rooms on the first floor of the Cour Carrée&#x27;s East (Colonnade) Wing, but the collection remained his personal property. As a consequence, the works were removed after Louis-Philippe was deposed in 1848, and were eventually auctioned away in 1853.

The short-lived Second Republic had more ambitions for the Louvre. It initiated repair work, the completion of the Galerie d&#x27;Apollon and of the , and the overhaul of the (former site of the iconic yearly Salon) and of the Grande Galerie. In 1848, the Naval Museum in the Cour Carrée&#x27;s attic was brought under the common Louvre Museum management, a change which was again reversed in 1920. In 1850 under the leadership of curator Adrien de Longpérier, the musée mexicain opened within the Louvre as the first European museum dedicated to pre-Columbian art.

=== Second Empire ===
The rule of Napoleon III was transformational for the Louvre, both the building and the museum. In 1852, he created the Musée des Souverains in the Colonnade Wing, an ideological project aimed at buttressing his personal legitimacy. In 1861, he bought 11,835 artworks including 641 paintings, Greek gold and other antiquities of the Campana collection. For its display, he created another new section within the Louvre named , occupying a number of rooms in various parts of the building. Between 1852 and 1870, the museum added 20,000 new artefacts to its collections.

The main change of that period was to the building itself. In the 1850s architects Louis Visconti and Hector Lefuel created massive new spaces around what is now called the Cour Napoléon, some of which (in the South Wing, now Aile Denon) went to the museum. In the 1860s, Lefuel also led the creation of the with a new closer to Napoleon III&#x27;s residence in the Tuileries Palace, with the effect of shortening the by about a third of its previous length. A smaller but significant Second Empire project was the decoration of the below the Salon carré. 


=== From 1870 to 1981 ===
The Louvre narrowly escaped serious damage during the suppression of the Paris Commune. On 23 May 1871, as the French Army advanced into Paris, a force of &quot;Communards&quot; led by set fire to the adjoining Tuileries Palace. The fire burned for forty-eight hours, entirely destroying the interior of the Tuileries and spreading to the north west wing of the museum next to it. The emperor&#x27;s Louvre library (&quot;Bibliothèque du Louvre&quot;) and some of the adjoining halls, in what is now the Richelieu Wing, were separately destroyed. But the museum was saved by the efforts of Paris firemen and museum employees led by curator Henry Barbet de Jouy.

Following the end of the monarchy, several spaces in the Louvre&#x27;s South Wing went to the museum. The Salle du Manège was transferred to the museum in 1879, and in 1928 became its main entrance lobby. The large Salle des Etats that had been created by Lefuel between the and Pavillon Denon was redecorated in 1886 by , Lefuel&#x27;s successor as architect of the Louvre, and opened as a spacious exhibition room. Edomond Guillaume also decorated the first-floor room at the northwest corner of the Cour Carrée, on the ceiling of which he placed in 1890 a monumental painting by Carolus-Duran, &quot;The Triumph of Marie de&#x27; Medici&quot; originally created in 1879 for the Luxembourg Palace.

Meanwhile, during the Third Republic (1870–1940) the Louvre acquired new artefacts mainly via donations, gifts, and sharing arrangements on excavations abroad. The 583-item , donated in 1869 by Louis La Caze, included works by Chardin; Fragonard, Rembrandt and Watteau. In 1883, the &quot;Winged Victory of Samothrace&quot;, which had been found in the Aegean Sea in 1863, was prominently displayed as the focal point of the Escalier Daru. Major artifacts excavated at Susa in Iran, including the massive &quot;Apadana capital&quot; and glazed brick decoration from the Palace of Darius there, accrued to the Oriental (Near Eastern) Antiquities Department in the 1880s. The Société des amis du Louvre was established in 1897 and donated prominent works, such as the &quot;Pietà of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon&quot;. The expansion of the museum and its collections slowed after World War I, however, despite some prominent acquisitions such as Georges de La Tour&#x27;s &quot;Saint Thomas&quot; and Baron Edmond de Rothschild&#x27;s 1935 donation of 4,000 prints, 3,000 drawings, and 500 illustrated books.

From the late 19th century, the Louvre gradually veered away from its mid-century ambition of universality to become a more focused museum of French, Western and Near Eastern art, covering a space ranging from Iran to the Atlantic. The collections of the Louvre&#x27;s musée mexicain were transferred to the Musée d&#x27;Ethnographie du Trocadéro in 1887. As the was increasingly constrained to display its core naval-themed collections in the limited space it had in the second-floor attic of the northern half of the Cour Carrée, many of its significant holdings of non-Western artefacts were transferred in 1905 to the Trocadéro ethnography museum, the National Antiquities Museum in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, and the Chinese Museum in the Palace of Fontainebleau. The Musée de Marine itself was relocated to the Palais de Chaillot in 1943. The Louvre&#x27;s extensive collections of Asian art were moved to the Guimet Museum in 1945. Nevertheless, the Louvre&#x27;s first gallery of Islamic art opened in 1893.


In the late 1920s, Louvre Director Henri Verne devised a master plan for the rationalization of the museum&#x27;s exhibitions, which was partly implemented in the following decade. In 1932–1934, Louvre architects and Albert Ferran redesigned the Escalier Daru to its current appearance. The in the South Wing was covered by a glass roof in 1934. Decorative arts exhibits were expanded in the first floor of the North Wing of the Cour Carrée, including some of France&#x27;s first period room displays. In the late 1930s, The La Caze donation was moved to a remodeled above the , with reduced height to create more rooms on the second floor and a sober interior design by Albert Ferran.

During World War II, the Louvre conducted an elaborate plan of evacuation of its art collection. When Germany occupied the Sudetenland, many important artworks such as the &quot;Mona Lisa&quot; were temporarily moved to the Château de Chambord. When war was formally declared a year later, most of the museum&#x27;s paintings were sent there as well. Select sculptures such as &quot;Winged Victory of Samothrace&quot; and the &quot;Venus de Milo&quot; were sent to the Château de Valençay. On 27 August 1939, after two days of packing, truck convoys began to leave Paris. By 28 December, the museum was cleared of most works, except those that were too heavy and &quot;unimportant paintings [that] were left in the basement&quot;. In early 1945, after the liberation of France, art began returning to the Louvre.

New arrangements after the war revealed the further evolution of taste away from the lavish decorative practices of the late 19th century. In 1947, Edmond Guillaume&#x27;s ceiling ornaments were removed from the , where the &quot;Mona Lisa&quot; was first displayed in 1966. Around 1950, Louvre architect streamlined the interior decoration of the . In 1953, a new ceiling by Georges Braque was inaugurated in the , next to the . In the late 1960s, seats designed by Pierre Paulin were installed in the . In 1972, the &#x27;s museography was remade with lighting from a hung tubular case, designed by Louvre architect with assistance from designers , Joseph-André Motte and Paulin.

In 1961, the Finance Ministry accepted to leave the Pavillon de Flore at the southwestern end of the Louvre building, as Verne had recommended in his 1920s plan. New exhibition spaces of sculptures (ground floor) and paintings (first floor) opened there later in the 1960s, on a design by government architect Olivier Lahalle.

=== Grand Louvre ===
In 1981, French President François Mitterrand proposed, as one of his Grands Projets, the Grand Louvre plan to relocate the Finance Ministry, until then housed in the North Wing of the Louvre, and thus devote almost the entire Louvre building (except its northwestern tip, which houses the separate Musée des Arts Décoratifs) to the museum which would be correspondingly restructured. In 1984 I. M. Pei, the architect personally selected by Mitterrand, proposed a master plan including an underground entrance space accessed through a glass pyramid in the Louvre&#x27;s central &quot;Cour Napoléon&quot;.

The open spaces surrounding the pyramid were inaugurated on 15 October 1988, and its underground lobby was opened on 30 March 1989. New galleries of early modern French paintings on the 2nd floor of the Cour Carrée, for which the planning had started before the &quot;Grand Louvre&quot;, also opened in 1989. Further rooms in the same sequence, designed by Italo Rota, opened on 15 December 1992.

On 18 November 1993, Mitterrand inaugurated the next major phase of the Grand Louvre plan: the renovated North (Richelieu) Wing in the former Finance Ministry site, the museum&#x27;s largest single expansion in its entire history, designed by Pei, his French associate Michel Macary, and Jean-Michel Wilmotte. Further underground spaces known as the Carrousel du Louvre, centered on the Inverted Pyramid and designed by Pei and Macary, had opened in October 1993. Other refurbished galleries, of Italian sculptures and Egyptian antiquities, opened in 1994. The third and last main phase of the plan unfolded mainly in 1997, with new renovated rooms in the Sully and Denon wings. A new entrance at the &quot;porte des Lions&quot; opened in 1998, leading on the first floor to new rooms of Spanish paintings.

As of 2002, the Louvre&#x27;s visitor count had doubled from its pre-Grand-Louvre levels.

=== 21st century ===
President Jacques Chirac, who had succeeded Mitterrand in 1995, insisted on the return of non-Western art to the Louvre, upon a recommendation from his friend the art collector and dealer . On his initiative, a selection of highlights from the collections of what would become the Musée du Quai Branly – Jacques Chirac was installed on the ground floor of the and opened in 2000, six years ahead of the Musée du Quai Branly itself.

The main other initiative in the aftermath of the Grand Louvre project was Chirac&#x27;s decision to create a new department of Islamic Art, by executive order of 1 August 2003, and to move the corresponding collections from their prior underground location in the Richelieu Wing to a more prominent site in the Denon Wing. That new section opened on 22 September 2012, together with collections from the Roman-era Eastern Mediterranean, with financial support from the Al Waleed bin Talal Foundation and on a design by Mario Bellini and Rudy Ricciotti.

In 2007, German painter Anselm Kiefer was invited to create a work for the North stairs of the Perrault Colonnade, &quot;Athanor&quot;. This decision announces the museum&#x27;s reengagement with contemporary art under the direction of Henri Loyrette, fifty years after the institution&#x27;s last order to a contemporary artists, George Braque.

In 2010, American painter Cy Twombly completed a new ceiling for the (the former ), a counterpoint to that of Braque installed in 1953 in the adjacent . The room&#x27;s floor and walls were redesigned in 2021 by Louvre architect Michel Goutal to revert the changes made by his predecessor Albert Ferran in the late 1930s, triggering protests from the Cy Twombly Foundation on grounds that the then-deceased painter&#x27;s work had been created to fit with the room&#x27;s prior decoration.

That same year, the Louvre commissioned French artist François Morellet to create a work for the Lefuel stairs, on the first floor. For &quot;L&#x27;esprit d&#x27;escalier&quot; Morellet redesigned the stairscase&#x27;s windows, echoing their original structures but distorting them to create a disturbing optical effect.

On 6 June 2014, the Decorative Arts section on the first floor of the Cour Carrée&#x27;s northern wing opened after comprehensive refurbishment.

In January 2020, under the direction of Jean-Luc Martinez, the museum inaugurated a new contemporary art commission, &quot;L&#x27;Onde du Midi&quot; by Venezuelan kinetic artist Elias Crespin. The sculpture hovers under the Escalier du Midi, the staircase on the South of the Perrault Colonnade.

The Louvre, like many other museums and galleries, felt the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the arts and cultural heritage. It was closed for six months during French coronavirus lockdowns and saw visitor numbers plunge to 2.7 million in 2020, from 9.6 million in 2019 and 10.2 million in 2018, which was a record year.

In preparation for the 2024 Olympics, the Louvre staged an exhibit about the Games&#x27; history that links their ancient beginnings to the modern era.

Attendance rose to 8.9 million in 2023, 14 percent above 2022, but still short of the record of 10.2 million in 2018.

In January 2025, French President Emmanuel Macron announced plans for a renovation and expansion of the Louvre, including a room solely for the Mona Lisa. The planned renovation and expansion was a result of the increasing number of visitors each year to the Louvre.
== Collections ==
The Musée du Louvre owns 615,797 objects of which 482,943 are accessible online since 24 March 2021 and displays 35,000 works of art in eight curatorial departments.

The Louvre is home to one of the world&#x27;s most extensive collections of art, including works from diverse cultures and time periods. Visitors can view iconic works like the Mona Lisa and the Winged Victory of Samothrace, as well as pieces from ancient civilizations such as Egypt, Greece, and Rome. The museum also features collections of decorative arts, Islamic art, and sculptures.

=== Egyptian antiquities ===

The department, comprising over 50,000 pieces, includes artifacts from the Nile civilizations which date from 4,000 BC to the 4th century AD. The collection, among the world&#x27;s largest, overviews Egyptian life spanning Ancient Egypt, the Middle Kingdom, the New Kingdom, Coptic art, and the Roman, Ptolemaic, and Byzantine periods.

The department&#x27;s origins lie in the royal collection, but it was augmented by Napoleon&#x27;s 1798 expeditionary trip with Dominique Vivant, the future director of the Louvre. After Jean-François Champollion translated the Rosetta Stone, Charles X decreed that an Egyptian Antiquities department be created. Champollion advised the purchase of three collections, formed by Edmé-Antoine Durand, Henry Salt, and Bernardino Drovetti; these additions added 7,000 works. Growth continued via acquisitions by Auguste Mariette, founder of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. Mariette, after excavations at Memphis, sent back crates of archaeological finds including &quot;The Seated Scribe&quot;.

Guarded by the Great Sphinx of Tanis, the collection is housed in more than 20 rooms. Holdings include art, papyrus scrolls, mummies, tools, clothing, jewelry, games, musical instruments, and weapons. Pieces from the ancient period include the &quot;Gebel el-Arak Knife&quot; from 3400 BC, &quot;The Seated Scribe&quot;, and the &quot;Head of King Djedefre&quot;. Middle Kingdom art, &quot;known for its gold work and statues&quot;, moved from realism to idealization; this is exemplified by the schist statue of Amenemhatankh and the wooden &quot;Offering Bearer&quot;. The New Kingdom and Coptic Egyptian sections are deep, but the statue of the goddess Nephthys and the limestone depiction of the goddess Hathor demonstrate New Kingdom sentiment and wealth.

=== Near Eastern antiquities ===
Near Eastern antiquities, the second newest department, dates from 1881 and presents an overview of early Near Eastern civilization and &quot;first settlements&quot;, before the arrival of Islam. The department is divided into three geographic areas: the Levant, Mesopotamia (Iraq), and Persia (Iran). The collection&#x27;s development corresponds to archaeological work such as Paul-Émile Botta&#x27;s 1843 expedition to Khorsabad and the discovery of Sargon II&#x27;s palace. These finds formed the basis of the Assyrian museum, the precursor to today&#x27;s department.

The museum contains exhibits from Sumer and the city of Akkad, with monuments such as the Prince of Lagash&#x27;s &quot;Stele of the Vultures&quot; from 2450 BC and the stele erected by Naram-Sin, King of Akkad, to celebrate a victory over barbarians in the Zagros Mountains. The Code of Hammurabi, discovered in 1901, displays Babylonian Laws prominently, so that no man could plead their ignorance. The 18th-century BC mural of the &quot;Investiture of Zimrilim&quot; and the 25th-century BC &quot;Statue of Ebih-Il&quot; found in the ancient city-state of Mari are also on display at the museum.

A significant portion of the department covers the ancient Levant, including the &quot;Sarcophagus of Eshmunazar II&quot; discovered in 1855, which catalyzed Ernest Renan&#x27;s 1860 &quot;Mission de Phénicie&quot;. It contains one of the world&#x27;s largest and most comprehensive collections of Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions. The section also covers North African Punic antiquities (Punic = Western Phoenician), given the significant French presence in the region in the 19th century, with early finds including the 1843 discovery of the Ain Nechma inscriptions.

The Persian portion of Louvre contains work from the archaic period, like the &quot;Funerary Head&quot; and the Persian &quot;Archers of Darius I&quot;, and rare objects from Persepolis.

=== Greek, Etruscan, and Roman ===

The Greek, Etruscan, and Roman department displays pieces from the Mediterranean Basin dating from the Neolithic to the 6th century. The collection spans from the Cycladic period to the decline of the Roman Empire. This department is one of the museum&#x27;s oldest, and contains works acquired by Francis I. Initially, the collection focused on marble sculptures, such as the &quot;Venus de Milo&quot;. Works such as the &quot;Apollo Belvedere&quot; arrived during the Napoleonic Wars, of which some were returned after Napoleon I&#x27;s fall in 1815. Other works, such as the Borghese Vase, were bought by Napoleon. Later in the 19th century, the Louvre acquired works including vases from the Durand collection and bronzes.

The archaic is demonstrated by jewellery and pieces such as the limestone Lady of Auxerre, from 640 BC; and the cylindrical &quot;Hera of Samos&quot;, –560 BC. After the 4th century BC, focus on the human form increased, exemplified by the &quot;Borghese Gladiator&quot;. The Louvre holds masterpieces from the Hellenistic era, including The &quot;Winged Victory of Samothrace&quot; (190 BC) and the Venus de Milo, symbolic of classical art. The long &quot;Galerie Campana&quot; displays an outstanding collection of more than one thousand Greek potteries. In the galleries paralleling the Seine, much of the museum&#x27;s Roman sculpture is displayed. The Roman portraiture is representative of that genre; examples include the portraits of Agrippa and Annius Verus; among the bronzes is the Greek Apollo of Piombino.

=== Islamic art ===
The Islamic art collection, the museum&#x27;s newest, spans &quot;thirteen centuries and three continents&quot;. These exhibits, of ceramics, glass, metalware, wood, ivory, carpet, textiles, and miniatures, include more than 5,000 works and 1,000 shards. Originally part of the decorative arts department, the holdings became separate in 2003. Among the works are the &quot;Pyxide d&#x27;al-Mughira&quot;, a 10th century ivory box from Andalusia; the &quot;Baptistery of Saint-Louis&quot;, an engraved brass basin from the 13th or 14th century Mamluk period; and the 10th century &quot;Shroud of Saint-Josse&quot; from Iran. The collection contains three pages of the &quot;Shahnameh&quot;, an epic book of poems by Ferdowsi in Persian, and a Syrian metalwork named the &quot;Barberini Vase&quot;. In September 2019, a new and improved Islamic art department was opened by Princess Lamia bint Majed Al Saud. The new department exhibits 3,000 pieces were collected from Spain to India via the Arabian peninsula dating from the 7th to the 19th centuries.

=== Sculptures ===
The sculpture department consists of works created before 1850 not belonging in the Etruscan, Greek, and Roman department. The Louvre has been a repository of sculpted material since its time as a palace; however, only ancient architecture was displayed until 1824, except for Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;Dying Slave&quot; and &quot;Rebellious Slave&quot;. Initially the collection included only 100 pieces, the rest of the royal sculpture collection being at Versailles. It remained small until 1847, when Léon Laborde was given control of the department. Laborde developed the medieval section and purchased the first such statues and sculptures in the collection, &quot;King Childebert&quot; and &quot;stanga door&quot;, respectively. The collection was part of the Department of Antiquities but was given autonomy in 1871 under Louis Courajod, a director who organized a wider representation of French works. In 1986, all post-1850 works were relocated to the new Musée d&#x27;Orsay. The Grand Louvre project separated the department into two exhibition spaces; the French collection is displayed in the Richelieu Wing, and foreign works in the Denon Wing.

The collection&#x27;s overview of French sculpture contains Romanesque works such as the 11th-century &quot;Daniel in the Lions&#x27; Den&quot; and the 12th-century &quot;Virgin of Auvergne&quot;. In the 16th century, Renaissance influence caused French sculpture to become more restrained, as seen in Jean Goujon&#x27;s bas-reliefs, and Germain Pilon&#x27;s &quot;Descent from the Cross&quot; and &quot;Resurrection of Christ&quot;. The 17th and 18th centuries are represented by Gian Lorenzo Bernini&#x27;s 1640–1 Bust of Cardinal Richelieu, Étienne Maurice Falconet&#x27;s &quot;Woman Bathing&quot; and &quot;Amour menaçant&quot;, and François Anguier&#x27;s obelisks. Neoclassical works includes Antonio Canova&#x27;s &quot;Psyche Revived by Cupid&#x27;s Kiss&quot; (1787). The 18th and 19th centuries are represented by the French sculptors like Alfred Barye and Émile Guillemin.

=== Decorative arts ===

The Objets d&#x27;art collection spans the time from the Middle Ages to the mid-19th century. The department began as a subset of the sculpture department, based on royal property and the transfer of work from the Basilique Saint-Denis, the burial ground of French monarchs that held the &quot;Coronation Sword of the Kings of France&quot;. Among the budding collection&#x27;s most prized works were pietre dure vases and bronzes. The Durand collection&#x27;s 1825 acquisition added &quot;ceramics, enamels, and stained glass&quot;, and 800 pieces were given by Pierre Révoil. The onset of Romanticism rekindled interest in Renaissance and Medieval artwork, and the Sauvageot donation expanded the department with 1,500 middle-age and faïence works. In 1862, the Campana collection added gold jewelry and maiolicas, mainly from the 15th and 16th centuries.

The works are displayed on the Richelieu Wing&#x27;s first floor and in the Apollo Gallery, named by the painter Charles Le Brun, who was commissioned by Louis XIV (the Sun King) to decorate the space in a solar theme. The medieval collection contains the coronation crown of Louis XV, Charles V&#x27;s sceptre, and the 12th century &quot;porphyry vase&quot;. The Renaissance art holdings include Giambologna&#x27;s bronze &quot;Nessus and Deianira&quot; and the tapestry &quot;Maximillian&#x27;s Hunt&quot;. From later periods, highlights include Madame de Pompadour&#x27;s Sèvres vase collection and Napoleon III&#x27;s apartments.

In September 2000, the Louvre Museum dedicated the Gilbert Chagoury and Rose-Marie Chagoury Gallery to display tapestries donated by the Chagourys, including a 16th-century six-part tapestry suite, sewn with gold and silver threads representing sea divinities, which was commissioned in Paris for Colbert de Seignelay, Secretary of State for the Navy.

=== Painting ===
The painting collection has more than 7,500 works from the 13th century to 1848 and is managed by 12 curators who oversee the collection&#x27;s display. Nearly two-thirds are by French artists, and more than 1,200 are Northern European. The Italian paintings compose most of the remnants of Francis I and Louis XIV&#x27;s collections, others are unreturned artwork from the Napoleon era, and some were bought. The collection began with Francis, who acquired works from Italian masters such as Raphael and Michelangelo and brought Leonardo da Vinci to his court. After the French Revolution, the Royal Collection formed the nucleus of the Louvre. When the &quot;d&#x27;Orsay&quot; train station was converted into the Musée d&#x27;Orsay in 1986, the collection was split, and pieces completed after the 1848 Revolution were moved to the new museum. French and Northern European works are in the Richelieu Wing and &quot;Cour Carrée&quot;; Spanish and Italian paintings are on the first floor of the Denon Wing.

Exemplifying the French School are the early &quot;Avignon Pietà&quot; of Enguerrand Quarton; the anonymous painting of &quot;King Jean le Bon&quot; ( 1360), possibly the oldest independent portrait in Western painting to survive from the postclassical era; Hyacinthe Rigaud&#x27;s &quot;Louis XIV&quot;; Jacques-Louis David&#x27;s &quot;The Coronation of Napoleon&quot;; Théodore Géricault&#x27;s &quot;The Raft of the Medusa&quot;; and Eugène Delacroix&#x27;s &quot;Liberty Leading the People&quot;. Nicolas Poussin, the Le Nain brothers, Philippe de Champaigne, Le Brun, La Tour, Watteau, Fragonard, Ingres, Corot, and Delacroix are well represented.

Northern European works include Johannes Vermeer&#x27;s &quot;The Lacemaker&quot; and &quot;The Astronomer&quot;; Caspar David Friedrich&#x27;s &quot;The Tree of Crows&quot;; Rembrandt&#x27;s &quot;The Supper at Emmaus&quot;, &quot;Bathsheba at Her Bath&quot;, and &quot;The Slaughtered Ox&quot;.

The Italian holdings are notable, particularly the Renaissance collection. The works include Andrea Mantegna and Giovanni Bellini&#x27;s &quot;Calvary&quot;s, which reflect realism and detail &quot;meant to depict the significant events of a greater spiritual world&quot;. The High Renaissance collection includes Leonardo da Vinci&#x27;s &quot;Mona Lisa&quot;, &quot;Virgin and Child with St. Anne&quot;, &quot;St. John the Baptist&quot;, and &quot;Madonna of the Rocks&quot;. The Baroque collection includes Giambattista Pittoni&#x27;s &quot;The Continence of Scipio&quot;, &quot;Susanna and the Elders&quot;, &quot;Bacchus and Ariadne&quot;, &quot;Mars and Venus&quot;, and others Caravaggio is represented by &quot;The Fortune Teller&quot; and &quot;Death of the Virgin&quot;. From 16th century Venice, the Louvre displays Titian&#x27;s &quot;Le Concert Champetre&quot;, &quot;The Entombment,&quot; and &quot;The Crowning with Thorns&quot;.

The La Caze Collection, a bequest to the Musée du Louvre in 1869 by Louis La Caze, was the largest contribution of a person in the history of the Louvre. La Caze gave 584 paintings of his personal collection to the museum. The bequest included Antoine Watteau&#x27;s Commedia dell&#x27;arte player of Pierrot (&quot;Gilles&quot;). In 2007, this bequest was the topic of the exhibition &quot;1869: Watteau, Chardin... entrent au Louvre. La collection La Caze&quot;.

Some of the best known paintings of the museum have been digitized by the French Center for Research and Restoration of the Museums of France.

=== Prints and drawings ===
The prints and drawings department encompasses works on paper. The origins of the collection were the 8,600 works in the Royal Collection (&quot;Cabinet du Roi&quot;), which were increased via state appropriation, purchases such as the 1,200 works from Fillipo Baldinucci&#x27;s collection in 1806, and donations. The department opened on 5 August 1797, with 415 pieces displayed in the Galerie d&#x27;Apollon. The collection is organized into three sections: the core &quot;Cabinet du Roi&quot;, 14,000 royal copper printing-plates, and the donations of Edmond de Rothschild, which include 40,000 prints, 3,000 drawings, and 5,000 illustrated books. The holdings are displayed in the Pavillon de Flore; due to the fragility of the paper medium, only a portion are displayed at one time.


== Management, administration, partnerships ==
The Louvre is owned by the French government. Since the 1990s, its management and governance have been made more independent. Since 2003, the museum has been required to generate funds for projects. By 2006, government funds had dipped from 75 percent of the total budget to 62 percent. Every year, the Louvre now raises as much as it gets from the state, about €122 million. The government pays for operating costs (salaries, safety, and maintenance), while the rest – new wings, refurbishments, acquisitions – is up to the museum to finance. A further €3 million to €5 million a year is raised by the Louvre from exhibitions that it curates for other museums, while the host museum keeps the ticket money. As the Louvre became a point of interest in the book &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; and the 2006 film based on the book, the museum earned $2.5 million by allowing filming in its galleries. In 2008, the French government provided $180 million of the Louvre&#x27;s yearly $350 million budget; the remainder came from private contributions and ticket sales.

The Louvre employs a staff of 2,000 led by Director Jean-Luc Martinez, who reports to the French Ministry of Culture and Communications. Martinez replaced Henri Loyrette in April 2013. Under Loyrette, who replaced Pierre Rosenberg in 2001, the Louvre has undergone policy changes that allow it to lend and borrow more works than before. In 2006, it loaned 1,300 works, which enabled it to borrow more foreign works. From 2006 to 2009, the Louvre lent artwork to the High Museum of Art in Atlanta, Georgia, and received a $6.9 million payment to be used for renovations.

In 2009, Minister of culture Frédéric Mitterrand approved a plan that would have created a storage facility northwest of Paris to hold objects from the Louvre and two other national museums in Paris&#x27;s flood zone, the Musée du Quai Branly and the Musée d&#x27;Orsay; the plan was later scrapped. In 2013, his successor Aurélie Filippetti announced that the Louvre would move more than 250,000 works of art held in a basement storage area in Liévin; the cost of the project, estimated at €60 million, will be split between the region (49%) and the Louvre (51%). The Louvre will be the sole owner and manager of the store. In July 2015, a team led by British firm Rogers Stirk Harbour + Partners was selected to design the complex, which will have light-filled work spaces under one vast, green roof.

In 2012, the Louvre and the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco announced a five-year collaboration on exhibitions, publications, art conservation and educational programming. The €98.5 million expansion of the Islamic Art galleries in 2012 received state funding of €31 million, as well as €17 million from the Alwaleed Bin Talal Foundation founded by the eponymous Saudi prince. The Republic of Azerbaijan, the Emir of Kuwait, the Sultan of Oman and King Mohammed VI of Morocco donated in total €26 million. In addition, the opening of the Louvre Abu Dhabi is supposed to provide €400 million over the course of 30 years for its use of the museum&#x27;s brand. Loyrette has tried to improve weak parts of the collection through income generated from loans of art and by guaranteeing that &quot;20% of admissions receipts will be taken annually for acquisitions&quot;. He has more administrative independence for the museum and achieved 90 percent of galleries to be open daily, as opposed to 80 percent previously. He oversaw the creation of extended hours and free admission on Friday nights and an increase in the acquisition budget to $36 million from $4.5 million.

In March 2018, an exhibition of dozens of artworks and relics belonging to France&#x27;s Louvre Museum was opened to visitors in Tehran, as a result of an agreement between Iranian and French presidents in 2016. In the Louvre, two departments were allocated to the antiquities of the Iranian civilization, and the managers of the two departments visited Tehran. Relics belonging to Ancient Egypt, Rome and Mesopotamia as well as French royal items were showcased at the Tehran exhibition.

Iran&#x27;s National Museum building was designed and constructed by French architect André Godard. Following its time in Tehran, the exhibition is set to be held in the Khorasan Grand Museum in Mashhad, northeastern Iran in June 2018.

On the 500th anniversary of Leonardo da Vinci&#x27;s death, the Louvre held the largest ever single exhibit of his work, from 24 October 2019 to 24 February 2020. The event included over a hundred items: paintings, drawings and notebooks. A full 11 of the fewer than 20 paintings that Da Vinci completed in his lifetime were displayed. Five of them are owned by the Louvre, but the Mona Lisa was not included because it is in such great demand among visitors to the Louvre museum; the work remained on display in its gallery. Salvator Mundi was also not included since the Saudi owner did not agree to move the work from its hiding place. Vitruvian Man, however, was on display, after a successful legal battle with its owner, the Galleria dell&#x27;Accademia in Venice.

In 2021, a Renaissance era ceremonial helmet and breastplate stolen from the museum in 1983 were recovered. The museum noted that the 1983 theft had &quot;deeply troubled all the staff at the time.&quot; There are few publicly accessible details on the theft itself.

The current director of the Louvre is Laurence des Cars, who was selected by French president Emmanuel Macron in 2021. She is the first woman to hold this position.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Louvre has launched a digital platform where most of its works, including those that are not on display, can be seen. The database includes more than 482,000 illustrated records, representing 75% of the Louvre&#x27;s collections. The museum was visited by over 7.6 million visitors in 2022, up 170 percent from 2021, but still below the 10.8 million visitors in 2018 before the COVID-19 pandemic.

In 2023, the Louvre Museum in Paris implemented a significant change in its pricing policy, marking the first price increase since 2017. The decision to raise ticket prices by 30% is part of a broader strategy aimed at supporting free entry during the Olympics and effectively managing the anticipated crowd. Director Laurence des Cars has introduced measures to regulate attendance, including capping daily visitors at 30,000 and planning a new entrance to alleviate congestion. These efforts are geared towards ensuring a top-notch experience for art enthusiasts during the Olympic Games, as the museum expects to host approximately 8.7 million visitors this year, with a remarkable 80% seeking to view the Mona Lisa.

== Archaeological research ==
The Louvre&#x27;s ancient art collections are to a significant extent the product of excavations, some of which the museum sponsored under various legal regimes over time, often as a companion to France&#x27;s diplomacy and/or colonial enterprises. In the , a carved marble panel lists a number of such campaigns, led by:
* Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel in Greece (1818)
* Jean-François Champollion in Egypt (1828–1829)
* Guillaume-Abel Blouet and Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois with the Morea expedition in Greece (1829)
* in Algeria (1842–1845)
* Paul-Émile Botta in the Nineveh Plains (1845)
* in Cyrenaica (1850)
* Auguste Mariette in Egypt (1850–1854)
* Victor Langlois in Cilicia (1852)
* Ernest Renan with the Mission de Phénicie following the 1860 civil conflict in Mount Lebanon and Damascus (1860–1861)
* Léon Heuzey and Honoré Daumet in Macedonia (1861)
* Eugène-Melchior de Vogüé and Edmond Duthoit in Cyprus (1863–1866)
* Charles Champoiseau in Samothrace (1863)
* in Thessaloniki and Thasos (1864–1865)
* Olivier Rayet and Albert-Félix-Théophile Thomas in Ionia (1872–1873)
* Charles Simon Clermont-Ganneau in Palestine (1873)
* in Algeria and Tunisia (1874)
* Ernest de Sarzec in Tello / ancient Girsu, Mesopotamia (1877–1900)
* Paul Girard in Greece (1881)
* Edmond Pottier, Salomon Reinach and Alphonse Veyries in Myrina (Aeolis) (1872–1873)
* Marcel-Auguste Dieulafoy and Jane Dieulafoy in Susa, Persia (1884–1886)
* Charles Huber in Tayma, Arabia (1885)
* Alfred Charles Auguste Foucher in India and present-day Pakistan (1895–1897)
* Arthur Engel and in Spain (1897)
* Jacques de Morgan in Susa (1897)
* Gaston Cros in Tello / ancient Girsu (1902)
* Paul Pelliot in Chinese Turkestan (1907–1909)
* Maurice Pézard in Northern Palestine (1923)
* Georges Aaron Bénédite in Egypt (1926)
* François Thureau-Dangin in Northern Syria (1929)
* Henri de Genouillac in Mesopotamia (1912, 1929)
* the Institut Français d&#x27;Archéologie Orientale in Cairo, created in 1880
The rest of the plaque combines donors of archaeological items, many of whom were archaeologists themselves, and other archaeologists whose excavations contributed to the Louvre&#x27;s collections:
* in France (1899)
* Édouard Piette in France (1902)
* in France (1899–1906)
* Henri and Jacques de Morgan in Susa (1909–1910)
* (1906–1920) and his daughter Germaine in France (1976)
* in France (1929)
* and his wife Suzanne in France (1935)
* Fernand Bisson de la Roque in Egypt (1922–1950)
* Bernard Bruyère in Egypt (1920–1951)
* Raymond Weill in Egypt (1952)
* Pierre Montet in Egypt (1921–1956)
* in the Indus Valley and Afghanistan (1950–1973)
* in France (1973)
* André Parrot in Mari, Syria (1931–1974)
* Claude Frédéric-Armand Schaeffer in Ugarit, Syria (1929–1970)
* Roman Ghirshman in Iraq and Iran (1931–1972)

== Satellites and offshoots ==
Several museums in and outside France have been or are placed under the Louvre&#x27;s administrative authority or linked to it through exclusive partnerships, while not being located in the Louvre Palace. Since 2019, the Louvre has also maintained a large art storage and research facility in the Northern French town of Liévin, the , which is not open to the public.

=== Musée de Cluny (1926–1977) ===
In February 1926, the Musée de Cluny, whose creation dates back to the 19th century, was brought under the aegis of the Louvre&#x27;s department of decorative arts (). That affiliation was terminated in 1977.

=== Musée du Jeu de Paume (1947–1986) ===
The building in the Tuileries Garden, initially intended as a sports venue, was repurposed from 1909 as an art gallery. In 1947, it became the exhibition space for the Louvre&#x27;s collections of late 19th and early 20th paintings, most prominently Impressionism, as the Louvre Palace was lacking space to display them, and was consequently brought under direct management by the Louvre&#x27;s . In 1986, these collections were transferred to the newly created Musée d&#x27;Orsay.

=== Musée du Petit Palais, Avignon (since 1976) ===
The Musée du Petit Palais opened in 1976 in the former urban mansion of the archbishops of Avignon, close to the Papal Palace in Avignon. An initiative led by Avignon Mayor and Louvre President-Director Michel Laclotte, part of its permanent collection is made of artworks from the deposited by the Louvre. On , a new agreement between the City of Avignon and the Louvre allowed its rebranding as .

=== Gypsothèque du Louvre (since 2001) ===
The (plaster cast gallery) of the Louvre is a collection of plaster casts that was formed in 1970 by the reunion of the corresponding inventories of the Louvre, the and the Art and Archaeology Institute of the Sorbonne University, the latter two following depredations during the May 68 student unrest. Initially called the from 1970 to 1978, the project was subsequently left unfinished and only came to fruition after being brought under the Louvre&#x27;s management by ministerial decision in 2001. It is located in the Petite Écurie, a dependency of Versailles Palace, and has been open to the public since 2012.

=== Musée Delacroix (since 2004) ===
The small museum located in Eugène Delacroix&#x27;s former workshop in central Paris, created in the 1930s, has been placed under management by the Louvre since 2004.

=== Louvre-Lens (since 2012) ===
The Louvre-Lens follows a May 2003 initiative by then culture minister Jean-Jacques Aillagon to promote cultural projects outside of Paris that would make the riches of major Parisian institutions available to a broader French public, including a satellite () of the Louvre. After several rounds of competition, a former mining site in the town of Lens was selected for its location and announced by Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin on 2004-11-29. Japanese architects SANAA and landscape architect Catherine Mosbach were respectively selected in September 2005 to design the museum building and garden. Inaugurated by President François Hollande on 2012-12-04, the Louvre-Lens is run by the Hauts-de-France region under a contract () with the Louvre for art loans and brand use. Its main attraction is an exhibition of roughly 200 artworks from the Louvre on a rotating basis, presented chronologically in a single large room (the or &quot;gallery of time&quot;) that transcends the geographical and object-type divisions along which the Parisian Louvre&#x27;s displays are organized. The Louvre-Lens has been successful at attracting around 500,000 visitors per year until the COVID-19 pandemic.

=== Louvre Abu Dhabi (since 2017) ===
The Louvre Abu Dhabi is a separate entity from the Louvre, but the two entities have a multifaceted contractual relationship that allows the Emirati museum to use the Louvre name until 2037, and to exhibit artworks from the Louvre until 2027. It was inaugurated on 2017-11-08 and opened to the public three days later. A 30-year agreement, signed in early 2007 by French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres and Sheik Sultan bin Tahnoon Al Nahyan, establishes that Abu Dhabi shall pay €832,000,000 (US$1.3 billion) in exchange for the Louvre name use, managerial advice, art loans, and special exhibitions. The Louvre Abu Dhabi is located on Saadiyat Island and was designed by the French architect Jean Nouvel and engineering firm of Buro Happold. It occupies and is covered by an iconic metallic dome designed to cast rays of light mimicking sunlight passing through date palm fronds in an oasis. The French art loans, expected to total between 200 and 300 artworks during a 10-year period, come from multiple museums, including the Louvre, the Centre Georges Pompidou, the Musée d&#x27;Orsay, Versailles, the Guimet Museum, the Musée Rodin, and the Musée du quai Branly.

== Controversy ==
The Louvre is involved in controversies that surround cultural property seized under Napoleon I, as well as during World War II by the Nazis. In the early 2010s, workers&#x27; rights in the construction of Louvre Abu Dhabi were also a point of controversy for the museum.

=== Napoleonic looting ===
Napoleon&#x27;s campaigns acquired Italian pieces by treaties, as war reparations, and Northern European pieces as spoils, as well as some antiquities excavated in Egypt, though the vast majority of the latter were seized as war reparations by the British army and are now part of collections of the British Museum. On the other hand, the Dendera zodiac is, like the Rosetta Stone, claimed by Egypt even though it was acquired in 1821, before the Egyptian Anti-export legislation of 1835. The Louvre administration has thus argued in favor of retaining this item despite requests by Egypt for its return. The museum participates too in arbitration sessions held via UNESCO&#x27;s Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to Its Countries of Origin. The museum consequently returned in 2009 five Egyptian fragments of frescoes (30 cm x 15 cm each) whose existence of the tomb of origin had only been brought to the authorities attention in 2008, eight to five years after their good-faith acquisition by the museum from two private collections and after the necessary respect of the procedure of &quot;déclassement&quot; from French public collections before the Commission scientifique nationale des collections des musées de France.

=== Nazi looting ===
During Nazi occupation, thousands of artworks were stolen. But after the war, 61,233 articles of more than 150,000 seized artworks returned to France and were assigned to the Office des Biens Privés. In 1949, it entrusted 2,130 unclaimed pieces (including 1,001 paintings) to the Direction des Musées de France in order to keep them under appropriate conditions of conservation until their restitution and meanwhile classified them as MNRs (Musées Nationaux Recuperation or, in English, the National Museums of Recovered Artwork). Some 10% to 35% of the pieces are believed to come from Jewish spoliations and until the identification of their rightful owners, which declined at the end of the 1960s, they are registered indefinitely on separate inventories from the museum&#x27;s collections.

They were exhibited in 1946 and shown all together to the public during four years (1950–1954) in order to allow rightful claimants to identify their properties, then stored or displayed, according to their interest, in several French museums including the Louvre. From 1951 to 1965, about 37 pieces were restituted. Since November 1996, the partly illustrated catalogue of 1947–1949 has been accessible online and completed. In 1997, Prime Minister Alain Juppé initiated the Mattéoli Commission, headed by Jean Mattéoli, to investigate the matter and according to the government, the Louvre is in charge of 678 pieces of artwork still unclaimed by their rightful owners. During the late 1990s, the comparison of the American war archives, which had not been done before, with the French and German ones as well as two court cases which finally settled some of the heirs&#x27; rights (Gentili di Giuseppe and Rosenberg families) allowed more accurate investigations. Since 1996, the restitutions, according sometimes to less formal criteria, concerned 47 more pieces (26 paintings, with 6 from the Louvre including a then displayed Tiepolo), until the last claims of French owners and their heirs ended again in 2006.

According to Serge Klarsfeld, since the now complete and constant publicity which the artworks got in 1996, the majority of the French Jewish community is nevertheless in favour of the return to the normal French civil rule of &quot;prescription acquisitive&quot; of any unclaimed good after another long period of time and consequently to their ultimate integration into the common French heritage instead of their transfer to foreign institutions like during World War II.

=== Construction of Louvre Abu Dhabi ===
In 2011, over 130 international artists urged a boycott of the new Guggenheim museum as well as Louvre Abu Dhabi, citing reports, since 2009, of abuses of foreign construction workers on Saadiyat Island, including the arbitrary withholding of wages, unsafe working conditions, and failure of companies to pay or reimburse the steep recruitment fees being charged to laborers. According to &quot;Architectural Record&quot;, Abu Dhabi has comprehensive labor laws to protect the workers, but they are not conscientiously implemented or enforced. In 2010, the Guggenheim Foundation placed on its website a joint statement with Abu Dhabi&#x27;s Tourism Development and Investment Company (TDIC) recognizing the following workers&#x27; rights issues, among others: health and safety of the workers; their access to their passports and other documents that the employers have been retaining to guaranty that they stay on the job; using a general contractor that agrees to obey the labor laws; maintaining an independent site monitor; and ending the system that has been generally used in the Persian Gulf region of requiring workers to reimburse recruitment fees.

In 2013, &quot;The Observer&quot; reported that conditions for the workers at the Louvre and New York University construction sites on Saadiyat amounted to &quot;modern-day slavery&quot;. In 2014, the Guggenheim&#x27;s Director, Richard Armstrong, said that he believed that living conditions for the workers at the Louvre project were now good and that &quot;many fewer&quot; of them were having their passports confiscated. He stated that the main issue then remaining was the recruitment fees charged to workers by agents who recruit them. Later in 2014, the Guggenheim&#x27;s architect, Gehry, commented that working with the Abu Dhabi officials to implement the law to improve the labor conditions at the museum&#x27;s site is &quot;a moral responsibility.&quot; He encouraged the TDIC to build additional worker housing and proposed that the contractor cover the cost of the recruitment fees. In 2012, TDIC engaged PricewaterhouseCoopers as an independent monitor required to issue reports every quarter. Labor lawyer Scott Horton told &quot;Architectural Record&quot; that he hoped the Guggenheim project will influence the treatment of workers on other Saadiyat sites and will &quot;serve as a model for doing things right.&quot;

== See also ==

* Center for Research and Restoration of Museums of France
* Hôtel du Louvre
* List of museums in Paris
* Musée de la mode et du textile
* List of tourist attractions in Paris
* List of largest art museums

== References ==
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* Digital Collection
* Louvre&#x27;s 360x180 degree panorama virtual tour
* Louvre virtual tours</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="4" end="10" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="23" end="36" title="Louvre" label="Louvre Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207694" start="56" end="66" title="art museum" label="art museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="70" end="75" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q603022" start="155" end="165" title="Rive Droite" label="Right Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="173" end="178" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161741" start="198" end="216" title="1st arrondissement of Paris" label="1st arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q621154" start="265" end="274" title="Western canon" label="canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="284" end="295" title="Art of Europe" label="Western art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="317" end="326" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151952" start="340" end="353" title="Venus de Milo" label="Venus de Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216402" start="371" end="385" title="Winged Victory" label="Winged Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075988" start="421" end="434" title="Louvre Palace" label="Louvre Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="492" end="501" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992417" start="519" end="534" title="Medieval Louvre" label="Medieval Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="676" end="685" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="733" end="745" title="French kings" label="French kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="844" end="853" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="864" end="884" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q337579" start="1100" end="1143" title="Académie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture" label="Académie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="1189" end="1195" title="Salon (gathering)" label="salons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1259" end="1276" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="1282" end="1299" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1668" end="1676" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754837" start="1688" end="1713" title="Napoleonic looting of art" label="Napoleonic looting of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="1966" end="1977" title="Louis XVIII of France" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="1982" end="1991" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="2008" end="2028" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="2132" end="2146" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145903" start="2210" end="2230" title="Egyptian Antiquities" label="Egyptian Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q258212" start="2232" end="2256" title="Near Eastern Antiquities" label="Near Eastern Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247086" start="2258" end="2263" title="Greek art" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q830331" start="2265" end="2273" title="Etruscan art" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354732" start="2279" end="2296" title="Roman art" label="Roman Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="2298" end="2309" title="Islamic Art" label="Islamic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q631931" start="2322" end="2337" title="Decorative Arts" label="Decorative Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075109" start="2582" end="2599" title="objet d&amp;#x27;art" label="objets d&amp;#x27;art"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610625" start="2793" end="2820" title="List of largest museums" label="largest museum in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="2924" end="2943" title="2024 Paris Olympics" label="2024 Paris Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888113" start="2964" end="2996" title="List of most-visited museums" label="most-visited museum in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q182955" start="3011" end="3026" title="Vatican Museums" label="Vatican Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075988" start="3097" end="3110" title="Louvre Palace" label="Louvre Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q818517" start="3152" end="3169" title="Tuileries Gardens" label="Tuileries Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="3187" end="3192" title="Paris Metro" label="Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461794" start="3206" end="3219" title="Louvre - Rivoli (Paris Métro)" label="Louvre-Rivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467113" start="3224" end="3252" title="Palais Royal - Musée du Louvre (Paris Métro)" label="Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940350" start="3307" end="3326" title="Carrousel du Louvre" label="Carrousel du Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113648" start="3356" end="3368" title="Grand Louvre" label="Grand Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13397" start="3581" end="3595" title="Louvre Pyramid" label="Louvre Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q141747" start="3779" end="3792" title="rue de Rivoli" label="rue de Rivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q181974" start="4091" end="4117" title="French Republican calendar" label="French Republican calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4829" end="4841" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="5099" end="5111" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q779225" start="5491" end="5507" title="differential GPS" label="differential GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190246" start="5614" end="5629" title="Nintendo Direct" label="Nintendo Direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q316013" start="5640" end="5652" title="Satoru Iwata" label="Satoru Iwata"/>
<link wikidata="Q12382" start="5657" end="5673" title="Shigeru Miyamoto" label="Shigeru Miyamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075988" start="5916" end="5929" title="Louvre Palace" label="Louvre Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="5969" end="5983" title="Philip II of France" label="King Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="6067" end="6085" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="6097" end="6105" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992417" start="6135" end="6150" title="Medieval Louvre" label="Medieval Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568738" start="6409" end="6438" title="Grand Larousse encyclopédique" label="Grand Larousse encyclopédique"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029925" start="6490" end="6502" title="wolf hunting" label="wolf hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627230" start="6593" end="6605" title="Burgundofara" label="Burgundofara"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="6967" end="6976" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="7050" end="7059" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297212" start="7086" end="7104" title="French Renaissance architecture" label="French Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179544" start="7582" end="7597" title="House of France" label="House of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q201428" start="7606" end="7629" title="Palace of Fontainebleau" label="Palace of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="7726" end="7743" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="7757" end="7766" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="8277" end="8281" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q289796" start="8414" end="8444" title="Étienne La Font de Saint-Yenne" label="Étienne La Font de Saint-Yenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="8529" end="8537" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q329852" start="8648" end="8665" title="Luxembourg Palace" label="Luxembourg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q584267" start="8688" end="8711" title="Charles François Paul Le Normant de Tournehem" label="Le Normant de Tournehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258999" start="8720" end="8738" title="Abel François Poisson" label="Marquis de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571" start="8890" end="8906" title="Andrea del Sarto" label="Andrea del Sarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="8947" end="8954" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="8956" end="8962" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9440" start="8964" end="8972" title="Paolo Veronese" label="Veronese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="8974" end="8983" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="8985" end="8992" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150679" start="8996" end="9004" title="Anthony van Dyck" label="Van Dyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="9086" end="9103" title="Louis XVIII of France" label="Count of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="9162" end="9171" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q460371" start="9243" end="9266" title="Charles-Claude Flahaut de la Billaderie, comte d&amp;#x27;Angiviller" label="comte d&amp;#x27;Angiviller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915606" start="9383" end="9396" title="Musée des Plans-Reliefs" label="plans-reliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="9811" end="9840" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="National Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="9976" end="9985" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="10754" end="10761" title="émigrés" label="émigrés"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10766" end="10772" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478131" start="10789" end="10804" title="biens nationaux" label="biens nationaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670039" start="10883" end="10889" title="Livre tournois" label="livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004236" start="11008" end="11027" title="Treaty of Tolentino" label="Treaty of Tolentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q465762" start="11080" end="11087" title="Laocoön and His Sons" label="Laocoön"/>
<link wikidata="Q619135" start="11104" end="11120" title="Apollo Belvedere" label="Apollo Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q326724" start="11464" end="11471" title="Bastille Day" label="14 July"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094627" start="11561" end="11583" title="Galerie d&amp;#x27;Apollon" label="Galerie d&amp;#x27;Apollon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151209" start="11806" end="11821" title="Anne of Austria" label="Anne of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q468618" start="11985" end="12007" title="Dominique Vivant Denon" label="Dominique Vivant Denon"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="12060" end="12077" title="French Invasion of Egypt (1798)" label="Egyptian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q691834" start="12189" end="12211" title="Ennio Quirino Visconti" label="Ennio Quirino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="12221" end="12240" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547" start="12251" end="12265" title="Antonio Canova" label="Antonio Canova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270929" start="12281" end="12294" title="Léon Dufourny" label="Léon Dufourny"/>
<link wikidata="Q652952" start="12298" end="12313" title="Pierre-François-Léonard Fontaine" label="Pierre Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="12569" end="12580" title="war looting" label="war looting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004236" start="12619" end="12638" title="Treaty of Tolentino" label="Treaty of Tolentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q206752" start="12706" end="12728" title="Treaty of Campo Formio" label="Treaty of Campo Formio"/>
<link wikidata="Q685704" start="12745" end="12770" title="Count Philipp von Cobenzl" label="Count Philipp von Cobenzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="12778" end="12795" title="Austrian Monarchy" label="Austrian Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="12906" end="12931" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994701" start="13110" end="13130" title="Horses of Saint Mark" label="Horses of Saint Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="13204" end="13218" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q631104" start="13294" end="13322" title="Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel" label="Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="13734" end="13742" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="14029" end="14040" title="Louis XVIII" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="14079" end="14087" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185255" start="14154" end="14169" title="The Wedding at Cana (Veronese)" label="Wedding at Cana"/>
<link wikidata="Q271676" start="14208" end="14215" title="Charles Le Brun" label="Le Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q540338" start="14241" end="14247" title="Alessandro Albani" label="Albani"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="14322" end="14330" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="14350" end="14363" title="Second French Empire" label="Second Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206874" start="14441" end="14451" title="civil list" label="civil list"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="14891" end="14910" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="14924" end="14935" title="Louis XVIII" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="14940" end="14949" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000930" start="15066" end="15077" title="Cour Carrée" label="Cour Carrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167079" start="15106" end="15126" title="Percier and Fontaine" label="Percier and Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q260" start="15544" end="15569" title="Jean-François Champollion" label="Jean-François Champollion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044749" start="15622" end="15656" title="Department of Egyptian Antiquities of the Louvre" label="Department of Egyptian Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662608" start="15706" end="15725" title="Edmé-Antoine Durand" label="Edmé-Antoine Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q733780" start="15727" end="15737" title="Henry Salt (Egyptologist)" label="Henry Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q822895" start="15767" end="15786" title="Bernardino Drovetti" label="Bernardino Drovetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q175250" start="15827" end="15856" title="Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia" label="Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877" start="15889" end="15901" title="Museo Egizio" label="Museo Egizio"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="15905" end="15910" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="16116" end="16136" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330260" start="16170" end="16198" title="Musée des Monuments français (1795-1816)" label="Musée des Monuments Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="16245" end="16256" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465751" start="16354" end="16375" title="Louis Antoine, Duke of Angoulême" label="Dauphin Louis Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q525949" start="16419" end="16449" title="Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau" label="Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448129" start="16514" end="16541" title="Musée national de la Marine" label="Musée national de la Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q244490" start="16670" end="16675" title="attic" label="attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="16736" end="16751" title="July Revolution" label="July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="16753" end="16772" title="Louis Philippe I" label="King Louis Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="16820" end="16840" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329787" start="16848" end="16872" title="Musée de l&amp;#x27;Histoire de France (Versailles)" label="Museum of French History"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035292" start="17052" end="17070" title="Assyrian sculpture" label="Assyrian sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q720688" start="17097" end="17113" title="Paul-Émile Botta" label="Paul-Émile Botta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094674" start="17270" end="17285" title="Spanish gallery" label="Spanish gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984289" start="17396" end="17405" title="Louvre Colonnade" label="Colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="17608" end="17623" title="French Second Republic" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094627" start="17707" end="17729" title="Galerie d&amp;#x27;Apollon" label="Galerie d&amp;#x27;Apollon"/>
<link wikidata="Q262478" start="17801" end="17806" title="Salon (Paris)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127218" start="18031" end="18051" title="Adrien Prévost de Longpérier" label="Adrien de Longpérier"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696114" start="18057" end="18071" title="musée mexicain" label="musée mexicain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091532" start="18139" end="18156" title="pre-Columbian art" label="pre-Columbian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="18193" end="18205" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q106688208" start="18301" end="18321" title="Musée des Souverains" label="Musée des Souverains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984289" start="18329" end="18343" title="Louvre Colonnade" label="Colonnade Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q442379" start="18514" end="18532" title="Campana collection" label="Campana collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q794916" start="18835" end="18849" title="Louis Visconti" label="Louis Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q323877" start="18854" end="18867" title="Hector Lefuel" label="Hector Lefuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726910" start="18925" end="18938" title="Cour Napoléon" label="Cour Napoléon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234364" start="19118" end="19134" title="Tuileries Palace" label="Tuileries Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19295" end="19306" title="Salon carré" label="Salon carré"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="19410" end="19423" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q234364" start="19548" end="19564" title="Tuileries Palace" label="Tuileries Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605701" start="19977" end="19997" title="Henry Barbet de Jouy" label="Henry Barbet de Jouy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000930" start="20502" end="20513" title="Cour Carrée" label="Cour Carrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q274901" start="20582" end="20595" title="Carolus-Duran" label="Carolus-Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q182021" start="20618" end="20639" title="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q329852" start="20681" end="20698" title="Luxembourg Palace" label="Luxembourg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="20723" end="20737" title="Third French Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197963" start="20895" end="20908" title="Louis La Caze" label="Louis La Caze"/>
<link wikidata="Q207447" start="20928" end="20935" title="Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin" label="Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q704938" start="20937" end="20946" title="Alexandre-Évariste Fragonard" label="Fragonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="20948" end="20957" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q183221" start="20962" end="20969" title="Jean-Antoine Watteau" label="Watteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q216402" start="20990" end="21018" title="Winged Victory of Samothrace" label="Winged Victory of Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q55404407" start="21126" end="21139" title="Escalier Daru" label="Escalier Daru"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="21170" end="21174" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729938" start="21271" end="21287" title="Palace of Darius in Susa" label="Palace of Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488087" start="21375" end="21401" title="Société des amis du Louvre" label="Société des amis du Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q521671" start="21473" end="21504" title="Pietà of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon" label="Pietà of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203371" start="21639" end="21657" title="Georges de La Tour" label="Georges de La Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q467167" start="21694" end="21720" title="Edmond James de Rothschild" label="Baron Edmond de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="22013" end="22017" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696114" start="22072" end="22086" title="musée mexicain" label="musée mexicain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062726" start="22111" end="22149" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Ethnographie du Trocadéro" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Ethnographie du Trocadéro"/>
<link wikidata="Q244490" start="22288" end="22293" title="attic" label="attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342844" start="22459" end="22486" title="National Archaeological Museum, France" label="National Antiquities Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60847808" start="22490" end="22511" title="Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q106809029" start="22521" end="22535" title="Chinese Museum (Fontainebleau)" label="Chinese Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201428" start="22543" end="22566" title="Palace of Fontainebleau" label="Palace of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360213" start="22616" end="22634" title="Palais de Chaillot" label="Palais de Chaillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q149444" start="22687" end="22696" title="Asian art" label="Asian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q860994" start="22715" end="22728" title="Guimet Museum" label="Guimet Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="22787" end="22798" title="Islamic art" label="Islamic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132143" start="22852" end="22863" title="Henri Verne" label="Henri Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55404407" start="23063" end="23076" title="Escalier Daru" label="Escalier Daru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000930" start="23246" end="23257" title="Cour Carrée" label="Cour Carrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071002" start="23297" end="23308" title="period room" label="period room"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="23511" end="23523" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743214" start="23567" end="23599" title="Evacuation of the Louvre museum art collection during World War II" label="evacuation of its art collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="23627" end="23638" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="23682" end="23691" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q205367" start="23728" end="23747" title="Château de Chambord" label="Château de Chambord"/>
<link wikidata="Q216402" start="23887" end="23915" title="Winged Victory of Samothrace" label="Winged Victory of Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q151952" start="23936" end="23949" title="Venus de Milo" label="Venus de Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142363" start="23973" end="23992" title="Château de Valençay" label="Château de Valençay"/>
<link wikidata="Q153793" start="24694" end="24708" title="Georges Braque" label="Georges Braque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026435" start="24785" end="24798" title="Pierre Paulin" label="Pierre Paulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564572" start="24969" end="24987" title="Joseph-André Motte" label="Joseph-André Motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373064" start="25053" end="25070" title="Pavillon de Flore" label="Pavillon de Flore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="25376" end="25395" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115270" start="25420" end="25434" title="Grands Projets of François Mitterrand" label="Grands Projets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416512" start="25474" end="25490" title="Ministry of the Economy and Finance (France)" label="Finance Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319378" start="25649" end="25674" title="Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris" label="Musée des Arts Décoratifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="25743" end="25752" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q13397" start="25885" end="25898" title="Louvre Pyramid" label="glass pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000930" start="26159" end="26170" title="Cour Carrée" label="Cour Carrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804443" start="26313" end="26323" title="Italo Rota" label="Italo Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q375674" start="26642" end="26662" title="Jean-Michel Wilmotte" label="Jean-Michel Wilmotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940350" start="26704" end="26723" title="Carrousel du Louvre" label="Carrousel du Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177458" start="26741" end="26757" title="Louvre Inverted Pyramid" label="Inverted Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="27284" end="27298" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q167863" start="27555" end="27592" title="Musée du Quai Branly – Jacques Chirac" label="Musée du Quai Branly – Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738358" start="28177" end="28207" title="Alwaleed Philanthropies" label="Al Waleed bin Talal Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360756" start="28227" end="28240" title="Mario Bellini" label="Mario Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811177" start="28245" end="28259" title="Rudy Ricciotti" label="Rudy Ricciotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q170344" start="28286" end="28299" title="Anselm Kiefer" label="Anselm Kiefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q347699" start="28357" end="28365" title="Claude Perrault" label="Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984289" start="28366" end="28375" title="Louvre Colonnade" label="Colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743768" start="28498" end="28512" title="Henri Loyrette" label="Henri Loyrette"/>
<link wikidata="Q153793" start="28593" end="28606" title="Georges Braque" label="George Braque"/>
<link wikidata="Q159566" start="28635" end="28645" title="Cy Twombly" label="Cy Twombly"/>
<link wikidata="Q667780" start="29154" end="29171" title="François Morellet" label="François Morellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000930" start="29493" end="29504" title="Cour Carrée" label="Cour Carrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167200" start="29609" end="29626" title="Jean-Luc Martinez" label="Jean-Luc Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418048" start="29747" end="29760" title="Elias Crespin" label="Elias Crespin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984289" start="29845" end="29863" title="Louvre Colonnade" label="Perrault Colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q89113106" start="29926" end="29991" title="impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the arts and cultural heritage" label="impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the arts and cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="30213" end="30226" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="30496" end="30511" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="31091" end="31100" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216402" start="31109" end="31137" title="Winged Victory of Samothrace" label="Winged Victory of Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="31409" end="31413" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="31557" end="31570" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="31576" end="31590" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="31596" end="31607" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q577622" start="31609" end="31619" title="Coptic art" label="Coptic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="31629" end="31634" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="31636" end="31645" title="History of Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="31651" end="31660" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468618" start="31799" end="31815" title="Dominique Vivant" label="Dominique Vivant"/>
<link wikidata="Q260" start="31858" end="31883" title="Jean-François Champollion" label="Jean-François Champollion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48584" start="31899" end="31912" title="Rosetta Stone" label="Rosetta Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="31914" end="31923" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662608" start="32049" end="32068" title="Edmé-Antoine Durand" label="Edmé-Antoine Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q733780" start="32070" end="32080" title="Henry Salt (Egyptologist)" label="Henry Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q822895" start="32086" end="32105" title="Bernardino Drovetti" label="Bernardino Drovetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q311850" start="32179" end="32195" title="Auguste Mariette" label="Auguste Mariette"/>
<link wikidata="Q201219" start="32212" end="32227" title="Egyptian Museum" label="Egyptian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715" start="32269" end="32276" title="Memphis, Egypt" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q378034" start="32335" end="32352" title="The Seated Scribe" label="The Seated Scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028852" start="32376" end="32397" title="Great Sphinx of Tanis" label="Great Sphinx of Tanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="32469" end="32476" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q695039" start="32611" end="32630" title="Gebel el-Arak Knife" label="Gebel el-Arak Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="32857" end="32863" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q280965" start="32874" end="32887" title="Amenemhatankh" label="Amenemhatankh"/>
<link wikidata="Q169040" start="33017" end="33025" title="Nephthys" label="Nephthys"/>
<link wikidata="Q133343" start="33069" end="33075" title="Hathor" label="Hathor"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="33345" end="33350" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="33411" end="33417" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="33419" end="33430" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q720688" start="33535" end="33551" title="Paul-Émile Botta" label="Paul-Émile Botta"/>
<link wikidata="Q253208" start="33578" end="33587" title="Khorsabad" label="Khorsabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208336" start="33609" end="33618" title="Sargon II" label="Sargon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="33764" end="33769" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="33786" end="33791" title="Akkad (city)" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088425" start="33850" end="33871" title="Stele of the Vultures" label="Stele of the Vultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="33899" end="33904" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q297506" start="33916" end="33925" title="Naram-Sin of Akkad" label="Naram-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="33988" end="34004" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="34010" end="34027" title="Code of Hammurabi" label="Code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433261" start="34058" end="34072" title="Babylonian Law" label="Babylonian Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q23343" start="34170" end="34193" title="Investiture of Zimrilim" label="Investiture of Zimrilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q477556" start="34230" end="34247" title="Statue of Ebih-Il" label="Statue of Ebih-Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="34289" end="34293" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="34389" end="34395" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q52725080" start="34417" end="34445" title="Sarcophagus of Eshmunazar II" label="Sarcophagus of Eshmunazar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157155" start="34488" end="34500" title="Ernest Renan" label="Ernest Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878812" start="34519" end="34538" title="Mission de Phénicie" label="Mission de Phénicie"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078904" start="34628" end="34662" title="Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions" label="Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q114666589" start="34876" end="34899" title="Ain Nechma inscriptions" label="Ain Nechma inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="35077" end="35087" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="35229" end="35238" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137392" start="35289" end="35304" title="History of the Cyclades" label="Cycladic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="35424" end="35433" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151952" start="35509" end="35522" title="Venus de Milo" label="Venus de Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q619135" start="35554" end="35570" title="Apollo Belvedere" label="Apollo Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901063" start="35704" end="35717" title="Borghese Vase" label="Borghese Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="35858" end="35865" title="Archaic Greece" label="archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020438" start="35928" end="35943" title="Lady of Auxerre" label="Lady of Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="35984" end="35988" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q185392" start="36100" end="36118" title="Borghese Gladiator" label="Borghese Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="36165" end="36176" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q738680" start="36394" end="36409" title="Greek pottery" label="Greek potteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="36596" end="36603" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172567" start="36608" end="36620" title="Marcus Annius Verus (disambiguation)" label="Annius Verus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858460" start="36653" end="36671" title="Apollo of Piombino" label="Apollo of Piombino"/>
<link wikidata="Q629316" start="37068" end="37092" title="Pyxis of al-Mughira" label="Pyxide d&amp;#x27;al-Mughira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="37130" end="37139" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="37238" end="37244" title="Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23323" start="37280" end="37301" title="Suaire de Saint-Josse" label="Shroud of Saint-Josse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8279" start="37368" end="37377" title="Shahnameh" label="Shahnameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43459" start="37410" end="37418" title="Ferdowsi" label="Ferdowsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237440" start="37576" end="37600" title="Lamia bint Majed Al Saud" label="Lamia bint Majed Al Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="38044" end="38056" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83862" start="38070" end="38081" title="Dying Slave" label="Dying Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q212852" start="38438" end="38453" title="Childebert I" label="King Childebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206419" start="38597" end="38611" title="Louis Courajod" label="Louis Courajod"/>
<link wikidata="Q46805" start="38987" end="38997" title="Romanesque art" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q551643" start="39229" end="39240" title="Jean Goujon" label="Jean Goujon"/>
<link wikidata="Q554943" start="39265" end="39278" title="Germain Pilon" label="Germain Pilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="39408" end="39428" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Gian Lorenzo Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647650" start="39443" end="39469" title="Bust of Cardinal Richelieu" label="Bust of Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q289246" start="39471" end="39495" title="Étienne Maurice Falconet" label="Étienne Maurice Falconet"/>
<link wikidata="Q68181664" start="39565" end="39581" title="François and Michel Anguier" label="François Anguier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="39599" end="39611" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547" start="39627" end="39641" title="Antonio Canova" label="Antonio Canova"/>
<link wikidata="Q517408" start="39655" end="39690" title="Psyche Revived by Cupid&amp;#x27;s Kiss" label="Psyche Revived by Cupid&amp;#x27;s Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q20644763" start="39778" end="39790" title="Alfred Barye" label="Alfred Barye"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578357" start="39795" end="39810" title="Émile Guillemin" label="Émile Guillemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075109" start="39842" end="39859" title="Objet d&amp;#x27;art" label="Objets d&amp;#x27;art"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="40052" end="40073" title="Basilique Saint-Denis" label="Basilique Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044853" start="40238" end="40249" title="pietre dure" label="pietre dure"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="40428" end="40439" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="40462" end="40473" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="40478" end="40486" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q209671" start="40573" end="40580" title="faience" label="faïence"/>
<link wikidata="Q442379" start="40601" end="40619" title="Campana collection" label="Campana collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="40982" end="40998" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q220136" start="41093" end="41104" title="Giambologna" label="Giambologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q188965" start="41244" end="41263" title="Madame de Pompadour" label="Madame de Pompadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q206493" start="41271" end="41277" title="Sèvres" label="Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="41298" end="41310" title="Napoleon III of France" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561162" start="41382" end="41398" title="Gilbert R. Chagoury" label="Gilbert Chagoury"/>
<link wikidata="Q601170" start="41628" end="41648" title="Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Marquis de Seignelay" label="Colbert de Seignelay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="42194" end="42201" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="42206" end="42218" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="42273" end="42290" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23402" start="42418" end="42436" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="42503" end="42518" title="1848 Revolution" label="1848 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q521671" start="42763" end="42776" title="Pietà of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon" label="Avignon Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q966851" start="42786" end="42804" title="Enguerrand Quarton" label="Enguerrand Quarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49898" start="42970" end="42986" title="Hyacinthe Rigaud" label="Hyacinthe Rigaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="43017" end="43036" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231009" start="43050" end="43076" title="The Coronation of Napoleon" label="The Coronation of Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184212" start="43084" end="43102" title="Théodore Géricault" label="Théodore Géricault"/>
<link wikidata="Q212616" start="43116" end="43138" title="The Raft of the Medusa" label="The Raft of the Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="43150" end="43166" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q29530" start="43180" end="43206" title="Liberty Leading the People" label="Liberty Leading the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="43399" end="43415" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Johannes Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216387" start="43429" end="43442" title="The Lacemaker (Vermeer)" label="The Lacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q544315" start="43459" end="43473" title="The Astronomer (Vermeer)" label="The Astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104884" start="43481" end="43503" title="Caspar David Friedrich" label="Caspar David Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q24213" start="43517" end="43534" title="The Tree of Crows" label="The Tree of Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="43542" end="43551" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q272277" start="43599" end="43620" title="Bathsheba at Her Bath" label="Bathsheba at Her Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681" start="43758" end="43773" title="Andrea Mantegna" label="Andrea Mantegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q17169" start="43778" end="43794" title="Giovanni Bellini" label="Giovanni Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="43979" end="43996" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="44010" end="44019" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q563727" start="44033" end="44063" title="The Virgin and Child with St. Anne (Leonardo da Vinci)" label="Virgin and Child with St. Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q783215" start="44077" end="44097" title="St. John the Baptist (Leonardo)" label="St. John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q269342" start="44115" end="44135" title="Madonna of the Rocks" label="Madonna of the Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q982011" start="44175" end="44195" title="Giambattista Pittoni" label="Giambattista Pittoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029378" start="44209" end="44233" title="The Continence of Scipio" label="The Continence of Scipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930210" start="44247" end="44269" title="Susanna and the Elders" label="Susanna and the Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206860" start="44283" end="44302" title="Bacchus and Ariadne" label="Bacchus and Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44316" end="44330" title="Mars and Venus (Pittoni)" label="Mars and Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="44349" end="44359" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610675" start="44384" end="44402" title="The Fortune Teller (Caravaggio)" label="The Fortune Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q597114" start="44419" end="44438" title="Death of the Virgin (Caravaggio)" label="Death of the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="44492" end="44498" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197963" start="44679" end="44692" title="Louis La Caze" label="Louis La Caze"/>
<link wikidata="Q183221" start="44855" end="44870" title="Antoine Watteau" label="Antoine Watteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306138" start="45253" end="45259" title="Old master print" label="prints"/>
<link wikidata="Q467167" start="45804" end="45824" title="Edmond James de Rothschild" label="Edmond de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q81689" start="46853" end="46870" title="The Da Vinci Code" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167200" start="47202" end="47219" title="Jean-Luc Martinez" label="Jean-Luc Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743768" start="47305" end="47319" title="Henri Loyrette" label="Henri Loyrette"/>
<link wikidata="Q966176" start="47364" end="47380" title="Pierre Rosenberg" label="Pierre Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q953345" start="47616" end="47634" title="High Museum of Art" label="High Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q384602" start="47730" end="47749" title="Minister of Culture (France)" label="Minister of culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q257752" start="47750" end="47769" title="Frédéric Mitterrand" label="Frédéric Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q167863" start="47943" end="47963" title="Musée du Quai Branly" label="Musée du Quai Branly"/>
<link wikidata="Q23402" start="47972" end="47990" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q198005" start="48044" end="48062" title="Aurélie Filippetti" label="Aurélie Filippetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q217841" start="48166" end="48172" title="Liévin" label="Liévin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000974" start="48387" end="48418" title="Rogers Stirk Harbour + Partners" label="Rogers Stirk Harbour + Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416890" start="48553" end="48587" title="Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco" label="Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738358" start="48836" end="48865" title="Alwaleed Bin Talal Foundation" label="Alwaleed Bin Talal Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="48976" end="49003" title="King Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="King Mohammed VI of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="49825" end="49831" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631008" start="50198" end="50213" title="National Museum of Iran" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q518977" start="50272" end="50284" title="André Godard" label="André Godard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50356" end="50377" title="Khorasan Grand Museum" label="Khorasan Grand Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q121157" start="50381" end="50388" title="Mashhad" label="Mashhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="50805" end="50814" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892745" start="50949" end="50963" title="Salvator Mundi (Leonardo)" label="Salvator Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215486" start="51062" end="51075" title="Vitruvian Man" label="Vitruvian Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855544" start="51154" end="51182" title="Galleria dell&amp;#x27;Accademia" label="Galleria dell&amp;#x27;Accademia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626534" start="51501" end="51518" title="Laurence des Cars" label="Laurence des Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="51639" end="51656" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="52769" end="52778" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18116180" start="53135" end="53166" title="Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel" label="Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q260" start="53186" end="53211" title="Jean-François Champollion" label="Jean-François Champollion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119629" start="53235" end="53256" title="Guillaume-Abel Blouet" label="Guillaume-Abel Blouet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19544314" start="53261" end="53284" title="Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois" label="Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147833" start="53294" end="53310" title="Morea expedition" label="Morea expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q720688" start="53355" end="53371" title="Paul-Émile Botta" label="Paul-Émile Botta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993049" start="53379" end="53393" title="Nineveh Plains" label="Nineveh Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="53406" end="53415" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q311850" start="53425" end="53441" title="Auguste Mariette" label="Auguste Mariette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522463" start="53465" end="53480" title="Victor Langlois (historian)" label="Victor Langlois"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="53484" end="53491" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157155" start="53501" end="53513" title="Ernest Renan" label="Ernest Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878812" start="53523" end="53542" title="Mission de Phénicie" label="Mission de Phénicie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772246" start="53557" end="53606" title="1860 civil conflict in Mount Lebanon and Damascus" label="1860 civil conflict in Mount Lebanon and Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q709657" start="53621" end="53632" title="Léon Heuzey" label="Léon Heuzey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140221" start="53637" end="53650" title="Honoré Daumet" label="Honoré Daumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="53654" end="53663" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16053" start="53673" end="53697" title="Eugène-Melchior de Vogüé" label="Eugène-Melchior de Vogüé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047815" start="53702" end="53716" title="Edmond Duthoit" label="Edmond Duthoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q216402" start="53741" end="53760" title="Charles Champoiseau" label="Charles Champoiseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="53764" end="53774" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="53787" end="53799" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q204096" start="53804" end="53810" title="Thasos" label="Thasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754052" start="53825" end="53838" title="Olivier Rayet" label="Olivier Rayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830898" start="53843" end="53872" title="Albert-Félix-Théophile Thomas" label="Albert-Félix-Théophile Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="53876" end="53881" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623694" start="53896" end="53926" title="Charles Simon Clermont-Ganneau" label="Charles Simon Clermont-Ganneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="53930" end="53939" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q990874" start="53981" end="53997" title="Ernest de Sarzec" label="Ernest de Sarzec"/>
<link wikidata="Q853946" start="54017" end="54022" title="Girsu" label="Girsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="54024" end="54035" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723040" start="54050" end="54061" title="Paul Girard" label="Paul Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285721" start="54081" end="54095" title="Edmond Pottier" label="Edmond Pottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q659722" start="54097" end="54112" title="Salomon Reinach" label="Salomon Reinach"/>
<link wikidata="Q609532" start="54137" end="54152" title="Myrina (Aeolis)" label="Myrina (Aeolis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624559" start="54167" end="54191" title="Marcel-Auguste Dieulafoy" label="Marcel-Auguste Dieulafoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460196" start="54196" end="54210" title="Jane Dieulafoy" label="Jane Dieulafoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="54214" end="54218" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27365" start="54258" end="54263" title="Tayma" label="Tayma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227551" start="54281" end="54311" title="Alfred Charles Auguste Foucher" label="Alfred Charles Auguste Foucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q20644128" start="54360" end="54372" title="Arthur Engel (numismatist)" label="Arthur Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q541964" start="54395" end="54412" title="Jacques de Morgan" label="Jacques de Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="54416" end="54420" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526725" start="54430" end="54441" title="Gaston Cros" label="Gaston Cros"/>
<link wikidata="Q853946" start="54461" end="54466" title="Girsu" label="Girsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q368821" start="54476" end="54488" title="Paul Pelliot" label="Paul Pelliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="54492" end="54509" title="Xinjiang" label="Chinese Turkestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21091582" start="54524" end="54538" title="Maurice Pézard" label="Maurice Pézard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508830" start="54570" end="54592" title="Georges Aaron Bénédite" label="Georges Aaron Bénédite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352388" start="54611" end="54634" title="François Thureau-Dangin" label="François Thureau-Dangin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395015" start="54662" end="54681" title="Henri de Genouillac" label="Henri de Genouillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472454" start="54716" end="54762" title="Institut Français d&amp;#x27;Archéologie Orientale" label="Institut Français d&amp;#x27;Archéologie Orientale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579997" start="55008" end="55022" title="Édouard Piette" label="Édouard Piette"/>
<link wikidata="Q541964" start="55076" end="55093" title="Jacques de Morgan" label="Jacques de Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069056" start="55232" end="55258" title="Fernand Bisson de la Roque" label="Fernand Bisson de la Roque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402281" start="55282" end="55297" title="Bernard Bruyère" label="Bernard Bruyère"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134275" start="55321" end="55334" title="Raymond Weill" label="Raymond Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q689251" start="55353" end="55366" title="Pierre Montet" label="Pierre Montet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="55397" end="55409" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q522200" start="55459" end="55471" title="André Parrot" label="André Parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="55475" end="55486" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari, Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128825" start="55501" end="55533" title="Claude Frédéric-Armand Schaeffer" label="Claude Frédéric-Armand Schaeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="55537" end="55543" title="Ugarit" label="Ugarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386600" start="55565" end="55580" title="Roman Ghirshman" label="Roman Ghirshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075988" start="55832" end="55845" title="Louvre Palace" label="Louvre Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q217841" start="55963" end="55969" title="Liévin" label="Liévin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124095" start="56068" end="56082" title="Musée de Cluny" label="Musée de Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q818517" start="56318" end="56334" title="Tuileries Garden" label="Tuileries Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="56548" end="56561" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23402" start="56760" end="56778" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q360149" start="56909" end="56931" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Avignon" label="archbishops of Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q143463" start="56946" end="56958" title="Palais des Papes" label="Papal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="56962" end="56969" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q672222" start="57036" end="57051" title="Michel Laclotte" label="Michel Laclotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325510" start="57336" end="57348" title="plaster cast" label="plaster cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q41497113" start="57486" end="57505" title="Sorbonne University" label="Sorbonne University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="57556" end="57562" title="May 68" label="May 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377428" start="57799" end="57812" title="Petite Écurie" label="Petite Écurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="57830" end="57847" title="Versailles Palace" label="Versailles Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="57959" end="57975" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q439594" start="58203" end="58224" title="Jean-Jacques Aillagon" label="Jean-Jacques Aillagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165271" start="58480" end="58484" title="Lens, Pas-de-Calais" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q63263" start="58547" end="58567" title="Jean-Pierre Raffarin" label="Jean-Pierre Raffarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q737536" start="58603" end="58608" title="SANAA" label="SANAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="58763" end="58780" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677767" start="58826" end="58841" title="Hauts-de-France" label="Hauts-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176133" start="59375" end="59391" title="Louvre Abu Dhabi" label="Louvre Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q707980" start="59759" end="59785" title="Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres" label="Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198382" start="60020" end="60035" title="Saadiyat Island" label="Saadiyat Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q214317" start="60077" end="60088" title="Jean Nouvel" label="Jean Nouvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928594" start="60113" end="60125" title="Buro Happold" label="Buro Happold"/>
<link wikidata="Q25292" start="60247" end="60256" title="date palm" label="date palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="60270" end="60275" title="oasis" label="oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="60425" end="60448" title="Centre Georges Pompidou" label="Centre Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q23402" start="60454" end="60472" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591574" start="60474" end="60484" title="Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q860994" start="60490" end="60503" title="Guimet Museum" label="Guimet Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q650519" start="60509" end="60520" title="Musée Rodin" label="Musée Rodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167863" start="60530" end="60550" title="Musée du quai Branly" label="Musée du quai Branly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754837" start="60643" end="60649" title="Napoleonic looting of art" label="seized"/>
<link wikidata="Q328376" start="60699" end="60711" title="Nazi plunder" label="by the Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="61171" end="61185" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100139" start="61210" end="61224" title="Dendera zodiac" label="Dendera zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q48584" start="61238" end="61251" title="Rosetta Stone" label="Rosetta Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="61537" end="61543" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11921706" start="62142" end="62148" title="Federico Gentili Di Giuseppe" label="During"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="62149" end="62164" title="German occupation of France during World War II" label="Nazi occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215569" start="63387" end="63398" title="Alain Juppé" label="Alain Juppé"/>
<link wikidata="Q832370" start="63444" end="63457" title="Jean Mattéoli" label="Jean Mattéoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11921706" start="63822" end="63841" title="Federico Gentili Di Giuseppe" label="Gentili di Giuseppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q539312" start="64169" end="64184" title="Serge Klarsfeld" label="Serge Klarsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787034" start="65068" end="65088" title="Architectural Record" label="Architectural Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="65847" end="65859" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323783" start="66061" end="66078" title="Richard Armstrong (museum director)" label="Richard Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="66753" end="66775" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945440" start="67089" end="67145" title="Center for Research and Restoration of Museums of France" label="Center for Research and Restoration of Museums of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146289" start="67148" end="67163" title="Hôtel du Louvre" label="Hôtel du Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423272" start="67166" end="67190" title="List of museums in Paris" label="List of museums in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055599" start="67193" end="67223" title="Musée de la mode et du textile" label="Musée de la mode et du textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403319" start="67226" end="67262" title="List of tourist attractions in Paris" label="List of tourist attractions in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036694" start="67265" end="67292" title="List of largest art museums" label="List of largest art museums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17547" wikidata="Q316" url="?curid=17547" title="Love">
<text>Love encompasses a range of strong and positive emotional and mental states, from the most sublime virtue or good habit, or the deepest interpersonal affection, to the simplest pleasure. An example of this range of meanings is that the love of a mother differs from the love of a spouse, which differs from the love of food. Most commonly, love refers to a feeling of strong attraction and emotional attachment.

Love is considered to be both positive and negative, with its virtue representing human kindness, compassion, and affection—&quot;the unselfish, loyal, and benevolent concern for the good of another&quot;—and its vice representing a human moral flaw akin to vanity, selfishness, amour-propre, and egotism. It may also describe compassionate and affectionate actions towards other humans, oneself, or animals. In its various forms, love acts as a major facilitator of interpersonal relationships, and owing to its central psychological importance, is one of the most common themes in the creative arts. Love has been postulated to be a function that keeps human beings together against menaces and to facilitate the continuation of the species.

Ancient Greek philosophers identified six forms of love: familial love (), friendly love or platonic love (), romantic love (), self-love (), guest love (), and divine or unconditional love (). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of love: fatuous love, unrequited love, empty love, companionate love, consummate love, infatuated love (limerence), amour de soi, and courtly love. Numerous cultures have also distinguished , , , , , , , , , , charity, (and other variants or symbioses of these states), as culturally unique words, definitions, or expressions of love in regard to specified &quot;moments&quot; currently lacking in the English language.

The color wheel theory of love defines three primary, three secondary, and nine tertiary love styles, describing them in terms of the traditional color wheel. The triangular theory of love suggests intimacy, passion, and commitment are core components of love. Love has additional religious or spiritual meaning. This diversity of uses and meanings, combined with the complexity of the feelings involved, makes love unusually difficult to consistently define, compared to other emotional states.

==Definitions==
The word &quot;love&quot; can have a variety of related but distinct meanings in different contexts. Many other languages use multiple words to express some of the different concepts that in English are denoted as &quot;love&quot;; one example is the plurality of Greek concepts for &quot;love&quot; (, , , ). Cultural differences in conceptualizing love makes it difficult to establish a universal definition.

Although the nature or essence of love is a subject of frequent debate, different aspects of the word can be clarified by determining what is &quot;not&quot; love (antonyms of &quot;love&quot;). Love, as a general expression of positive sentiment (a stronger form of &quot;like&quot;), is commonly contrasted with hate (or neutral apathy). As a less sexual and more emotionally intimate form of romantic attachment, love is commonly contrasted with lust. As an interpersonal relationship with romantic overtones, love is sometimes contrasted with friendship, although the word &quot;love&quot; is often applied to close friendships or platonic love. Further possible ambiguities come with usages like &quot;girlfriend&quot;, &quot;boyfriend&quot;, and &quot;just good friends&quot;.

 Abstractly discussed, &quot;love&quot; usually refers to a feeling one person experiences for another person. Love often involves caring for, or identifying with, a person or thing (cf. vulnerability and care theory of love), including oneself (cf. narcissism). In addition to cross-cultural differences in understanding love, ideas about love have also changed greatly over time. Some historians date modern conceptions of romantic love to courtly Europe during or after the Middle Ages, although the prior existence of romantic attachments is attested by ancient love poetry.

The complex and of love often reduces its discourse to a thought-terminating cliché. Several common proverbs regard love, from Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Love conquers all&quot; to The Beatles&#x27; &quot;All You Need Is Love&quot;. St. Thomas Aquinas, following Aristotle, defines love as &quot;to will the good of another.&quot; Bertrand Russell describes love as &quot;absolute value,&quot; as opposed to relative value. Philosopher Gottfried Leibniz said that love is &quot;to be delighted by the happiness of another.&quot; Meher Baba stated that in love there is a &quot;feeling of unity&quot; and an &quot;active appreciation of the intrinsic worth of the object of love.&quot; Biologist Jeremy Griffith defines love as &quot;unconditional selflessness&quot;. According to Ambrose Bierce, love is a temporary insanity curable by marriage.

==Impersonal==
People can express love towards things other than humans; this can range from expressing a strong liking of something, such as &quot;I love popcorn&quot; or that something is essential to one&#x27;s identity, such as &quot;I love being an actor&quot;.

People can have a profound dedication and immense appreciation for an object, principle, or objective, thereby experiencing a sense of love towards it. For example, compassionate outreach and volunteer workers&#x27; &quot;love&quot; of their cause may sometimes be born not of interpersonal love but impersonal love, altruism, and strong spiritual or political convictions.

People can also &quot;love&quot; material objects, animals, or activities if they invest themselves in bonding or otherwise identifying with those things. If sexual passion is also involved, then this feeling is called paraphilia.

==Interpersonal==

Interpersonal love refers to love between human beings. It is a much more potent sentiment than &quot;liking&quot; a person. Unrequited love refers to feelings of love that are not reciprocated. Interpersonal love is most closely associated with interpersonal relationships. Such love might exist between family members, friends, and couples. There are several psychological disorders related to love, such as erotomania.

Throughout history, philosophy and religion have speculated about the phenomenon of love. In the 20th century, the science of psychology has studied the subject. The sciences of anthropology, neuroscience, and biology have also added to the understanding of the concept of love.

===Biological basis===

Biological models of sex tend to view love as a mammalian drive, much like hunger or thirst. Helen Fisher, an anthropologist and human behavior researcher, divides the experience of love into three partly overlapping stages: lust, attraction, and attachment. Lust is the feeling of sexual desire; romantic attraction determines what partners find attractive and pursue, ; and attachment involves sharing a home, parental duties, mutual defense, and in humans involves feelings of safety and security. Three distinct neural circuitries, including neurotransmitters, and three behavioral patterns, are associated with these three romantic styles.
Lust is the initial passionate sexual desire that promotes mating, and involves the increased release of hormones such as testosterone and estrogen. These effects rarely last more than a few weeks or months. Attraction is the more individualized and romantic desire for a specific candidate for mating, which develops out of lust as commitment to an individual mate form. Recent studies in neuroscience have indicated that as people fall in love, the brain consistently releases a certain set of chemicals, including the neurotransmitter hormones dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, the same compounds released by amphetamine, stimulating the brain&#x27;s pleasure center and leading to side effects such as increased heart rate, reduced appetite and sleep, and an intense feeling of excitement. Research indicates that this stage generally lasts from one and a half to three years.

Since the lust and attraction stages are both considered temporary, a third stage is needed to account for long-term relationships. Attachment is the bonding that promotes relationships lasting for many years and even decades. Attachment is generally based on commitments such as marriage and children, or mutual friendship based on things like shared interests. It has been linked to higher levels of the chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin, to a greater degree than what is found in short-term relationships. Enzo Emanuele and coworkers reported the protein molecule known as the nerve growth factor (NGF) has high levels when people first fall in love, but these return to previous levels after one year.
===Psychological basis===
Psychology depicts love as a cognitive and social phenomenon. Psychologist Robert Sternberg formulated a triangular theory of love in which love has three components: intimacy, commitment, and passion. Intimacy is when two people share confidences and various details of their personal lives, and is usually shown in friendships and romantic love affairs. Commitment is the expectation that the relationship is permanent. Passionate love is shown in infatuation as well as romantic love. All forms of love are viewed as varying combinations of these three components. Non-love does not include any of these components. Liking only includes intimacy. Infatuated love only includes passion. Empty love only includes commitment. Romantic love includes both intimacy and passion. Companionate love includes intimacy and commitment. Fatuous love includes passion and commitment. Consummate love includes all three components.

American psychologist Zick Rubin sought to define &quot;love&quot; by psychometrics in the 1970s. His work identifies a different set of three factors that constitute love: attachment, caring, and intimacy.

Following developments in electrical theories such as Coulomb&#x27;s law, which showed that positive and negative charges attract, analogs in human life were envisioned, such as &quot;opposites attract&quot;. Research on human mating has generally found this not to be true when it comes to character and personality—people tend to like people similar to themselves. However, in a few unusual and specific domains, such as immune systems, it seems that humans prefer others who are unlike themselves (e.g., with an orthogonal immune system), perhaps because this will lead to a baby that has the best of both worlds.

In recent years, various human bonding theories have been developed, described in terms of attachments, ties, bonds, and affinities.
Some Western authorities into two main components, the altruistic and the narcissistic. This view is represented in the works of Scott Peck, whose work in the field of applied psychology explored the definitions of love and evil. Peck maintains that love is a combination of the &quot;concern for the spiritual growth of another&quot; and simple narcissism. In combination, love is an &quot;activity&quot;, not simply a feeling.

Psychologist Erich Fromm maintained in his book &quot;The Art of Loving&quot; that love is not merely a feeling but is also actions, and that in fact the &quot;feeling&quot; of love is superficial in comparison to one&#x27;s commitment to love via a series of loving actions over time. Fromm held that love is ultimately not a feeling at all, but rather is a commitment to, and adherence to, loving actions towards another, oneself, or many others, over a sustained duration. Fromm also described love as a conscious choice that in its early stages might originate as an involuntary feeling, but which then later no longer depends on those feelings, but rather depends only on conscious commitment.

===Evolutionary basis===
Evolutionary psychology has attempted to provide various reasons for love as a survival tool. Humans are dependent on parental help for a large portion of their lifespans compared to other mammals. Love has therefore been seen as a mechanism to promote parental support of children for this extended time period. Furthermore, researchers as early as Charles Darwin identified unique features of human love compared to other mammals and credited love as a major factor for creating social support systems that enabled the development and expansion of the human species. Another factor may be that sexually transmitted diseases can cause, among other effects, permanently reduced fertility, injury to the fetus, and increase complications during childbirth. This would favor monogamous relationships over polygamy.

===Adaptive benefit===
Interpersonal love between a man and woman provides an evolutionary adaptive benefit since it facilitates mating and sexual reproduction. However, some organisms can reproduce asexually without mating. Understanding the adaptive benefit of interpersonal love depends on understanding the adaptive benefit of sexual reproduction as opposed to asexual reproduction. Richard Michod reviewed evidence that love, and consequently sexual reproduction, provides two major adaptive advantages. First, sexual reproduction facilitates repair of damages in the DNA that is passed from parent to progeny (during meiosis, a key stage of the sexual process). Second, a gene in either parent may contain a harmful mutation, but in the progeny produced by sexual reproduction, expression of a harmful mutation introduced by one parent is likely to be masked by expression of the unaffected homologous gene from the other parent.

===Comparison of scientific models===
Biological models of love tend to see it as a drive, similar to hunger or thirst. Psychology sees love as more of a social and cultural phenomenon. Love is influenced by hormones (such as oxytocin), neurotrophins (such as NGF), and pheromones, and how people think and behave in love is influenced by their conceptions of love. The conventional view in biology is that there are two major drives in love: sexual attraction and attachment. Attachment between adults is presumed to work on the same principles that lead an infant to become attached to its mother. The traditional psychological view sees love as being a combination of companionate love and passionate love. Passionate love is intense longing, and is often accompanied by physiological arousal (shortness of breath, rapid heart rate); companionate love is affection and a feeling of intimacy not accompanied by physiological arousal.

===Health===
Love plays a role in human well-being and health. Engaging in activities associated with love, such as nurturing relationships, has been shown to activate key brain regions responsible for emotion, attention, motivation, and memory. These activities also contribute to the regulation of the autonomic nervous system, leading to stress reduction over time, although the initial stages of love may induce stress. Love&#x27;s social bonds enhance both physical and mental health, fostering resilience, compassion, and closeness. It boosts immune function and promotes healing, while also encouraging positive motivations and behaviors for individual flourishing and survival. Breakups can evoke a range of emotional states, including distrust, rejection, and anger, leading to trauma and various psychological challenges such as anxiety, social withdrawal, and even love addiction. Individuals may become fixated on past relationships, perpetuating emotional distress akin to addiction. Health benefits grow bigger when married couples are older, this is because the partners play a crucial role in promoting each other&#x27;s well-being.

==Cultural views==
===Ancient Greek===
Greek distinguishes several different senses in which the word &quot;love&quot; is used. Ancient Greeks identified three main forms of love: friendship or platonic desire (), sexual or romantic desire (), and self-emptying or divine love (). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of romantic love.

;&quot;Agape&quot; ( )
: &quot;Agape&quot;, often a Christian term, denotes a form of love that stands apart from the conventional understanding of affection. Rooted in theological discourse, &quot;agape&quot; represents a love that is characterized by its spontaneous nature and its independence from the inherent value of its object. Originating from the Greek term for &quot;love&quot;, &quot;agape&quot; has been examined within theological scholarship, particularly in contrast to &quot;eros.&quot; In the Christian tradition, agape is often attributed to the love of God for humanity, as well as humanity&#x27;s reciprocal love for God and for one another, often termed as brotherly love. &quot;Agape&quot; is considered to be unmerited and unmotivated by any inherent worthiness in its recipient. Instead, it is portrayed as an expression of the nature of God, exemplifying divine love that transcends human comprehension.

;&quot;Eros&quot; ( )
: &quot;Eros&quot; originally referred to a passionate desire, often synonymous with sexual passion, reflecting an egocentric nature. However, its modern interpretation portrays it as both selfish and responsive to the merits of the beloved, thus contingent on reasons. Plato, in his &quot;Symposium&quot;, argued that sexual desire, fixated on physical beauty, is inadequate and should evolve into an appreciation of the beauty of the soul, culminating in an appreciation of the form of beauty itself. In Greek mythology, Eros symbolizes the state of being in love, extending beyond mere physical sexuality (referred to as &quot;Venus&quot;). Unrestrained Venus can reduce individuals to mere appetite, but when Eros is present, the focus shifts to the beloved, elevating intimacy beyond physical gratification. Eros is depicted as divine yet potentially dangerous, capable of inspiring both altruism and selfishness.

;&quot;Philia&quot; ( )
: &quot;Philia&quot; originally describing an affectionate regard or friendly feeling, extended to relationships like friendship, family members, business partners, and one&#x27;s nation. Similar to &quot;eros&quot;, &quot;philia&quot; is often seen as responsive to positive attributes in the beloved. This similarity has led scholars to think whether the primary difference between romantic &quot;eros&quot; and &quot;philia&quot; lies solely in the sexual dimension of the former. The distinction between the two becomes more complex with attempts from scholars to diminish the importance of the sexual aspect in eros, contributing to a nuanced understanding of these forms of love. &quot;Philia&quot; was articulated by Aristotle in his &quot;Nicomachean Ethics.&quot; Aristotle suggests that &quot;philia&quot; can be motivated by considerations for either one&#x27;s own benefit or the benefit of the other. &quot;Philia&quot; often arises from the utility found in the relationship or from admiration for the character or virtues of the other individual. Aristotle further elucidates that the foundation of philia rests on objective grounds; individuals must share similar dispositions, refrain from holding grudges, and embody qualities such as justice, among others.

===Ancient Roman===
In Latin, friendship was distinctly termed &quot;amicitia,&quot; while &quot;amor&quot; encompassed erotic passion, familial attachment, and, albeit less commonly, the affection between friends. Cicero, in his essay &quot;On Friendship&quot; reflects on the innate human tendency to both love oneself and seek out another with whom to intertwine minds, nearly blending them into a singular entity. This suggests that while friends remain distinct individuals, they also, in some sense, become intertwined, embodying a shared essence.

Lucretius perceives love as a disruptive and irrational force, leading to madness and despair. To him, it is an affliction distorting reality, a primal urge rooted in the biological need for species to propagate. He emphasizes love&#x27;s futility and self-destructive nature. In contrast, Ovid acknowledges the pleasure of love alongside its risks and complexities. He views love as a game of manipulation and deception, marked by a blend of hedonism and cynicism. Ovid recognizes the transient nature of passion and the inevitable disappointment in romantic relationships.

===Chinese===
Ren (仁), a concept in Confucianism philosophy, embodies the essence of humanity and virtue. It is regarded as the sum of all virtues within a person, encompassing traits such as selflessness and self-cultivation. Ren emphasizes the cultivation of harmonious relationships within society, starting from the family unit and extending outward. Within Confucianism, these relationships are delineated by five main categories: father-son, older brother-younger brother, husband-wife, older friend-younger friend, and lord-servant. In Confucianism, one displays benevolent love by performing actions such as filial piety from children, kindness from parents, loyalty to the king and so forth.

Central to the concept of Ren is the notion of reciprocity and empathetic understanding. It is often interpreted as akin to love (愛, &quot;ài&quot;), but sometimes it also considered a stage between &quot;ài&quot; and &quot;ling&quot;, characterized by the sincere and open-hearted expression of human feelings. Through genuine love for others, individuals cultivate Ren and foster deeper connections that bridge the gap between the human and the divine. Ren&#x27;s significance lies in its ability to foster genuine human connection and empathy, laying the foundation for harmonious relationships within society.

Mozi, a Chinese philosopher, articulated a philosophy centered on the principle of universal love. At the core of his teachings lay the belief that genuine harmony and societal well-being could only be achieved through love for others, transcending narrow self-interest. Mozi contended that universal love was not merely an abstract concept but a practical imperative, requiring individuals to actively promote the welfare of all members of society through their actions.

In Mozi&#x27;s philosophical framework, universal love was not only a moral obligation but also a divine principle originating from Heaven itself. He argued that this principle was exemplified through the actions of sage-kings from ancient times, who demonstrated how love could manifest in tangible ways within human interactions. Mozi&#x27;s advocacy for universal love extended beyond interpersonal relationships; he believed it should guide the selection of rulers and the structuring of society, emphasizing reciprocity and egalitarianism as foundational principles for a harmonious social order.

In Taoism, the concept of 慈 (&quot;ci&quot;) embodies compassion or love, with connotations of tender nurturing akin to a mother&#x27;s care. It emphasizes the idea that creatures can only thrive through raising and nurturing. &quot;Ci&quot; serves as the wellspring of compassion or love that transcends preconceived notions of individuals, instead fostering compassion for people as they are. Love, as depicted in the Taoist text, &quot;Daodejing&quot;, is depicted as open and responsive to each person&#x27;s unique circumstances. Taoism juxtaposes human beings with the vastness of nature, likening the creation of people to the formation of waves in the ocean. Unlike Confucianism, as portrayed in the Taoist text &quot;Zhuangzi&quot;, Taoist responses to the loss of a beloved may involve either mourning their death or embracing the loss and finding joy in new creations. Daoist love seeks connections that surpass distinctions and superficial reflections.

===Japanese===

The Japanese language uses three words to convey the English equivalent of love — , and . The term &quot;ai&quot; carries a multiple meanings, encompassing feelings of feelings from superior to inferiors, compassion and empathy towards others and selfless love, originally referred to beauty and was often used in a religious context. Initially synonymous with &quot;koi&quot;, representing romantic love between a man and a woman, emphasizing its physical expression, &quot;ai&quot; underwent a transformation during the early Meiji era. It evolved into a euphemistic term for or love attachment, signifying a shift towards a more egalitarian treatment and consideration of others as equals. Prior to Western influence, the term &quot;koi&quot; generally represented romantic love. describes a longing for a member of the opposite sex and is typically interpreted as selfish and wanting. The term&#x27;s origins come from the concept of lonely solitude as a result of separation from a loved one. Though modern usage of focuses on sexual love and infatuation, the Manyō used the term to cover a wider range of situations, including tenderness, benevolence, and material desire. The fusion of &quot;ai&quot; and &quot;koi&quot; gave rise to the modern term &quot;ren&#x27;ai&quot;; its usage more closely resembles that of in the form of romantic love.

The concept , the dependency and emotional bonds between an infant and its mother—a bond that lays the foundation for the archetypal concept of love. Japanese culture traditionally distinguishes between marriage and love, valuing practical considerations and complementarity within family units.

===Indian===

In ancient India, there was an understanding of erotics and the art of love. References in the Rigveda suggest the presence of romantic narratives in ancient Indo-Aryan society, evident in dialogues between deities like Yama and Yami, and Pururavas and Urvashi. The Sanskrit language, offered various terms to convey the concept of love, such as &quot;kama,&quot; &quot;sneha, priya, vatsalya,&quot; &quot;bhakti&quot;, &quot;priti&quot; and &quot;prema&quot;.

In Indian literature, there are seven stages of love. The first is &quot;preska&quot;, characterized by the desire to see something pleasant. Next is &quot;abhilasa,&quot; involving constant thoughts about the beloved. Then comes &quot;raga,&quot; signifying the mental inclination to be united with the beloved. Following that is &quot;shena&quot;, which involves favorable activities directed towards the beloved. &quot;Prema&quot; is the stage where one cannot live without the beloved. Then there is &quot;rati&quot;, which involves living together with the beloved. Finally, &quot;srngara&quot; represents the playful interaction with the beloved.

&quot;Kama&quot; initially representing desire and longing. Later, Vātsyāyana, the author of the Kama Sutra, explored the concept of &quot;kama&quot;, defining it as the enjoyment of sensory pleasures with conscious awareness. However, there were also teachings cautioning against becoming overly attached to desire, advocating for the pursuit of genuine happiness through transcending desires. The Atharvaveda, presents &quot;kama&quot; as the tender affection between partners.

Nevertheless, &quot;kama&quot; is also often associated with insatiable sexual desire intertwined with intense emotions like anger and greed, portraying it as potentially harmful. Over time, &quot;kama&quot; took on anthropomorphic qualities, evolving into the figure of the Indian Cupid.

&quot;Sneha&quot;, considered the emotional facet of love, stands in contrast to the intense passion of &quot;kama&quot; with its calm demeanor. Characterized by moisture and viscosity, the term originally denoted oiliness. It is often compounded with words for family members, reflecting attachment to individuals like mothers, fathers, and sons. Those experiencing &quot;sneha&quot; tend to exhibit great concern for one another. While traditionally attributed to sensing, the Harshacharita presents a spontaneous perspective, suggesting it lacks a definitive cause. Due to its emotional nature, &quot;sneha&quot; is transient, emerging without reason and disappearing likewise.

&quot;Preman&quot; represents a heightened stage in the development of love, characterized by the unbearable feeling of separation from the beloved. Etymologically, it denotes the sense of endearment akin to one&#x27;s own. &quot;Priti&quot;, similar to &quot;preman&quot;, denotes fondness for anything delightful and familiar. It encompasses a general liking for arts, sports, and objects, while also encompassing a human instinct. &quot;Priti&quot; is built on foundations of trust and fidelity. Friendly relations (&quot;priti&quot;) may persist between individuals but are not necessarily bound by affection (&quot;sneha&quot;).

&quot;Vatsalya&quot; originally signifies the tender affection exhibited by a cow towards her calf, extending to denote the love nurtured by elders or superiors towards the younger or inferior. This love is exemplified in the affection of parents towards their children, a husband&#x27;s care for his wife, or a ruler&#x27;s concern for their subjects. Conversely, &quot;bhakti&quot; denotes the love expressed by the younger towards the seniors, exemplified in a child&#x27;s devotion to their parents.

===Persian===
Interpretations of Rumi&#x27;s poetry and Sufi cosmology by scholars emphasize a divine-centric perspective, focusing on the transcendent nature of love. These interpretations emphasize Rumi&#x27;s rejection of mortal attachments in favor of a love for the ultimate beloved, seen as embodying absolute beauty and grandeur. Scholars like William Chittick assert that all love stems from the divine, with God being both lover and beloved. Leonard Lewisohn characterizes Rumi&#x27;s poetry as part of a mystical tradition that celebrates love as pathways to union with the divine, highlighting a transcendent experience.

In Persian mysticism, the concept of creation stems from love, viewed as the fundamental essence from which all beings originate and to which they ultimately return. This notion, influenced by neoplatonism, portrays love as both earthly and transcendent, embodying a universal striving for reunion with the divine. Scholars such as Abdolhossein Zarrinkoob trace this philosophical stance, highlighting its fusion with ancient Persian religious beliefs in figures like Ibn Arabi. According to Islamicists like William Chittick and Leonard Lewisohn, all forms of love find their origin in divine love, with creation serving as a reflection of God&#x27;s beauty and love. This perspective is evident in the poetry of Hafez and others, where the concept of tajalli, or divine self-manifestation, underscores the profound spiritual significance of love as it pertains to both human relationships and devotion to God.

==Religious views==
===Abrahamic===
====Judaism====

In Hebrew, (&quot;ahavah&quot;) signifies the love of Israelites for God and each other. However, the concept &quot;hesed&quot; offers a deeper understanding of love within Jewish thought and life. It goes beyond mere passion, embodying a character trait that is actively expressed through generosity and grace. &quot;Hesed&quot; has a dual nature: when attributed to God, it denotes grace or favor, while when practiced by humans, it reflects piety and devotion.

&quot;Hasidim&quot;, demonstrate their commitment and love for God through acts of &quot;hesed&quot;. The Torah serves as a guide, outlining how Israelites should express their love for God, show reverence for nature, and demonstrate compassion toward fellow human beings. The commandment &quot;Love thy neighbor as thyself&quot; from the Torah&#x27;s, gives emphasis on ethical obligations and impartiality in judgment. It highlights the importance of treating all individuals equally before the law, rejecting favoritism and bribery; deuteronomy further emphasizes impartiality in judgment.

As for love between marital partners, this is deemed an essential ingredient to life: &quot;See life with the wife you love&quot; (Ecclesiastes ). Rabbi David Wolpe writes that &quot;love is not only about the feelings of the lover... It is when one person believes in another person and shows it.&quot; He further states that &quot;love... is a feeling that expresses itself in action. What we really feel is reflected in what we do.&quot; The biblical book Song of Solomon is considered a romantically phrased metaphor of love between God and his people, but in its plain reading it reads like a love song. The 20th-century rabbi Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler is frequently quoted as defining love from the Jewish point of view as &quot;giving without expecting to take&quot;.

====Christianity====

The Christian understanding is that love comes from God, who is himself love (). The love of man and woman— in Greek—and the unselfish love of others (), are often contrasted as &quot;descending&quot; and &quot;ascending&quot; love, respectively, but are ultimately the same thing.

There are several Greek words for &quot;love&quot; that are regularly referred to in Christian circles.
; : In the New Testament, is charitable, selfless, altruistic, and unconditional. It is parental love, seen as creating goodness in the world; it is the way God is seen to love humanity, and it is seen as the kind of love that Christians aspire to have for one another.
; : Also used in the New Testament, is a human response to something that is found to be delightful. Also known as &quot;brotherly love.&quot;
Two other words for love in the Greek language, (sexual love) and (child-to-parent love), were never used in the New Testament.

Christians believe that to &quot;love God with all your heart, mind, and strength&quot; and &quot;love your neighbor as yourself&quot; are the two most important things in life (the greatest commandment of the Jewish Torah, according to Jesus; cf. Gospel of Mark ). Saint Augustine summarized this when he wrote &quot;Love God, and do as thou wilt.&quot;

The Apostle Paul glorified love as the most important virtue of all. Describing love in the famous poetic interpretation in 1 Corinthians, he wrote, &quot;Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres.&quot; ()

The Apostle John wrote, &quot;For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him.&quot; (John ) John also wrote, &quot;Dear friends, let us love one another for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love.&quot; ()

Saint Augustine wrote that one must be able to decipher the difference between love and lust. Lust, according to Saint Augustine, is an overindulgence, but to love and be loved is what he has sought for his entire life. He even says, &quot;I was in love with love.&quot; Finally, he does fall in love and is loved back, by God. Saint Augustine says the only one who can love you truly and fully is God because love with a human only allows for flaws such as &quot;jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and contention.&quot; According to Saint Augustine, to love God is &quot;to attain the peace which is yours.&quot;

Augustine regards the duplex commandment of love in as the heart of Christian faith and the interpretation of the Bible. After the review of Christian doctrine, Augustine treats the problem of love in terms of use and enjoyment until the end of Book I of &quot;De Doctrina Christiana&quot; (1.22.21–1.40.44).

Christian theologians see God as the source of love, which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships. Influential Christian theologian C. S. Lewis wrote a book called &quot;The Four Loves&quot;. Benedict XVI named his first encyclical &quot;God is love&quot;. He said that a human being, created in the image of God, who is love, is able to practice love; to give himself to God and others () and by receiving and experiencing God&#x27;s love in contemplation (). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and Mary, the mother of Jesus and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them.
Pope Francis asserts that the &quot;Cross (Jesus crucified) is the greatest meaning of the greatest love,&quot; and in the crucifixion is found everything, all knowledge and the entirety of God&#x27;s love. Pope Francis taught that &quot;True love is both loving and letting oneself be loved... what is important in love is not our loving, but allowing ourselves to be loved by God.&quot; And so, in the analysis of a Catholic theologian, for Pope Francis, &quot;the key to love... is not our activity. It is the activity of the greatest, and the source, of all the powers in the universe: God&#x27;s.&quot;

In Christianity the practical definition of love is summarized by Thomas Aquinas, who defined love as &quot;to will the good of another,&quot; or to desire for another to succeed. This is an explanation of the Christian need to love others, including their enemies. Thomas Aquinas explains that Christian love is motivated by the need to see others succeed in life, to be good people.

Regarding love for enemies, Jesus is quoted in the Gospel of Matthew:

Tertullian wrote regarding love for enemies: &quot;Our individual, extraordinary, and perfect goodness consists in loving our enemies. To love one&#x27;s friends is common practice, to love one&#x27;s enemies only among Christians.&quot;

====Islam====

Love encompasses the Islamic view of life as universal brotherhood that applies to all who hold faith. Among the 99 names of God (Allah) is the name &quot;Al-Wadud&quot;, or &quot;the Loving One,&quot; which is found in Surah and . God is also referenced at the beginning of every chapter in the Qur&#x27;an as &quot;Ar-Rahman&quot; and &quot;Ar-Rahim&quot;, or the &quot;Most Compassionate&quot; and the &quot;Most Merciful&quot;, indicating that nobody is more loving, compassionate, and benevolent than God. The Qur&#x27;an refers to God as being &quot;full of loving kindness.&quot;

The Qur&#x27;an exhorts Muslim believers to treat , with or &quot;deep kindness&quot; as stated in Surah . is also used by the Qur&#x27;an to describe the love and kindness that children must show to their parents.

, or divine love, is emphasized by Sufism in the Islamic tradition. Practitioners of Sufism believe that love is a projection of the essence of God into the universe. God desires to recognize beauty, and as if one looks at a mirror to see oneself, God &quot;looks&quot; at himself within the dynamics of nature. Since everything is a reflection of God, the school of Sufism practices seeing the beauty inside the apparently ugly. Sufism is often referred to as the religion of love. God in Sufism is referred to in three main terms—Lover, Loved, and Beloved—with the last of these terms often seen in Sufi poetry. A common viewpoint of Sufism is that through love, humankind can return to its inherent purity and grace. The saints of Sufism are infamous for being &quot;drunk&quot; due to their love of God; hence, the constant reference to wine in Sufi poetry and music.

====Bahá&#x27;í Faith====
The Bahá&#x27;í concept of the human soul emphasizes its expression through capacities such as knowledge, love, and will. According to Bahá&#x27;í teachings, conscious recognition of one&#x27;s Creator and a reciprocal love relationship with that Creator form the basis of obedience to religious law. This perspective grounds adherence to law within the spiritual dynamics of each individual&#x27;s journey, portraying obedience as a conscious choice driven by love rather than as mere compliance with external dictates.

Baháʼu&#x27;lláh, the founder of the Bahá&#x27;í Faith, emphasizes the importance of observing God&#x27;s commandments out of love, describing them as &quot;the lamps of My loving providence&quot; and urging followers to adhere to them for &quot;the love of My beauty.&quot; This framing positions love as the motive force for individuals striving to follow divine laws. In Bahá&#x27;í understanding, love is considered the fundamental universal law. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh&#x27;s son and successor, describes love as the &quot;most great law&quot; and the force that binds together the diverse elements of the material world. He further asserts that love is the establisher of true civilization and the source of glory for every race and nation.

From the Bahá&#x27;í perspective, God&#x27;s revelation of laws to humanity is an act of love, and the legitimate reason for their application and adherence lies in their expression of love. This understanding underscores the intimate connection between spiritual principles, individual growth, and the practice of religious law within the Bahá&#x27;í Faith.

===Dharmic===
====Buddhism====
In Buddhism, love is understood as a selfless, universal quality that serves as the foundation for compassion, joy in others&#x27; happiness, and equanimity. Together, these four qualities—loving-kindness (&quot;maitrī&quot;), compassion (&quot;karuṇā&quot;), sympathetic joy (&quot;mudita&quot;), and equanimity (&quot;upekṣā&quot;)—are known as the brahmavihara. Loving-kindness, the first of the four, fosters goodwill toward all beings and leads naturally to compassion for those who suffer, joy in others&#x27; achievements, and, ultimately, to equanimity, a balanced state free from attachment and aversion. This progression helps practitioners to reduce negative tendencies like ill-will, jealousy, and possessiveness, with the ultimate aim of cultivating inner peace and a compassionate view toward all beings, supporting both personal growth and societal harmony.

In Theravada, love and sympathy play key roles in shaping ethical behavior and social actions. Sympathy motivates altruistic acts like teaching and helping others, while loving-kindness is cultivated primarily through meditation, acting as a form of mental liberation. Together, these qualities encourage impartial love and empathy, fostering personal peace and societal harmony, and supporting both individual growth and a more compassionate world.

In Mahayana, love is understood as profound compassion and a commitment to mutual support. This concept is central to the Bodhisattva ideal, where practitioners vow to help all beings reach enlightenment, often delaying their own liberation to support others. Mahayana teachings emphasize selfless love, blurring the boundary between self and others, and seeing all beings as interconnected. This love, framed within the Mahayana understanding of reality as ultimately illusory, transcends ego and guides both the practitioner and others toward collective liberation.

In Vajrayana, love is a transformative force that, when disciplined, leads to spiritual enlightenment. Rather than rejecting desire, Vajrayana encourages the refinement of love and other potent energies as pathways to higher consciousness. By controlling and sublimating these energies, often represented through sexual energy as a life force (k&quot;Kundalini&quot;), practitioners unite the principles of wisdom and skill. Here, love becomes a symbol and method for ultimate unity, guiding practitioners to enlightenment by transforming personal desire into a universal connection.

====Hinduism====

In Hinduism, is pleasurable, sexual love, personified by the god Kamadeva. For many Hindu schools, it is the third end () in life. Kamadeva is often pictured holding a bow of sugar cane and an arrow of flowers; he may ride upon a great parrot. He is usually accompanied by his consort Rati and his companion Vasanta, lord of the spring season. Stone images of Kamadeva and Rati can be seen on the door of the Chennakeshava Temple, Belur, in Karnataka, India. &quot;Maara&quot; is another name for .

In contrast to , —or refers to &quot;elevated&quot; love. is compassion and mercy, which impels one to help reduce the suffering of others. is a Sanskrit term meaning &quot;loving devotion to the divine.&quot; A person who practices is called a . Hindu writers, theologians, and philosophers have distinguished nine forms of , which can be found in the &quot;Bhagavata Purana&quot; and works by Tulsidas. The philosophical work &quot;Narada Bhakti Sutra&quot;, written by an unknown author (presumed to be Narada), distinguishes eleven forms of love.

In certain Vaishnava sects within Hinduism, attaining unadulterated, unconditional, and incessant love for the Godhead is considered the foremost goal of life. Gaudiya Vaishnavas, who worship Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cause of all causes, consider Love for Godhead, (), to act in two ways: and (union and separation)—two opposites.

In the condition of separation, there is an acute yearning for being with the beloved and in the condition of union, there is supreme happiness. Gaudiya Vaishnavas consider that Krishna-prema (love for Godhead) burns away one&#x27;s material desires, pierces the heart, and washes away everything—one&#x27;s pride, one&#x27;s religious rules, and one&#x27;s shyness. Krishna-prema is considered to make one drown in the ocean of transcendental ecstasy and pleasure. The love of Radha, a cowherd girl, for Krishna is often cited as the supreme example of love for Godhead by Gaudiya Vaishnavas. Radha is considered to be the internal potency of Krishna, and is the supreme lover of Godhead. Her example of love is considered to be beyond the understanding of the material realm, as it surpasses any form of selfish love or lust that is visible in the material world. The reciprocal love between Radha (the supreme lover) and Krishna (God as the Supremely Loved) is the subject of many poetic compositions in India, such as the &quot;Gita Govinda&quot; of Jayadeva and &quot;Hari Bhakti Shuddhodhaya.&quot;

In the tradition within Hinduism, it is believed that execution of devotional service to God leads to the development of Love for God (), and as love for God increases in the heart, the more one becomes free from material contamination (). Being perfectly in love with God or Krishna makes one perfectly free from material contamination, and this is the ultimate way of salvation or liberation. In this tradition, salvation or liberation is considered inferior to love, and just an incidental by-product. Being absorbed in Love for God is considered to be the perfection of life.

==Political views==

===Free love===

The term &quot;free love&quot; has been used to describe a social movement that rejects marriage, which is seen as a form of social bondage. The free love movement&#x27;s initial goal was to separate the state from sexual matters such as marriage, birth control, and adultery. It claimed that such issues were the concern of the people involved, and no one else.

Many people in the early 19th century believed that marriage was an important aspect of life to &quot;fulfill earthly human happiness.&quot; Middle-class Americans wanted the home to be a place of stability in an uncertain world. This mentality created a vision of strongly defined gender roles, which provoked the advancement of the free love movement as a contrast.

Advocates of free love had two strong beliefs: opposition to the idea of forceful sexual activity in a relationship and advocacy for a woman to use her body in any way that she pleases. These are also beliefs of feminism.

==Philosophical views==

Philosophically, love is often categorized into four types: love as a union, robust concern, valuing, and emotion. Love as a union suggests love forms a &quot;we&quot; by merging individual identities, as proposed by thinkers like Roger Scruton and Robert Nozick, who argue this fusion enhances shared care. Critics, however, contend that union threatens individual autonomy, though Nozick and others believe this merging enriches love. Michael Friedman offers a compromise with his federation model, where love unifies yet preserves individual identities.

Love as robust concern defines love as a deep care for the beloved&#x27;s well-being without creating a union. This view prioritizes concern for the beloved&#x27;s welfare, but critics argue it misses the interactive and emotional aspects of love. Supporters maintain that love&#x27;s essence lies in respecting the beloved&#x27;s autonomy. Monique Wonderly adds that attachment complements this view, making the beloved important for both themselves and the lover.

Love as valuing includes two approaches: appraisal and bestowal of value. J. David Velleman argues that appraisal responds to the inherent dignity in others, making love a unique emotional vulnerability. However, this view struggles to explain love&#x27;s selectivity and constancy. Peter Singer&#x27;s bestowal view posits that love creates intrinsic value in the beloved, yet critics question how this explains love&#x27;s discernment.

Love as an emotion is seen either as an emotion proper or as an emotion complex. Emotion properly treats love as a specific motivational response, but some find this too simplistic. The emotion complex perspective suggests that love is a dynamic, interconnected emotional history shaped by the relationship. Figures like Annette Baier and Neera K. Badhwar highlight emotional interdependence, though critics wonder how this distinguishes love from other relationships and defines its unique narrative.

== Literature depictions ==

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

==External links==

* History of Love, &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q316" start="0" end="4" title="Love" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968640" start="62" end="75" title="mental states" label="mental states"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="99" end="105" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="136" end="149" title="Interpersonal relationship" label="interpersonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124198" start="150" end="159" title="affection" label="affection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196129" start="280" end="286" title="spouse" label="spouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="319" end="323" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q909609" start="400" end="410" title="attachment (psychology)" label="attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="475" end="481" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q488085" start="501" end="509" title="kindness" label="kindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412160" start="511" end="521" title="compassion" label="compassion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124198" start="527" end="536" title="affection" label="affection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411242" start="626" end="630" title="vice" label="vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="652" end="662" title="morality" label="moral flaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321250" start="671" end="677" title="vanity" label="vanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36381317" start="679" end="690" title="selfishness" label="selfishness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002896" start="692" end="704" title="amour-propre" label="amour-propre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282131" start="710" end="717" title="egotism" label="egotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="880" end="906" title="interpersonal relationship" label="interpersonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="1000" end="1013" title="creative arts" label="creative arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427336" start="1113" end="1155" title="human reproduction" label="facilitate the continuation of the species"/>
<link wikidata="Q929309" start="1196" end="1213" title="Greek words for love" label="six forms of love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995866" start="1215" end="1228" title="familial love" label="familial love"/>
<link wikidata="Q491" start="1233" end="1246" title="friendship" label="friendly love"/>
<link wikidata="Q209041" start="1250" end="1263" title="platonic love" label="platonic love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="1268" end="1281" title="romance (love)" label="romantic love"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546994" start="1286" end="1295" title="self-love" label="self-love"/>
<link wikidata="Q815825" start="1300" end="1310" title="hospitality" label="guest love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705924" start="1329" end="1347" title="unconditional love" label="unconditional love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526635" start="1413" end="1425" title="Love at first sight" label="fatuous love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003212" start="1427" end="1442" title="unrequited love" label="unrequited love"/>
<link wikidata="Q968447" start="1444" end="1454" title="empty love" label="empty love"/>
<link wikidata="Q126454268" start="1456" end="1473" title="companionate love" label="companionate love"/>
<link wikidata="Q968447" start="1475" end="1490" title="consummate love" label="consummate love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210705" start="1509" end="1518" title="limerence" label="limerence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748000" start="1521" end="1533" title="amour de soi" label="amour de soi"/>
<link wikidata="Q851650" start="1539" end="1551" title="courtly love" label="courtly love"/>
<link wikidata="Q456673" start="1615" end="1622" title="Charity (virtue)" label="charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311414" start="1635" end="1672" title="Religious views on love" label="variants or symbioses of these states"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907363" start="1830" end="1856" title="color wheel theory of love" label="color wheel theory of love"/>
<link wikidata="Q968447" start="1989" end="2014" title="triangular theory of love" label="triangular theory of love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493578" start="2120" end="2129" title="spiritual but not religious" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q929309" start="2603" end="2638" title="Greek words for love" label="Greek concepts for &amp;quot;love&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368367" start="2649" end="2669" title="Cultural identity" label="Cultural differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q160232" start="3065" end="3069" title="hate" label="hate"/>
<link wikidata="Q309406" start="3082" end="3088" title="apathy" label="apathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373791" start="3117" end="3137" title="Emotional intimacy" label="emotionally intimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498477" start="3200" end="3204" title="lust" label="lust"/>
<link wikidata="Q491" start="3298" end="3308" title="friendship" label="friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561592" start="3722" end="3759" title="vulnerability and care theory of love" label="vulnerability and care theory of love"/>
<link wikidata="Q186529" start="3785" end="3795" title="narcissism" label="narcissism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4008" end="4023" title="Middle Ages" label="the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413396" start="4172" end="4198" title="thought-terminating cliché" label="thought-terminating cliché"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="4215" end="4222" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="4242" end="4248" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q474024" start="4262" end="4279" title="Amor Vincit Omnia (Caravaggio)" label="Love conquers all"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="4289" end="4300" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q176098" start="4313" end="4333" title="All You Need Is Love" label="All You Need Is Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="4341" end="4359" title="St. Thomas Aquinas" label="St. Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="4371" end="4380" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="4439" end="4455" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310809" start="4516" end="4530" title="relative value (economics)" label="relative value"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="4544" end="4561" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q312701" start="4637" end="4647" title="Meher Baba" label="Meher Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181407" start="4803" end="4818" title="Jeremy Griffith" label="Jeremy Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q191050" start="4888" end="4902" title="Ambrose Bierce" label="Ambrose Bierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="5540" end="5548" title="altruism" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178059" start="5817" end="5827" title="paraphilia" label="paraphilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003212" start="5974" end="5989" title="Unrequited love" label="Unrequited love"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="6095" end="6121" title="interpersonal relationship" label="interpersonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q252185" start="6259" end="6269" title="erotomania" label="erotomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="6398" end="6408" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="6450" end="6462" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="6464" end="6476" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="6624" end="6630" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q457262" start="6669" end="6681" title="Helen Fisher (anthropologist)" label="Helen Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107654" start="6858" end="6871" title="sexual desire" label="sexual desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498477" start="7221" end="7225" title="Lust" label="Lust"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003481" start="7280" end="7286" title="Mating (human)" label="mating"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="7326" end="7334" title="hormones" label="hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="7343" end="7355" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="7360" end="7368" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632514" start="7429" end="7439" title="Interpersonal attraction" label="Attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="7611" end="7623" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q10599959" start="7742" end="7767" title="neuroendocrine" label="neurotransmitter hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="7768" end="7776" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="7778" end="7792" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="7798" end="7807" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="7840" end="7851" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q670713" start="7882" end="7897" title="pleasure center" label="pleasure center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="7944" end="7954" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="7956" end="7972" title="Anorexia (symptom)" label="reduced appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="7977" end="7982" title="insomnia" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="7991" end="8020" title="euphoria" label="intense feeling of excitement"/>
<link wikidata="Q909609" start="8242" end="8252" title="Attachment theory" label="Attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173366" start="8260" end="8267" title="human bonding" label="bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q169960" start="8526" end="8534" title="oxytocin" label="oxytocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124841" start="8539" end="8550" title="vasopressin" label="vasopressin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381503" start="8620" end="8633" title="Enzo Emanuele" label="Enzo Emanuele"/>
<link wikidata="Q417782" start="8691" end="8710" title="nerve growth factor" label="nerve growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="8843" end="8853" title="Psychology" label="Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="8905" end="8917" title="Psychologist" label="Psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q362357" start="8918" end="8934" title="Robert Sternberg" label="Robert Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q968447" start="8948" end="8973" title="triangular theory of love" label="triangular theory of love"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071467" start="9787" end="9797" title="Zick Rubin" label="Zick Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q506132" start="9835" end="9848" title="psychometrics" label="psychometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="10027" end="10045" title="Coulomb&amp;#x27;s law" label="Coulomb&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="10396" end="10409" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173366" start="10616" end="10629" title="human bonding" label="human bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="10729" end="10736" title="Western culture" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q663928" start="10853" end="10863" title="M. Scott Peck" label="Scott Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q538904" start="10892" end="10910" title="applied psychology" label="applied psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="11167" end="11178" title="Erich Fromm" label="Erich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q973382" start="11208" end="11225" title="The Art of Loving" label="The Art of Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="11879" end="11902" title="Evolutionary psychology" label="Evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="12229" end="12243" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="12475" end="12503" title="sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="12557" end="12566" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="12623" end="12633" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="12682" end="12690" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="12833" end="12852" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="12892" end="12901" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexually"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="13241" end="13269" title="DNA repair" label="repair of damages in the DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102467" start="13316" end="13323" title="origin and function of meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="13415" end="13423" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="13838" end="13845" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q169960" start="13856" end="13864" title="oxytocin" label="oxytocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420457" start="13867" end="13880" title="neurotrophins" label="neurotrophins"/>
<link wikidata="Q417782" start="13890" end="13893" title="nerve growth factor" label="NGF"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="13900" end="13909" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="14021" end="14028" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q464859" start="14073" end="14090" title="sexual attraction" label="sexual attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q909609" start="14095" end="14105" title="attachment theory" label="attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q126454268" start="14301" end="14318" title="companionate love" label="companionate love"/>
<link wikidata="Q379784" start="14404" end="14425" title="physiological arousal" label="physiological arousal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="14871" end="14895" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="15756" end="15761" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q929309" start="15776" end="15800" title="Greek words for love" label="several different senses"/>
<link wikidata="Q491" start="15897" end="15907" title="friendship" label="friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q209041" start="15911" end="15926" title="platonic love" label="platonic desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="15941" end="15956" title="romance (love)" label="romantic desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q572486" start="15965" end="15978" title="Kenosis" label="self-emptying"/>
<link wikidata="Q210143" start="16076" end="16081" title="Agapē" label="Agape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361301" start="17007" end="17011" title="Eros (love)" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q486727" start="17312" end="17321" title="Symposium (Plato)" label="Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="17545" end="17549" title="Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242529" start="17949" end="17955" title="Philia" label="Philia"/>
<link wikidata="Q474537" start="18713" end="18731" title="Nicomachean Ethics" label="Nicomachean Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="19458" end="19464" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q675210" start="19485" end="19498" title="On Friendship" label="On Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q47154" start="19798" end="19807" title="Lucretius" label="Lucretius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="20088" end="20092" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="20241" end="20249" title="hedonism" label="hedonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q245781" start="20254" end="20262" title="Cynicism (contemporary)" label="cynicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="20388" end="20391" title="Ren (philosophy)" label="Ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="20410" end="20422" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="20990" end="21002" title="filial piety" label="filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008244" start="21294" end="21310" title="Ling (Chinese religion)" label="&amp;quot;ling&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="22770" end="22776" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134425" start="23206" end="23215" title="Daodejing" label="Daodejing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074987" start="23487" end="23507" title="Zhuangzi (book)" label="&amp;quot;Zhuangzi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="23753" end="23770" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="24277" end="24286" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="25417" end="25430" title="ancient India" label="ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="25509" end="25516" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616887" start="25634" end="25638" title="Yama" label="Yama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348057" start="25643" end="25647" title="Yami" label="Yami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076326" start="25653" end="25662" title="Pururavas" label="Pururavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307799" start="25667" end="25674" title="Urvashi" label="Urvashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="25680" end="25697" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit language"/>
<link wikidata="Q380234" start="26597" end="26607" title="Vātsyāyana" label="Vātsyāyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47228" start="26627" end="26637" title="Kama Sutra" label="Kama Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q236092" start="26929" end="26940" title="Atharvaveda" label="Atharvaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="27227" end="27242" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810426" start="27780" end="27793" title="Harshacharita" label="Harshacharita"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="29156" end="29167" title="Rumi" label="Rumi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695194" start="29179" end="29193" title="Sufi cosmology" label="Sufi cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496299" start="29474" end="29490" title="William Chittick" label="William Chittick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525500" start="29574" end="29590" title="Leonard Lewisohn (Islamic studies scholar)" label="Leonard Lewisohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170253" start="29759" end="29776" title="Persian mysticism" label="Persian mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="29949" end="29961" title="neoplatonism" label="neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116676" start="30088" end="30111" title="Abdolhossein Zarrinkoob" label="Abdolhossein Zarrinkoob"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="30224" end="30233" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496299" start="30265" end="30281" title="William Chittick" label="William Chittick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525500" start="30286" end="30302" title="Leonard Lewisohn (Islamic studies scholar)" label="Leonard Lewisohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240" start="30470" end="30475" title="Hafez" label="Hafez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980235" start="30509" end="30516" title="tajalli" label="tajalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="30725" end="30731" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="31293" end="31298" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42614" start="31723" end="31734" title="deuteronomy" label="deuteronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="31912" end="31924" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241264" start="31934" end="31945" title="David Wolpe" label="David Wolpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="32240" end="32255" title="Song of Solomon" label="Song of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="32318" end="32321" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="32407" end="32412" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331113" start="32413" end="32436" title="Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler" label="Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="32629" end="32632" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="32975" end="32988" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33387" end="33423" title="#Ancient Greek" label="words for love in the Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="33506" end="33516" title="Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="33614" end="33622" title="neighbourhood" label="neighbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51641" start="33688" end="33708" title="Great Commandment" label="greatest commandment"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="33723" end="33728" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="33743" end="33748" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="33754" end="33768" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="33772" end="33787" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="33862" end="33878" title="The Apostle Paul" label="The Apostle Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="33986" end="33999" title="First Epistle to the Corinthians" label="1 Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="34339" end="34355" title="John the Apostle" label="The Apostle John"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="34608" end="34612" title="Gospel of John" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="34828" end="34843" title="Saint Augustine" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244902" start="35703" end="35725" title="De Doctrina Christiana" label="De Doctrina Christiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="35762" end="35773" title="Theology" label="theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="35902" end="35913" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283958" start="35940" end="35954" title="The Four Loves" label="The Four Loves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="35962" end="35974" title="Benedict XVI" label="Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="35991" end="36001" title="encyclical" label="encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q605550" start="36008" end="36019" title="Deus caritas est" label="God is love"/>
<link wikidata="Q30547" start="36302" end="36320" title="Teresa of Calcutta" label="Teresa of Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="36325" end="36350" title="Mary, the mother of Jesus" label="Mary, the mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="36427" end="36439" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="36470" end="36485" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="Jesus crucified"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="37102" end="37116" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="37493" end="37503" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="37877" end="37882" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="37967" end="37972" title="Surah" label="Surah"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="38262" end="38273" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="38586" end="38592" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q967441" start="39346" end="39357" title="love of God" label="love of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="39972" end="39988" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216954" start="40423" end="40440" title="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="41132" end="41140" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47924" start="41275" end="41285" title="equanimity" label="equanimity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434717" start="41341" end="41347" title="maitrī" label="maitrī"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583564" start="41374" end="41380" title="karuṇā" label="karuṇā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689785" start="41412" end="41418" title="mudita" label="mudita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165710" start="41449" end="41455" title="upekṣā" label="upekṣā"/>
<link wikidata="Q897336" start="41480" end="41492" title="brahmavihara" label="brahmavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="42006" end="42015" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="42457" end="42465" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="42576" end="42587" title="Bodhisattva" label="Bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="43026" end="43035" title="Vajrayana Buddhism" label="Vajrayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q625498" start="43367" end="43389" title="Kundalini" label="k&amp;quot;Kundalini&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="43629" end="43637" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q113155" start="43691" end="43699" title="Kamadeva" label="Kamadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="43801" end="43811" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364772" start="43911" end="43915" title="Rati" label="Rati"/>
<link wikidata="Q113155" start="43986" end="43994" title="Kamadeva" label="Kamadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536222" start="44035" end="44062" title="Chennakeshava Temple, Belur" label="Chennakeshava Temple, Belur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="44067" end="44076" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="44078" end="44083" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="44271" end="44279" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q682958" start="44485" end="44501" title="Bhagavata Purana" label="Bhagavata Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q312976" start="44521" end="44529" title="Tulsidas" label="Tulsidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337406" start="44560" end="44579" title="Narada Bhakti Sutra" label="Narada Bhakti Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q844066" start="44632" end="44638" title="Narada" label="Narada"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="44689" end="44698" title="Vaishnava" label="Vaishnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="44712" end="44720" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144575" start="44838" end="44856" title="Gaudiya Vaishnavism" label="Gaudiya Vaishnavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q113904" start="45633" end="45638" title="Radha" label="Radha"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="45683" end="45690" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q113904" start="45933" end="45938" title="Radha" label="Radha"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="45963" end="45970" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="46046" end="46051" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q389414" start="46071" end="46083" title="Gita Govinda" label="Gita Govinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q335015" start="46093" end="46101" title="Jayadeva" label="Jayadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="46169" end="46177" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49773" start="46823" end="46838" title="social movement" label="social movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="46852" end="46860" title="marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="47012" end="47025" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="47031" end="47039" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="47709" end="47717" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q445939" start="47976" end="47989" title="Roger Scruton" label="Roger Scruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205927" start="47994" end="48007" title="Robert Nozick" label="Robert Nozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830429" start="48182" end="48198" title="Michael Friedman (philosopher)" label="Michael Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48644" end="48660" title="Monique Wonderly" label="Monique Wonderly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620273" start="48844" end="48861" title="J. David Velleman" label="J. David Velleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q211539" start="49053" end="49072" title="Peter Singer" label="Peter Singer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769048" start="49530" end="49543" title="Annette Baier" label="Annette Baier"/>
<link wikidata="Q93229140" start="49548" end="49564" title="Neera K. Badhwar" label="Neera K. Badhwar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17549" wikidata="Q1002861" url="?curid=17549" title="Forever Changes">
<text>Forever Changes is the third studio album by the American rock band Love, released on November 1, 1967, by Elektra Records. The album saw the group embrace a subtler folk-influenced sound based around acoustic guitars and orchestral arrangements, while primary songwriter Arthur Lee explored darker themes alluding to mortality and his growing disillusionment with the era&#x27;s counterculture. It was the final album recorded by the original band lineup; after its completion, guitarist Bryan MacLean left the group acrimoniously, and Lee subsequently dismissed the other members.

&quot;Forever Changes&quot; had only moderate success on the album charts upon release, peaking at No. 154 in the US and No. 24 in the UK. In subsequent years, it has become recognized as an influential document of 1960s psychedelia and named among the greatest albums of all time by a variety of publications.

==Background==

In 1966, Love released their first two albums in relatively rapid succession; the second, &quot;Da Capo&quot;, spawned their only Top 40 hit, &quot;7 and 7 Is&quot;. However, the group&#x27;s opportunity for major national success dwindled as a consequence of frontman Arthur Lee&#x27;s unwillingness to tour, his deteriorating relationship with Love&#x27;s other songwriter Bryan MacLean, and the overshadowing presence of label-mates the Doors. In a 1992 interview, MacLean spoke of him and Lee &quot;competing a bit like Lennon and McCartney to see who would come up with the better song. It was part of our charm. Everybody had different behaviour patterns. Eventually, the others couldn&#x27;t cut it&quot;. Throughout this period, the band – reduced to a quintet with the departures of Alban &quot;Snoopy&quot; Pfisterer and Tjay Cantrelli – were known to retreat to a dilapidated mansion in Hollywood, nicknamed &quot;The Castle&quot;, to use heroin, causing further stagnation. The band was allowed to live in this mansion as long as they maintained it and paid property taxes. According to author John Einerson, the rumor of it being formerly lived in by Bela Lugosi is a myth.

===Inspiration===
Rather than base his writings on Los Angeles&#x27;s burgeoning hippie scene, Lee&#x27;s material for &quot;Forever Changes&quot; was drawn from his lifestyle and environment. The songs reflected upon grim but blissful themes and Lee&#x27;s skepticism of the flower power movement. Writer Andrew Hultkrans explained Lee&#x27;s frame of mind at the time: &quot;Arthur Lee was one member of the &#x27;60s counterculture who didn&#x27;t buy flower-power wholesale, who intuitively understood that letting the sunshine in wouldn&#x27;t instantly vaporize the world&#x27;s (or his own) dark stuff&quot;. With the band in disarray, and increasingly concerned over his own mortality, Lee envisioned &quot;Forever Changes&quot; as a lament to his memory.

Having already produced the group&#x27;s first two albums, Bruce Botnick was enlisted to oversee the production of the third album along with Lee. Botnick, who had just finished working on Buffalo Springfield&#x27;s &quot;Buffalo Springfield Again&quot;, invited Neil Young to co-produce the album, but Young, after initially agreeing, excused himself from the project. As Botnick recalled &quot;Neil really had the burning desire to go solo and realize his dream without being involved in another band&quot;. According to the liner notes of the compilation album &quot;Love Story&quot;, Young was involved in &quot;Forever Changes&quot; long enough to arrange the track &quot;The Daily Planet&quot;; Young, however, has denied such involvement.

The title of the album came from a story that Lee had heard about a friend-of-a-friend who had broken up with his girlfriend. She exclaimed, &quot;You said you would love me forever!&quot; and he replied, &quot;Well, forever changes.&quot; Lee also noted that, since the name of the band was Love, the full title was actually &quot;Love Forever Changes&quot;.

==Recording==
According to AllMusic, the band embraced &quot;a more gentle, contemplative, and organic sound on &quot;Forever Changes&quot;,&quot; with much of the album &quot;built around interwoven acoustic guitar textures and subtle orchestrations, with strings and horns both reinforcing and punctuating the melodies.&quot; Elektra Records founder Jac Holzman had suggested that Love &quot;advance backwards&quot; by embracing the more subtle approach of folk music, and Lee, while typically independent in his musical directions, accepted the suggestion. Stephen M. Deusner of &quot;Pitchfork&quot; stated that Lee paired his &quot;dark, discomfiting lyrics&quot; with music that draws from rock, psychedelia, folk, pop, classical, and mariachi influences.
Love started recording &quot;Forever Changes&quot; in June 1967 at Sunset Sound Recorders. However, beginning with the early recording sessions, the band, except Lee, was plagued by internal conflicts and lack of preparation for Lee&#x27;s intricate arrangements. Through Holzman&#x27;s perspective, Botnick was an &quot;album savior&quot;, guiding and motivating Lee&#x27;s bandmates out of their trying period. To compel the band to participate, Botnick enlisted Wrecking Crew session musicians Billy Strange (guitar), Don Randi (piano), Hal Blaine (drums), and Carol Kaye (bass guitar) to work with Lee, completing the sessions for &quot;Andmoreagain&quot; and &quot;The Daily Planet&quot; in one day. Shocked by the notion of losing their roles, Botnick&#x27;s plan succeeded in motivating the other Love members to participate in recording the remaining material.

Lee spent three weeks with arranger David Angel, playing and singing the orchestral parts to him. Lee envisioned the horns and strings as part of the material from the beginning. String and horn overdubs on September 18, followed by two more stereo mixing sessions, completed the sessions.

==Release and reception==
===Initial release===
Upon its release in late 1967, &quot;Forever Changes&quot; was only moderately successful commercially. It peaked at No. 154 in 1968, which was the lowest showing of Love&#x27;s first three albums. &quot;Forever Changes&quot; had a much stronger showing in Great Britain, where it reached No. 24 on the UK album chart in 1968.

Initial reviews were positive. Writing for &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; in 1968, Jim Bickhart regarded &quot;Forever Changes&quot; as Love&#x27;s &quot;most sophisticated album yet&quot;, applauding the orchestral arrangements and recording quality. In &quot;Esquire&quot;, Robert Christgau called it an elaboration on Love&#x27;s original musical style and &quot;a vast improvement&quot; over their previous recordings, because &quot;Lee has stopped trying to imitate Mick Jagger with his soft voice, and the lyrics, while still obscure, now have an interesting surface as well.&quot; Pete Johnson of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; believed the album could &quot;survive endless listening with no diminishing either of power or of freshness&quot;, adding that &quot;parts of the album are beautiful; others are disturbingly ugly, reflections of the pop movement towards realism&quot;. Gene Youngblood of &quot;LA Free Express&quot; also praised the album, calling it &quot;melancholy iconoclasm and tasteful romanticism.&quot;

===Retrospective acclaim===

In a retrospective review, AllMusic stated that despite the album&#x27;s initial muted reception, &quot;years later it became recognized as one of the finest and most haunting albums to come out of the Summer of Love,&quot; calling it &quot;an album that heralds the last days of a golden age and anticipates the growing ugliness that would dominate the counterculture in 1968 and 1969.&quot; The 1979 edition of &quot;The Rolling Stone Record Guide&quot; gave the album a rating of five stars (out of five). It also received five stars in the 1983 edition of the guide and in the 1992 guide four. In a special issue of &quot;Mojo&quot; magazine, &quot;Forever Changes&quot; was ranked the second greatest psychedelic album of all time. In the January 1996 issue, &quot;Mojo&quot; readers selected &quot;Forever Changes&quot; as number 11 on the &quot;100 Greatest Albums Ever Made&quot;. &quot;Forever Changes&quot; was praised by a group of members of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom in 2002 as being one of the greatest albums of all time.

===Reissues===
&quot;Forever Changes&quot; was included in its entirety on the 2-CD retrospective Love compilation &quot;Love Story 1966–1972&quot;, released by Rhino Records in 1995. The album was re-released in an expanded single-CD version by Rhino in 2001, featuring alternate mixes, outtakes and the group&#x27;s 1968 single, &quot;Your Mind and We Belong Together&quot;/&quot;Laughing Stock&quot;, the final tracks ever to feature the &quot;Forever Changes&quot; line-up of Arthur Lee, Johnny Echols, Ken Forssi, Michael Stuart-Ware and Bryan MacLean (Forssi and MacLean both died in 1998).

&quot;The Forever Changes Concert&quot; was released on DVD in 2003 and marked the first time many of the songs had been performed live. The set features the entire album performed in its original running order, recorded in early 2003 during Lee&#x27;s tour of England, in which he was backed by the band Baby Lemonade and members of the Stockholm Strings &#x27;n&#x27; Horns ensemble. The DVD features the album concert, five bonus performances, documentary footage and an interview with Lee.

A double-CD &quot;Collector&#x27;s Edition&quot; of the album was issued by Rhino Records on April 22, 2008. The first disc consists of a remastered version of the original 1967 album. The second disc contains a previously unissued alternate stereo mix of the album, plus ten bonus tracks.

A Super High Material CD (SHM-CD) version of &quot;Forever Changes&quot; was released by Warner Music Japan in 2009, and a 24 bit 192 kHz High Resolution version of the album was released by HDTracks in 2014, and in the same year a hybrid Super Audio CD (SACD) version of the album was released by Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab.

A 50th anniversary deluxe edition box set was released by Rhino on April 6, 2018, featuring four CDs, a DVD and an LP. It contains remastered versions of the stereo, mono and alternate stereo mixes of the album, a disc of demos, outtakes, alternate mixes and non-album tracks, a DVD containing a 24/96 stereo mix of the album and a bonus music video, and a new LP remaster of the album, remastered by Bruce Botnick and cut from high resolution audio by Bernie Grundman.

==Legacy==
In 2008, the album was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame and in 2011, the album was added to the National Recording Registry. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked it number 180 on its 2020 list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. The album was also included in Robert Christgau&#x27;s &quot;Basic Record Library&quot; of 1950s and 1960s recordings, published in &quot;Christgau&#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies&quot; (1981). It was voted number 12 in Colin Larkin&#x27;s All Time Top 1000 Albums 3rd Edition (2000). In 2013, &quot;NME&quot; ranked the album number 37 on their list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. Publishers such as AllMusic and &quot;Slant Magazine&quot; have praised the album as well. In a 2005 survey held by British television&#x27;s Channel 4, the album was ranked 83rd in the 100 greatest albums of all time. The album was included in the 2005 book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot;.

According to the &quot;New Musical Express&quot;, the Stone Roses&#x27; relationship with their future producer John Leckie was settled when they all agreed that &quot;Forever Changes&quot; was the &quot;best record ever&quot;. Robert Plant is an admirer of the album.

==Track listing==
All songs written by Arthur Lee, except &quot;Alone Again Or&quot; and &quot;Old Man&quot; by Bryan MacLean. Details are taken from the 50th Anniversary Edition.
2001 Rhino bonus tracks

A single disc collection, presenting the original stereo album, remastered, plus the following bonus tracks:
2008 Rhino &quot;Collector&#x27;s Edition&quot; bonus tracks

A two-disc collection. Disc 1 presents the original stereo album, remastered, while disc 2 is a previously unreleased alternate stereo mix of the album, featuring the following bonus tracks:
2018 &quot;50th Anniversary Edition&quot; bonus discs

A box set comprising four CDs, one LP and one DVD: disc 2 presents the original mono album, remastered; disc 3 is the alternate stereo mix; disc 4 is outtakes, single versions, demos, session highlights and non album tracks from the era; disc 5 is the original stereo album on vinyl, remastered and cut from high resolution audio; and disc 6 is a 24/96 stereo mix on DVD, featuring a bonus music video.


==Personnel==
According to the 2001 reissue CD booklet.

Love
* Arthur Lee – guitar, vocals
* Bryan MacLean – guitar, vocals
* Johnny Echols – guitar
* Ken Forssi – bass guitar
* Michael Stuart-Ware – drums, percussion

Additional musicians
* Carol Kaye – bass guitar on &quot;Andmoreagain&quot; and &quot;The Daily Planet&quot;
* Don Randi – keyboards on &quot;Andmoreagain&quot; and &quot;The Daily Planet&quot;; piano on &quot;Old Man&quot; and &quot;Bummer in the Summer&quot;; harpsichord on &quot;The Red Telephone&quot;
* Billy Strange – electric guitar on &quot;Andmoreagain&quot; and &quot;The Daily Planet&quot;
* Hal Blaine – drums on &quot;Andmoreagain&quot; and &quot;The Daily Planet&quot;
* Neil Young – arranger on &quot;The Daily Planet&quot;
* David Angel – arranger
* Robert Barene, Arnold Belnick, James Getzoff, Marshall Sosson, Darrel Terwilliger – violin
* Norman Botnick – viola
* Jesse Ehrlich – cello
* Chuck Berghofer – double bass
* Bud Brisbois, Roy Caton, Ollie Mitchell – trumpet
* Richard Leith – trombone

Production and design
==See also==
*Timeline of 1960s counterculture

==References==
==External links==
*Inside the National Recording Registry segment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="58" end="62" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q664248" start="68" end="72" title="Love (band)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="107" end="122" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="166" end="170" title="folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="201" end="216" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="222" end="245" title="orchestral music" label="orchestral arrangements"/>
<link wikidata="Q543545" start="272" end="282" title="Arthur Lee (musician)" label="Arthur Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="369" end="394" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="era&amp;#x27;s counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581967" start="489" end="502" title="Bryan MacLean" label="Bryan MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="805" end="816" title="psychedelic music" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q647700" start="1008" end="1015" title="Da Capo (Love album)" label="Da Capo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643906" start="1060" end="1070" title="7 and 7 Is" label="7 and 7 Is"/>
<link wikidata="Q543545" start="1181" end="1191" title="Arthur Lee (musician)" label="Arthur Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581967" start="1287" end="1300" title="Bryan MacLean" label="Bryan MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="1348" end="1357" title="the Doors" label="the Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="1436" end="1456" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon and McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="2076" end="2087" title="Bela Lugosi" label="Bela Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="2181" end="2187" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254661" start="2376" end="2388" title="flower power" label="flower power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="2510" end="2534" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="&amp;#x27;60s counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301795" start="2924" end="2937" title="Bruce Botnick" label="Bruce Botnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q48992" start="3054" end="3073" title="Buffalo Springfield" label="Buffalo Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q851530" start="3087" end="3112" title="Buffalo Springfield Again" label="Buffalo Springfield Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="3128" end="3138" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="4000" end="4008" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="4209" end="4222" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="4230" end="4237" title="string section" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824192" start="4242" end="4247" title="Brass section" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="4301" end="4316" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079102" start="4325" end="4336" title="Jac Holzman" label="Jac Holzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="4432" end="4442" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="4561" end="4570" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="4669" end="4673" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q666011" start="4675" end="4686" title="psychedelia" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="4694" end="4697" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="4699" end="4708" title="classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q464129" start="4714" end="4722" title="mariachi" label="mariachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304002" start="4802" end="4824" title="Sunset Sound Recorders" label="Sunset Sound Recorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594426" start="5200" end="5213" title="The Wrecking Crew (music)" label="Wrecking Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="5214" end="5231" title="Session musician" label="session musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q543632" start="5232" end="5245" title="Billy Strange" label="Billy Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239457" start="5256" end="5265" title="Don Randi" label="Don Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570092" start="5275" end="5285" title="Hal Blaine" label="Hal Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q433273" start="5299" end="5309" title="Carol Kaye" label="Carol Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q25190087" start="5641" end="5652" title="David Angel (musician)" label="David Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="6321" end="6334" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="6528" end="6535" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="6543" end="6559" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="6738" end="6749" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730368" start="6855" end="6867" title="Pete Johnson (rock critic)" label="Pete Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="6881" end="6898" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="7357" end="7365" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q932701" start="7532" end="7546" title="Summer of Love" label="Summer of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="7956" end="7960" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="8036" end="8047" title="Psychedelic music" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="8288" end="8326" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="8546" end="8559" title="Rhino Records" label="Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859724" start="10067" end="10092" title="Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab" label="Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894402" start="10548" end="10563" title="Bernie Grundman" label="Bernie Grundman"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="10618" end="10637" title="Grammy Hall of Fame Award" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="10678" end="10705" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="10774" end="10809" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="10842" end="10858" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10949" end="11008" title="Christgau&amp;#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies" label="Christgau&amp;#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="11049" end="11061" title="Colin Larkin (writer)" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="11069" end="11093" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="11129" end="11132" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="11239" end="11247" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="11258" end="11272" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="11362" end="11371" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="11485" end="11525" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="11557" end="11576" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q29606" start="11584" end="11599" title="the Stone Roses" label="the Stone Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q542115" start="11646" end="11657" title="John Leckie" label="John Leckie"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="11762" end="11774" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q543545" start="11843" end="11853" title="Arthur Lee (musician)" label="Arthur Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734396" start="11868" end="11882" title="Alone Again Or" label="Alone Again Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581967" start="11916" end="11929" title="Bryan MacLean" label="Bryan MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q543545" start="12895" end="12905" title="Arthur Lee (musician)" label="Arthur Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581967" start="12925" end="12938" title="Bryan MacLean" label="Bryan MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182881" start="12958" end="12971" title="Johnny Echols" label="Johnny Echols"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195223" start="12983" end="12993" title="Ken Forssi" label="Ken Forssi"/>
<link wikidata="Q433273" start="13074" end="13084" title="Carol Kaye" label="Carol Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239457" start="13162" end="13171" title="Don Randi" label="Don Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q543632" start="13360" end="13373" title="Billy Strange" label="Billy Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570092" start="13455" end="13465" title="Hal Blaine" label="Hal Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="13537" end="13547" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q25190087" start="13593" end="13604" title="David Angel (musician)" label="David Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089091" start="13760" end="13775" title="Chuck Berghofer" label="Chuck Berghofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927486" start="13792" end="13804" title="Bud Brisbois" label="Bud Brisbois"/>
<link wikidata="Q26818529" start="13806" end="13815" title="Roy Caton" label="Roy Caton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869489" start="13906" end="13938" title="Timeline of 1960s counterculture" label="Timeline of 1960s counterculture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17553" wikidata="Q83219" url="?curid=17553" title="Kepler's laws of planetary motion">
<text>In astronomy, Kepler&#x27;s laws of planetary motion, published by Johannes Kepler in 1609 (except the third law, which was fully published in 1619), describe the orbits of planets around the Sun. These laws replaced circular orbits and epicycles in the heliocentric theory of Nicolaus Copernicus with elliptical orbits and explained how planetary velocities vary. The three laws state that:
# The orbit of a planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one of the two foci.
# A line segment joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time.
# The square of a planet&#x27;s orbital period is proportional to the cube of the length of the semi-major axis of its orbit.

The elliptical orbits of planets were indicated by calculations of the orbit of Mars. From this, Kepler inferred that other bodies in the Solar System, including those farther away from the Sun, also have elliptical orbits. The second law establishes that when a planet is closer to the Sun, it travels faster. The third law expresses that the farther a planet is from the Sun, the longer its orbital period.

Isaac Newton showed in 1687 that relationships like Kepler&#x27;s would apply in the Solar System as a consequence of his own laws of motion and law of universal gravitation.

A more precise historical approach is found in &quot;Astronomia nova&quot; and &quot;Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae&quot;.

==Comparison to Copernicus==

Johannes Kepler&#x27;s laws improved the model of Copernicus. According to Copernicus:

# The planetary orbit is a circle with epicycles.
# The Sun is approximately at the center of the orbit.
# The speed of the planet in the main orbit is constant.

Despite being correct in saying that the planets revolved around the Sun, Copernicus was incorrect in defining their orbits. Introducing physical explanations for movement in space beyond just geometry, Kepler correctly defined the orbit of planets as follows:

# The planetary orbit is &quot;not&quot; a circle with epicycles, but an &quot;ellipse&quot;.
# The Sun is &quot;not&quot; at the center but at a &quot;focal point&quot; of the elliptical orbit.
# Neither the linear speed nor the angular speed of the planet in the orbit is constant, but the &quot;area speed&quot; (closely linked historically with the concept of angular momentum) is constant.

The eccentricity of the orbit of the Earth makes the time from the March equinox to the September equinox, around 186 days, unequal to the time from the September equinox to the March equinox, around 179 days. A diameter would cut the orbit into equal parts, but the plane through the Sun parallel to the equator of the Earth cuts the orbit into two parts with areas in a 186 to 179 ratio, so the eccentricity of the orbit of the Earth is approximately
:formula_1

which is close to the correct value (0.016710218). The accuracy of this calculation requires that the two dates chosen be along the elliptical orbit&#x27;s minor axis and that the midpoints of each half be along the major axis. As the two dates chosen here are equinoxes, this will be correct when perihelion, the date the Earth is closest to the Sun, falls on a solstice. The current perihelion, near January 4, is fairly close to the solstice of December 21 or 22.

==Nomenclature==

It took nearly two centuries for the current formulation of Kepler&#x27;s work to take on its settled form. Voltaire&#x27;s &quot;Eléments de la philosophie de Newton&quot; (&quot;Elements of Newton&#x27;s Philosophy&quot;) of 1738 was the first publication to use the terminology of &quot;laws&quot;. The &quot;Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers&quot; in its article on Kepler (p. 620) states that the terminology of scientific laws for these discoveries was current at least from the time of Joseph de Lalande. It was the exposition of Robert Small, in &quot;An account of the astronomical discoveries of Kepler&quot; (1814) that made up the set of three laws, by adding in the third. Small also claimed, against the history, that these were empirical laws, based on inductive reasoning.

Further, the current usage of &quot;Kepler&#x27;s Second Law&quot; is something of a misnomer. Kepler had two versions, related in a qualitative sense: the &quot;distance law&quot; and the &quot;area law&quot;. The &quot;area law&quot; is what became the Second Law in the set of three; but Kepler did himself not privilege it in that way.

==History==
Kepler published his first two laws about planetary motion in 1609, having found them by analyzing the astronomical observations of Tycho Brahe. Kepler&#x27;s third law was published in 1619. Kepler had believed in the Copernican model of the Solar System, which called for circular orbits, but he could not reconcile Brahe&#x27;s highly precise observations with a circular fit to Mars&#x27; orbit – Mars coincidentally having the highest eccentricity of all planets except Mercury. His first law reflected this discovery.

In 1621, Kepler noted that his third law applies to the four brightest moons of Jupiter. Godefroy Wendelin also made this observation in 1643. The second law, in the &quot;area law&quot; form, was contested by Nicolaus Mercator in a book from 1664, but by 1670 his &quot;Philosophical Transactions&quot; were in its favour. As the century proceeded it became more widely accepted. The reception in Germany changed noticeably between 1688, the year in which Newton&#x27;s &quot;Principia&quot; was published and was taken to be basically Copernican, and 1690, by which time work of Gottfried Leibniz on Kepler had been published.

Newton was credited with understanding that the second law is not special to the inverse square law of gravitation, being a consequence just of the radial nature of that law, whereas the other laws do depend on the inverse square form of the attraction. Carl Runge and Wilhelm Lenz much later identified a symmetry principle in the phase space of planetary motion (the orthogonal group O(4) acting) which accounts for the first and third laws in the case of Newtonian gravitation, as conservation of angular momentum does via rotational symmetry for the second law.

==Formulary==
The mathematical model of the kinematics of a planet subject to the laws allows a large range of further calculations.

===First law ===
Kepler&#x27;s first law states that:

The orbit of every planet is an ellipse with the sun at one of the two foci.

Mathematically, an ellipse can be represented by the formula:
:formula_2

where formula_3 is the semi-latus rectum, &quot;ε&quot; is the eccentricity of the ellipse, &quot;r&quot; is the distance from the Sun to the planet, and &quot;θ&quot; is the angle to the planet&#x27;s current position from its closest approach, as seen from the Sun. So (&quot;r&quot;, &quot;θ&quot;) are polar coordinates.

For an ellipse 0 &lt; &quot;ε&quot; &lt; 1 ; in the limiting case &quot;ε&quot; = 0, the orbit is a circle with the Sun at the centre (i.e. where there is zero eccentricity).

At &quot;θ&quot; = 0°, perihelion, the distance is minimum
:formula_4

At &quot;θ&quot; = 90° and at &quot;θ&quot; = 270° the distance is equal to formula_3.

At &quot;θ&quot; = 180°, aphelion, the distance is maximum (by definition, aphelion is – invariably – perihelion plus 180°)
:formula_6

The semi-major axis &quot;a&quot; is the arithmetic mean between &quot;r&quot;min and &quot;r&quot;max:
:formula_7

The semi-minor axis &quot;b&quot; is the geometric mean between &quot;r&quot;min and &quot;r&quot;max:
:formula_8

The semi-latus rectum &quot;p&quot; is the harmonic mean between &quot;r&quot;min and &quot;r&quot;max:
:formula_9

The eccentricity &quot;ε&quot; is the coefficient of variation between &quot;r&quot;min and &quot;r&quot;max:
:formula_10

The area of the ellipse is
:formula_11

The special case of a circle is &quot;ε&quot; = 0, resulting in &quot;r&quot; = &quot;p&quot; = &quot;r&quot;min = &quot;r&quot;max = &quot;a&quot; = &quot;b&quot; and &quot;A&quot; = &quot;πr&quot;2.

===Second law===
Kepler&#x27;s second law states that:

A line joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time.

The orbital radius and angular velocity of the planet in the elliptical orbit will vary. This is shown in the animation: the planet travels faster when closer to the Sun, then slower when farther from the Sun. Kepler&#x27;s second law states that the blue sector has constant area.

====History and proofs====
Kepler notably arrived at this law through assumptions that were either only approximately true or outright false and can be outlined as follows:

# Planets are pushed around the Sun by a force from the Sun. This false assumption relies on incorrect Aristotelian physics that an object needs to be pushed to maintain motion.
# The propelling force from the Sun is inversely proportional to the distance from the Sun. Kepler reasoned this, believing that gravity spreading in three dimensions would be a waste, since the planets inhabited a plane. Thus, an inverse instead of the [correct] inverse square law.
# Because Kepler believed that force would be proportional to velocity, it followed from statements #1 and #2 that velocity would be inverse to the distance from the sun. This is also an incorrect tenet of Aristotelian physics.
# Since velocity is inverse to time, the distance from the sun would be proportional to the time to cover a small piece of the orbit. This is approximately true for elliptical orbits.
# The area swept out is proportional to the overall time. This is also approximately true.
# The orbits of a planet are circular (Kepler discovered his Second Law before his First Law, which contradicts this).

Nevertheless, the result of the Second Law is exactly true, as it is logically equivalent to the conservation of angular momentum, which is true for any body experiencing a radially symmetric force. A correct proof can be shown through this. Since the cross product of two vectors gives the area of a parallelogram possessing sides of those vectors, the triangular area dA swept out in a short period of time is given by half the cross product of the &quot;r&quot; and &quot;dx&quot; vectors, for some short piece of the orbit, &quot;dx&quot;.

formula_12
for a small piece of the orbit &quot;dx&quot; and time to cover it &quot;dt&quot;.

Thus formula_13

formula_14

Since the final expression is proportional to the total angular momentum formula_15, Kepler&#x27;s equal area law will hold for any system that conserves angular momentum. Since any radial force will produce no torque on the planet&#x27;s motion, angular momentum will be conserved.

====In terms of elliptical parameters====

In a small time formula_16 the planet sweeps out a small triangle having base line formula_17 and height formula_18 and area formula_19, so the constant areal velocity is formula_20

The area enclosed by the elliptical orbit is formula_21. So the period formula_22 satisfies
:formula_23

and the mean motion of the planet around the Sun
:formula_24

satisfies
:formula_25

And so, formula_26

===Third law===
Kepler&#x27;s third law states that:
The ratio of the square of an object&#x27;s orbital period with the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit is the same for all objects orbiting the same primary.

This captures the relationship between the distance of planets from the Sun, and their orbital periods.

Kepler enunciated in 1619 this third law in a laborious attempt to determine what he viewed as the &quot;music of the spheres&quot; according to precise laws, and express it in terms of musical notation. It was therefore known as the &quot;harmonic law&quot;. The original form of this law (referring to not the semi-major axis, but rather a &quot;mean distance&quot;) holds true only for planets with small eccentricities near zero.

Using Newton&#x27;s law of gravitation (published 1687), this relation can be found in the case of a circular orbit by setting the centripetal force equal to the gravitational force:
: formula_27

Then, expressing the angular velocity ω in terms of the orbital period formula_28 and then rearranging, results in Kepler&#x27;s Third Law:
: formula_29

A more detailed derivation can be done with general elliptical orbits, instead of circles, as well as orbiting the center of mass, instead of just the large mass. This results in replacing a circular radius, formula_17, with the semi-major axis, formula_31, of the elliptical relative motion of one mass relative to the other, as well as replacing the large mass formula_32 with formula_33. However, with planet masses being so much smaller than the Sun, this correction is often ignored. The full corresponding formula is:
:formula_34

where formula_32 is the mass of the Sun, formula_36 is the mass of the planet, formula_37 is the gravitational constant, formula_22 is the orbital period and formula_31 is the elliptical semi-major axis, and formula_40 is the astronomical unit, the average distance from earth to the sun.

==== Table ====
The following table shows the data used by Kepler to empirically derive his law:
Kepler became aware of John Napier&#x27;s recent invention of logarithms and log-log graphs before he discovered the pattern.

Upon finding this pattern Kepler wrote:

For comparison, here are modern estimates:
==Planetary acceleration==
Isaac Newton computed in his &quot;Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica&quot; the acceleration of a planet moving according to Kepler&#x27;s first and second laws.
# The &quot;direction&quot; of the acceleration is towards the Sun.
# The &quot;magnitude&quot; of the acceleration is inversely proportional to the square of the planet&#x27;s distance from the Sun (the &quot;inverse square law&quot;).

This implies that the Sun may be the physical cause of the acceleration of planets. However, Newton states in his &quot;Principia&quot; that he considers forces from a mathematical point of view, not a physical, thereby taking an instrumentalist view. Moreover, he does not assign a cause to gravity.

Newton defined the force acting on a planet to be the product of its mass and the acceleration (see Newton&#x27;s laws of motion). So:
# Every planet is attracted towards the Sun.
# The force acting on a planet is directly proportional to the mass of the planet and is inversely proportional to the square of its distance from the Sun.

The Sun plays an unsymmetrical part, which is unjustified. So he assumed, in Newton&#x27;s law of universal gravitation:
# All bodies in the Solar System attract one another.
# The force between two bodies is in direct proportion to the product of their masses and in inverse proportion to the square of the distance between them.

As the planets have small masses compared to that of the Sun, the orbits conform approximately to Kepler&#x27;s laws. Newton&#x27;s model improves upon Kepler&#x27;s model, and fits actual observations more accurately. (See two-body problem.)

Below comes the detailed calculation of the acceleration of a planet moving according to Kepler&#x27;s first and second laws.

===Acceleration vector===

From the heliocentric point of view consider the vector to the planet formula_41 where formula_42 is the distance to the planet and formula_43 is a unit vector pointing towards the planet.
formula_44

where formula_45 is the unit vector whose direction is 90 degrees counterclockwise of formula_43, and formula_47 is the polar angle, and where a dot on top of the variable signifies differentiation with respect to time.

Differentiate the position vector twice to obtain the velocity vector and the acceleration vector:
formula_48

So
formula_49
where the radial acceleration is
formula_50
and the transversal acceleration is
formula_51

===Inverse square law===
Kepler&#x27;s second law says that formula_52 is constant.

The transversal acceleration formula_53 is zero:
formula_54

So the acceleration of a planet obeying Kepler&#x27;s second law is directed towards the Sun.

The radial acceleration formula_55 is
formula_56

Kepler&#x27;s first law states that the orbit is described by the equation:
formula_57

Differentiating with respect to time
formula_58
or formula_59

Differentiating once more
formula_60

The radial acceleration formula_55 satisfies
formula_62

Substituting the equation of the ellipse gives
formula_63

The relation formula_64 gives the simple final result
formula_65

This means that the acceleration vector formula_66 of any planet obeying Kepler&#x27;s first and second law satisfies the inverse square law
formula_67
where
formula_68
is a constant, and formula_43 is the unit vector pointing from the Sun towards the planet, and formula_70 is the distance between the planet and the Sun.

Since mean motion formula_71 where formula_22 is the period, according to Kepler&#x27;s third law, formula_73 has the same value for all the planets. So the inverse square law for planetary accelerations applies throughout the entire Solar System.

The inverse square law is a differential equation. The solutions to this differential equation include the Keplerian motions, as shown, but they also include motions where the orbit is a hyperbola or parabola or a straight line. (See Kepler orbit.)

===Newton&#x27;s law of gravitation===
By Newton&#x27;s second law, the gravitational force that acts on the planet is:
formula_74

where formula_75 is the mass of the planet and formula_73 has the same value for all planets in the Solar System. According to Newton&#x27;s third law, the Sun is attracted to the planet by a force of the same magnitude. Since the force is proportional to the mass of the planet, under the symmetric consideration, it should also be proportional to the mass of the Sun, formula_77. So
formula_78
where formula_37 is the gravitational constant.

The acceleration of Solar System body number &quot;i&quot; is, according to Newton&#x27;s laws:
formula_80
where formula_81 is the mass of body &quot;j&quot;, formula_82 is the distance between body &quot;i&quot; and body &quot;j&quot;, formula_83 is the unit vector from body &quot;i&quot; towards body &quot;j&quot;, and the vector summation is over all bodies in the Solar System, besides &quot;i&quot; itself.

In the special case where there are only two bodies in the Solar System, Earth and Sun, the acceleration becomes
formula_84
which is the acceleration of the Kepler motion. So this Earth moves around the Sun according to Kepler&#x27;s laws.

If the two bodies in the Solar System are Moon and Earth the acceleration of the Moon becomes
formula_85

So in this approximation, the Moon moves around the Earth according to Kepler&#x27;s laws.

In the three-body case the accelerations are
formula_86

These accelerations are not those of Kepler orbits, and the three-body problem is complicated. But Keplerian approximation is the basis for perturbation calculations. (See Lunar theory.)

==Position as a function of time==
Kepler used his two first laws to compute the position of a planet as a function of time. His method involves the solution of a transcendental equation called Kepler&#x27;s equation.

The procedure for calculating the heliocentric polar coordinates (&quot;r&quot;,&quot;θ&quot;) of a planet as a function of the time &quot;t&quot; since perihelion, is the following five steps:

# Compute the mean motion , where &quot;P&quot; is the period.
# Compute the mean anomaly , where &quot;t&quot; is the time since perihelion.
# Compute the eccentric anomaly &quot;E&quot; by solving Kepler&#x27;s equation: formula_87 where formula_88 is the eccentricity.
# Compute the true anomaly &quot;θ&quot; by solving the equation: formula_89
# Compute the heliocentric distance &quot;r&quot;: formula_90 where formula_31 is the semimajor axis.
The position polar coordinates (&quot;r&quot;,&quot;θ&quot;) can now be written as a Cartesian vector formula_92 and the Cartesian velocity vector can then be calculated as formula_93, where formula_94 is the standard gravitational parameter.

The important special case of circular orbit, &quot;ε&quot; = 0, gives . Because the uniform circular motion was considered to be &quot;normal&quot;, a deviation from this motion was considered an anomaly.

The proof of this procedure is shown below.

===Mean anomaly, &quot;M&quot;===
The Keplerian problem assumes an elliptical orbit and the four points:
* &quot;s&quot; the Sun (at one focus of ellipse);
* &quot;z&quot; the perihelion
* &quot;c&quot; the center of the ellipse
* &quot;p&quot; the planet
and
* formula_95 distance between center and perihelion, the semimajor axis,
* formula_96

Division by &quot;a&quot;2/2 gives Kepler&#x27;s equation
formula_97

This equation gives &quot;M&quot; as a function of &quot;E&quot;. Determining &quot;E&quot; for a given &quot;M&quot; is the inverse problem. Iterative numerical algorithms are commonly used.

Having computed the eccentric anomaly &quot;E&quot;, the next step is to calculate the true anomaly &quot;θ&quot;.

But note: Cartesian position coordinates with reference to the center of ellipse are (&quot;a&quot; cos &quot;E&quot;, &quot;b&quot; sin &quot;E&quot;)

With reference to the Sun (with coordinates (&quot;c&quot;,0) = (&quot;ae&quot;,0) ), &quot;r&quot; = (&quot;a&quot; cos &quot;E&quot; – &quot;ae&quot;, &quot;b&quot; sin &quot;E&quot;)

True anomaly would be arctan(&quot;r&quot;&quot;y&quot;/&quot;r&quot;&quot;x&quot;), magnitude of &quot;r&quot; would be .

===True anomaly, &quot;θ&quot;===
Note from the figure that
formula_98
so that
formula_99

Dividing by formula_31 and inserting from Kepler&#x27;s first law
formula_101
to get
formula_102

The result is a usable relationship between the eccentric anomaly &quot;E&quot; and the true anomaly &quot;θ&quot;.

A computationally more convenient form follows by substituting into the trigonometric identity:
formula_103

Get
formula_104

Multiplying by 1 + &quot;ε&quot; gives the result
formula_105

This is the third step in the connection between time and position in the orbit.

=== Distance, &quot;r&quot; ===
The fourth step is to compute the heliocentric distance &quot;r&quot; from the true anomaly &quot;θ&quot; by Kepler&#x27;s first law:
formula_106

Using the relation above between &quot;θ&quot; and &quot;E&quot; the final equation for the distance &quot;r&quot; is:
formula_107

==See also==

* Circular motion
* Free-fall time
* Gravity
* Kepler orbit
* Kepler problem
* Kepler&#x27;s equation
* Laplace–Runge–Lenz vector
* Specific relative angular momentum, relatively easy derivation of Kepler&#x27;s laws starting with conservation of angular momentum
== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
== General bibliography ==
* Kepler&#x27;s life is summarized on pp. 523–627 and Book Five of his &quot;magnum opus&quot;, &quot;Harmonice Mundi&quot; (&quot;harmonies of the world&quot;), is reprinted on: 
* A derivation of Kepler&#x27;s third law of planetary motion is a standard topic in engineering mechanics classes. See, for example: .
* 

==External links==

* B.Surendranath Reddy; animation of Kepler&#x27;s laws: applet 
* Crowell, Benjamin, &quot;Light and Matter&quot;, an online book that gives a proof of the first law without the use of calculus (see section 15.7)
* David McNamara and Gianfranco Vidali, &quot;Kepler&#x27;s Second Law – Java Interactive Tutorial&quot;, an interactive Java applet that aids in the understanding of Kepler&#x27;s Second Law.
* Cain, Gay (May 10, 2010), &quot;Astronomy Cast&quot;, &quot;Ep. 189: Johannes Kepler and His Laws of Planetary Motion&quot;
* University of Tennessee&#x27;s Dept. Physics &amp; Astronomy: Astronomy 161, &quot;Johannes Kepler: The Laws of Planetary Motion&quot;
* Solar System Simulator (Interactive Applet) 
* &quot;Kepler and His Laws&quot; in &quot;From Stargazers to Starships&quot; by David P. Stern (10 October 2016)
* by Jens Puhle (Dec 27, 2023) – a video explaining and visualizing Kepler&#x27;s three laws of planetary motion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3" end="12" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="14" end="52" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="67" end="82" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261398" start="217" end="231" title="circular orbit" label="circular orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q961202" start="237" end="246" title="deferent and epicycle" label="epicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984081" start="254" end="273" title="Copernican heliocentrism" label="heliocentric theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="277" end="296" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="302" end="318" title="elliptical orbit" label="elliptical orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="422" end="429" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568" start="461" end="465" title="focus (geometry)" label="foci"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="600" end="614" title="orbital period" label="orbital period"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="664" end="679" title="semi-major and semi-minor axes" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="775" end="779" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="833" end="845" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="1105" end="1117" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="1231" end="1245" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="laws of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="1250" end="1278" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="law of universal gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q779311" start="1334" end="1349" title="Astronomia nova" label="Astronomia nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q16777454" start="1366" end="1398" title="Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae" label="Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="1437" end="1452" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="1487" end="1497" title="Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="2029" end="2036" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568" start="2102" end="2113" title="Focus (geometry)" label="focal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266743" start="2248" end="2258" title="areal velocity" label="area speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="2314" end="2330" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="2350" end="2362" title="Orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348808" start="2370" end="2388" title="orbit of the Earth" label="orbit of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="2413" end="2426" title="March equinox" label="March equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530126" start="2434" end="2451" title="September equinox" label="September equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="2651" end="2658" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="3109" end="3119" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="3174" end="3182" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="3405" end="3413" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14525437" start="3609" end="3649" title="Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers" label="Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q168419" start="3797" end="3814" title="Joseph de Lalande" label="Joseph de Lalande"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349851" start="3841" end="3853" title="Robert Small (minister)" label="Robert Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="4047" end="4060" title="empirical law" label="empirical law"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="4072" end="4091" title="inductive reasoning" label="inductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="4579" end="4590" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984081" start="4666" end="4682" title="Copernican heliocentrism" label="Copernican model"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="4887" end="4899" title="Orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203" start="5028" end="5048" title="Galilean moons" label="four brightest moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="5052" end="5059" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q735426" start="5061" end="5078" title="Godefroy Wendelin" label="Godefroy Wendelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362753" start="5182" end="5199" title="Nicolaus Mercator" label="Nicolaus Mercator"/>
<link wikidata="Q913162" start="5243" end="5269" title="Philosophical Transactions" label="Philosophical Transactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="5449" end="5458" title="Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Principia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="5553" end="5570" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q57564" start="5856" end="5866" title="Carl Runge" label="Carl Runge"/>
<link wikidata="Q638320" start="5871" end="5883" title="Wilhelm Lenz" label="Wilhelm Lenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="5934" end="5945" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="5971" end="5987" title="orthogonal group" label="orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="6086" end="6118" title="conservation of angular momentum" label="conservation of angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568" start="6429" end="6433" title="Focus (geometry)" label="foci"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="6533" end="6550" title="semi-latus rectum" label="semi-latus rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104486" start="6573" end="6585" title="Eccentricity (mathematics)" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="6816" end="6833" title="polar coordinates" label="polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="7035" end="7045" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="7196" end="7204" title="aphelion" label="aphelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="7311" end="7326" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="7348" end="7363" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="7427" end="7442" title="semi-minor axis" label="semi-minor axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="7464" end="7478" title="geometric mean" label="geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q188347" start="7581" end="7594" title="harmonic mean" label="harmonic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q623738" start="7692" end="7716" title="coefficient of variation" label="coefficient of variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="7781" end="7785" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051198" start="8727" end="8747" title="Physics (Aristotle)" label="Aristotelian physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266743" start="10858" end="10872" title="areal velocity" label="areal velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720536" start="11001" end="11012" title="mean motion" label="mean motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="11195" end="11209" title="orbital period" label="orbital period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478979" start="11526" end="11546" title="Musica universalis" label="music of the spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q172881" start="11987" end="12004" title="centripetal force" label="centripetal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="12768" end="12783" title="Solar mass" label="mass of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="12841" end="12863" title="gravitational constant" label="gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="12970" end="12987" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="13154" end="13165" title="John Napier" label="John Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="13369" end="13381" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="13404" end="13447" title="Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="13458" end="13470" title="acceleration" label="acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="14099" end="14104" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="14149" end="14153" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="14180" end="14208" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="14494" end="14536" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q232976" start="14973" end="14989" title="two-body problem" label="two-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="15156" end="15168" title="heliocentric" label="heliocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="15295" end="15306" title="unit vector" label="unit vector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15493" end="15496" title="Notation for differentiation#Newton&amp;#x27;s notation" label="dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="16570" end="16588" title="Inverse-square law" label="inverse square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="17049" end="17070" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="17208" end="17217" title="hyperbola" label="hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="17221" end="17229" title="parabola" label="parabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="17235" end="17248" title="straight line" label="straight line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="17255" end="17267" title="Kepler orbit" label="Kepler orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="17313" end="17337" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s second law" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s second law"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="17530" end="17553" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s third law" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s third law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="17823" end="17845" title="gravitational constant" label="gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q607699" start="18819" end="18837" title="three-body problem" label="three-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="18899" end="18911" title="perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443023" start="18931" end="18943" title="Lunar theory" label="Lunar theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q864333" start="19110" end="19133" title="Transcendental function" label="transcendental equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q932001" start="19141" end="19163" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="19319" end="19329" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720536" start="19375" end="19386" title="mean motion" label="mean motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="19438" end="19450" title="mean anomaly" label="mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000619" start="19517" end="19534" title="eccentric anomaly" label="eccentric anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264448" start="19647" end="19659" title="true anomaly" label="true anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q579338" start="20021" end="20053" title="standard gravitational parameter" label="standard gravitational parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="20375" end="20391" title="Elliptic orbit" label="elliptical orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="20484" end="20494" title="Perihelion and aphelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q932001" start="20690" end="20712" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273008" start="21876" end="21898" title="trigonometric identity" label="trigonometric identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q715746" start="22402" end="22417" title="Circular motion" label="Circular motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499609" start="22420" end="22434" title="Free-fall time" label="Free-fall time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="22437" end="22444" title="Gravity" label="Gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="22447" end="22459" title="Kepler orbit" label="Kepler orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564682" start="22462" end="22476" title="Kepler problem" label="Kepler problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q932001" start="22479" end="22501" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153324" start="22504" end="22529" title="Laplace–Runge–Lenz vector" label="Laplace–Runge–Lenz vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010521" start="22532" end="22566" title="Specific relative angular momentum" label="Specific relative angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066757" start="22834" end="22849" title="Harmonice Mundi" label="Harmonice Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="23191" end="23202" title="On-line book" label="online book"/>
</links>
</doc>
