<doc id="15155" wikidata="Q46868" url="?curid=15155" title="I. M. Pei">
<text>Ieoh Ming Pei ( ; ; April 26, 1917 – May 16, 2019) was a Chinese-American architect. Born in Guangzhou into a Chinese family, Pei drew inspiration at an early age from the garden villas at Suzhou, the traditional retreat of the scholar-gentry to which his family belonged. In 1935, he moved to the United States and enrolled in the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s architecture school, but quickly transferred to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Unhappy with the focus on Beaux-Arts architecture at both schools, he spent his free time researching emerging architects, especially Le Corbusier.

After graduating from MIT, Pei enrolled in the Harvard Graduate School of Design (GSD) where he befriended faculty members Walter Gropius and Marcel Breuer, both of whom had formerly taught at the Bauhaus. 

Beginning in 1948, Pei worked as an in-house architect for New York City real estate developer William Zeckendorf. In 1955, he established an independent design firm, I. M. Pei &amp; Associates. In 1966, the firm was reorganized as I. M. Pei &amp; Partners, and in 1989 reorganized 
as Pei Cobb Freed &amp; Partners. Pei retired from full-time practice in 1990. In his retirement, he worked as an architectural consultant primarily with his sons&#x27; architectural firm Pei Partnership Architects.

Pei&#x27;s first major recognition came with the Mesa Laboratory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado (designed in 1961, and completed in 1967). His new stature led to his selection as chief architect for the John F. Kennedy Library in Massachusetts. He went on to design Dallas City Hall and the East Building of the National Gallery of Art. He returned to China for the first time in 1975 to design a hotel at Fragrant Hills and, fifteen years later, designed Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong. In the early 1980s, Pei was the focus of controversy when he designed a glass-and-steel pyramid for the Louvre in Paris. He designed the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center in Dallas, the Miho Museum in Japan, Shigaraki, near Kyoto, and the chapel of the junior and high school: MIHO Institute of Aesthetics, the Suzhou Museum in Suzhou, Museum of Islamic Art in Qatar, and the Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art in Luxembourg.

Pei won prizes and awards in the field of architecture, including the AIA Gold Medal in 1979, the first Praemium Imperiale for Architecture in 1989, and the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum, in 2003. In 1983, he won the Pritzker Prize, which is sometimes referred to as the Nobel Prize of architecture.

== Childhood ==
I. M. Pei&#x27;s ancestry traces back to the Ming dynasty, when his family moved from Anhui to Suzhou. The family made their wealth in medicinal herbs, then joined the ranks of the scholar-gentry. Pei Ieoh Ming was born on April 26, 1917, to Tsuyee and Lien Kwun, and the family moved to Hong Kong one year later. It eventually included five children. As a boy, Pei was very close to his mother, a devout Buddhist, who was recognized for her skills as a flautist. She invited him, but not his brothers or sisters, to join her on meditation retreats. His relationship with his father was less intimate. Their interactions were respectful but distant.

Pei&#x27;s ancestors&#x27; success meant that the family lived in the upper echelons of society, but Pei said his father was &quot;not cultivated in the ways of the arts&quot;. The younger Pei, drawn more to music and other cultural forms than to his father&#x27;s domain of banking, explored art on his own. &quot;I have cultivated myself,&quot; he said later.

Pei studied in St. Paul&#x27;s College in Hong Kong as a child. When Pei was 10, his father received a promotion and relocated with his family to Shanghai. Pei attended St. John&#x27;s Middle School, the secondary school of St. John&#x27;s University that was run by Anglican missionaries. Academic discipline was rigorous; students were allowed only one half-day each month for leisure. Pei enjoyed playing billiards and watching Hollywood movies, especially those of Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin. He also learned rudimentary English by reading the Bible and novels by Charles Dickens.

Shanghai&#x27;s many international elements gave it the name &quot;Paris of the East&quot;. The city&#x27;s global architectural flavors had a profound influence on Pei, from The Bund waterfront area to the Park Hotel, built in 1934. He was also impressed by the many gardens of Suzhou, where he spent the summers with extended family and regularly visited a nearby ancestral shrine. The Shizilin Garden, built in the 14th century by a Buddhist monk and owned by Pei&#x27;s uncle Bei Runsheng, was especially influential. He spoke later of his fondness for the garden&#x27;s blending of natural and human-built structures.

Soon after the move to Shanghai, Pei&#x27;s mother developed cancer. She was prescribed opium for pain and assigned the task of preparing her pipe to Pei. She died shortly after his thirteenth birthday, and he was profoundly upset. The children were sent to live with extended family, as their father became more consumed by his work. Pei said: &quot;My father began living his own separate life pretty soon after that.&quot; His father later married a woman named Aileen, who moved to New York later in her life.

== Education and formative years ==
As Pei neared the end of his secondary education, he decided to attend university. He was accepted by a number of schools, but enrolled at the University of Pennsylvania. Pei&#x27;s choice had two roots. While studying in Shanghai, he had closely examined the catalogs for various institutions of higher learning around the world. The architectural program at the University of Pennsylvania stood out to him. The other major factor was Hollywood. Pei was fascinated by the representations of college life in the films of Bing Crosby, which differed tremendously from the academic atmosphere in China. &quot;College life in the U.S. seemed to me to be mostly fun and games&quot;, he said in 2000. &quot;Since I was too young to be serious, I wanted to be part of it ... You could get a feeling for it in Bing Crosby&#x27;s movies. College life in America seemed very exciting to me. It&#x27;s not real, we know that. Nevertheless, at that time it was very attractive to me.&quot; Pei added that &quot;Crosby&#x27;s films in particular had a tremendous influence on my choosing the United States instead of England to pursue my education.&quot;

In 1935, Pei boarded a boat and sailed to San Francisco, then traveled by train to Philadelphia. What he found once he arrived differed vastly from his expectations. Professors at the University of Pennsylvania based their teaching in the Beaux-Arts style, rooted in the classical traditions of ancient Greece and Rome. Pei was more intrigued by modern architecture, and also felt intimidated by the high level of drafting proficiency shown by other students. He decided to abandon architecture and transferred to the engineering program at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Once he arrived, however, the dean of the architecture school commented on his eye for design and convinced Pei to return to his original major.

MIT&#x27;s architecture faculty was also focused on the Beaux-Arts school, and Pei found himself uninspired by the work. In the library he found three books by the Swiss-French architect Le Corbusier. Pei was inspired by the innovative designs of the new International Style, characterized by simplified form and the use of glass and steel materials. Le Corbusier visited MIT in , an occasion which powerfully affected Pei: &quot;The two days with Le Corbusier, or &#x27;Corbu&#x27; as we used to call him, were probably the most important days in my architectural education.&quot; Pei was also influenced by the work of U.S. architect Frank Lloyd Wright. In 1938 he drove to Spring Green, Wisconsin, to visit Wright&#x27;s famous Taliesin building. After waiting for two hours, however, he left without meeting Wright.

Although he disliked the Beaux-Arts emphasis, Pei excelled in his studies. &quot;I certainly don&#x27;t regret the time at MIT&quot;, he said later. &quot;There I learned the science and technique of building, which is just as essential to architecture.&quot; Pei received his BArch degree in 1940; his thesis was titled &quot;Standardized Propaganda Units for War Time and Peace Time China&quot;.

While visiting New York City in the late 1930s, Pei met a Wellesley College student named Eileen Loo. They began dating and married in the spring of 1942. She enrolled in the landscape architecture program at Harvard University, and Pei was thus introduced to members of the faculty at Harvard&#x27;s Graduate School of Design (GSD). He was excited by the lively atmosphere and joined the GSD in .

Less than a month later, Pei suspended his work at Harvard to join the National Defense Research Committee, which coordinated scientific research into U.S. weapons technology during World War II. Pei&#x27;s background in architecture was seen as a considerable asset; one member of the committee told him: &quot;If you know how to build you should also know how to destroy.&quot; The fight against Germany was ending, so he focused on the Pacific War. The U.S. realized that its bombs used against the stone buildings of Europe would be ineffective against Japanese cities, mostly constructed from wood and paper; Pei was assigned to work on incendiary bombs. Pei spent two and a half years with the NDRC, but revealed few details of his work.

In 1945, Eileen gave birth to a son, T&#x27;ing Chung, and she withdrew from the landscape architecture program in order to care for him. Pei returned to Harvard in the autumn of 1945, and received a position as assistant professor of design. The GSD was developing into a hub of resistance to the Beaux-Arts orthodoxy. At the center were members of the Bauhaus, a European architectural movement that had advanced the cause of modernist design. The Nazi regime had condemned the Bauhaus school, and its leaders left Germany. Two of them, Walter Gropius and Marcel Breuer, took positions at the Harvard GSD. Their iconoclastic focus on modern architecture appealed to Pei, and he worked closely with both men.

One of Pei&#x27;s design projects at the GSD was a plan for an art museum in Shanghai. He wanted to create a mood of Chinese authenticity in the architecture without using traditional materials or styles. The design was based on straight modernist structures, organized around a central courtyard garden, with other similar natural settings arranged nearby. It was very well received, with Gropius calling it &quot;the best thing done in [my] master class.&quot; Pei received his MArch degree in 1946, and taught at Harvard for another two years.

== Career ==
=== 1948–1956: early career with Webb and Knapp ===
In the spring of 1948, Pei was recruited by New York real estate magnate William Zeckendorf to join a staff of architects for his firm of Webb and Knapp to design buildings around the country. Pei found Zeckendorf&#x27;s personality the opposite of his own; his new boss was known for his loud speech and gruff demeanor. Nevertheless, they became good friends and Pei found the experience personally enriching. Zeckendorf was well connected politically, and Pei enjoyed learning about the social world of New York&#x27;s city planners.

His first project for Webb and Knapp was an apartment building, which received funding from the Housing Act of 1949. Pei&#x27;s design was based on a circular tower with concentric rings. The areas closest to the supporting pillar handled utilities and circulation, and the apartments themselves were located toward the outer edge. Zeckendorf loved the design and even showed it off to Le Corbusier when they met. The cost of such an unusual design was too high, however, and the building never progressed beyond the model stage.

Pei finally saw his architecture come to life in 1949, when he designed a two-story corporate building for Gulf Oil in Atlanta, Georgia. The building was demolished in February 2013 although the front façade was retained as part of an apartment development. His use of marble for the exterior curtain wall brought praise from the journal &quot;Architectural Forum&quot;. Pei&#x27;s designs echoed the work of Mies van der Rohe in the beginning of his career as also shown in his own weekend-house in Katonah, New York in 1952. Soon, Pei was so inundated with projects that he asked Zeckendorf for assistants, which he chose from his associates at the GSD, including Henry N. Cobb and Ulrich Franzen. They set to work on a variety of proposals, including the Roosevelt Field Shopping Mall on Long Island. The team also redesigned the Webb and Knapp office building, transforming Zeckendorf&#x27;s office into a circular space with teak walls and a glass clerestory. They also installed a control panel into the desk that allowed their boss to control the lighting in his office. The project took one year and exceeded its budget, but Zeckendorf was delighted with the results.

In 1952, Pei and his team began work on a series of projects in Denver, Colorado. The first of these was the Mile High Center, which compressed the core building into less than 25 percent of the total site; the rest is adorned with an exhibition hall and fountain-dotted plazas. One block away, Pei&#x27;s team also redesigned Denver&#x27;s Courthouse Square, which combined office spaces, commercial venues, and hotels. These projects helped Pei conceptualize architecture as part of the larger urban geography: &quot;I learned the process of development, and about the city as a living organism.&quot; These lessons, he said, became essential for later projects.

Pei and his team also designed a united urban area for Washington, D.C., called L&#x27;Enfant Plaza (named for French-American architect Pierre Charles L&#x27;Enfant). Pei&#x27;s associate Araldo Cossutta was the lead architect for the plaza&#x27;s North Building and South Building. Vlastimil Koubek was the architect for the East Building (L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel), and for the Center Building (now the United States Postal Service headquarters). The team set out with a broad vision that was praised by both &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and &quot;Washington Star&quot; (which rarely agreed on anything), but funding problems forced revisions and a significant reduction in scale.

In 1955, Pei&#x27;s group took a step toward institutional independence from Webb and Knapp by establishing a new firm called I. M. Pei &amp; Associates. (The name changed later to I. M. Pei &amp; Partners.) They gained the freedom to work with other companies, but continued working primarily with Zeckendorf. The new firm distinguished itself through the use of detailed architectural models. They took on the Kips Bay residential area on the East Side of Manhattan, where Pei set up Kips Bay Towers, two large long towers of apartments with recessed windows (to provide shade and privacy) in a neat grid, adorned with rows of trees. Pei involved himself in the construction process at Kips Bay, even inspecting the bags of cement to check for consistency of color.

The company continued its urban focus with the Society Hill project in central Philadelphia. Pei designed the Society Hill Towers, a three-building residential block injecting cubist design into the local 18th-century milieu. As with previous projects, abundant green spaces were central to Pei&#x27;s vision, which added traditional townhouses to aid the transition from classical to modern design.

From 1958 to 1963, Pei and Ray Affleck developed a key downtown block of Montreal in a phased process that involved one of Pei&#x27;s most admired structures in the Commonwealth, the cruciform tower known as the Royal Bank Plaza (Place Ville Marie). According to &quot;The Canadian Encyclopedia&quot; : 

Although those projects were satisfying, Pei wanted to establish an independent name for himself. In 1959, he was approached by MIT to design a building for its Earth science program. The Green Building continued the grid design of Kips Bay and Society Hill. The pedestrian walkway on the ground floor, however, was prone to sudden gusts of wind, which embarrassed Pei. &quot;Here I was from MIT,&quot; he said, &quot;and I didn&#x27;t know about wind-tunnel effects.&quot; At the same time, he co-designed the Luce Memorial Chapel at Tunghai University in Taichung, Taiwan. The soaring structure, commissioned by the same organization that had run his middle school in Shanghai, broke severely from the cubist grid patterns of his urban projects.

The challenge of coordinating those projects took an artistic toll on Pei. He found himself responsible for acquiring new building contracts and supervising the plans for them. As a result, he felt disconnected from the actual creative work. &quot;Design is something you have to put your hand to,&quot; he said. &quot;While my people had the luxury of doing one job at a time, I had to keep track of the whole enterprise.&quot; Pei&#x27;s dissatisfaction reached its peak at a time when financial problems began plaguing Zeckendorf&#x27;s firm. I. M. Pei and Associates officially broke from Webb and Knapp in 1960, which benefited Pei creatively but pained him personally. He had developed a close friendship with Zeckendorf, and both men were sad to part ways.

=== NCAR and related projects ===
Pei was able to return to hands-on design when he was approached in 1961 by Walter Orr Roberts to design the new Mesa Laboratory for the National Center for Atmospheric Research outside Boulder, Colorado. The project differed from Pei&#x27;s earlier urban work because it rested in an open area in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains. He drove around the region with his wife, visiting assorted buildings and surveying the natural environs. He was impressed by the United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, but felt it was &quot;detached from nature&quot;.

The conceptualization stages were important for Pei, presenting a need and an opportunity to break from the Bauhaus tradition. He later recalled the long periods of time he spent in the area: &quot;I recalled the places I had seen with my mother when I was a little boy—the mountaintop Buddhist retreats. There in the Colorado mountains, I tried to listen to the silence again—just as my mother had taught me. The investigation of the place became a kind of religious experience for me.&quot; Pei also drew inspiration from the Mesa Verde cliff dwellings of the Ancestral Puebloans; he wanted the buildings to exist in harmony with their natural surroundings. To this end, he called for a rock-treatment process that could color the buildings to match the nearby mountains. He also set the complex back on the mesa overlooking the city, and designed the approaching road to be long, winding, and indirect.

Roberts disliked Pei&#x27;s initial designs, referring to them as &quot;just a bunch of towers&quot;. Roberts intended his comments as typical of scientific experimentation, rather than artistic critique, but Pei was frustrated. His second attempt, however, fitted Roberts&#x27; vision perfectly: a spaced-out series of clustered buildings, joined by lower structures and complemented by two underground levels. The complex used many elements of cubist design, and the walkways were arranged to increase the probability of casual encounters among colleagues.

Once the laboratory was built, several problems with its construction became apparent. Leaks in the roof caused difficulties for researchers, and the shifting of clay soil beneath the building caused cracks which were expensive to repair. Still, both architect and project manager were pleased with the final result. Pei referred to the NCAR complex as his &quot;breakout building&quot;, and he remained a friend of Roberts until the scientist died in .

The success of NCAR brought renewed attention to Pei&#x27;s design acumen. He was recruited to work on a variety of projects, including the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University, the Everson Museum of Art in Syracuse, New York, the Sundrome terminal at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City, and dormitories at New College of Florida.

=== Kennedy Library ===
After President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in , his family and friends discussed constructing a library that would serve as a fitting memorial. A committee was formed to advise Kennedy&#x27;s widow Jacqueline, who would make the final decision. The group deliberated for months and considered many famous architects. Eventually, Kennedy chose Pei to design the library, based on two considerations. First, she appreciated the variety of ideas he had used for earlier projects. &quot;He didn&#x27;t seem to have just one way to solve a problem,&quot; she said. &quot;He seemed to approach each commission thinking only of it and then develop a way to make something beautiful.&quot; Ultimately, however, Kennedy made her choice based on her personal connection with Pei. Calling it &quot;really an emotional decision&quot;, she explained: &quot;He was so full of promise, like Jack; they were born in the same year. I decided it would be fun to take a great leap with him.&quot;

The project was plagued with problems from the outset. President Kennedy had begun considering the structure of his library soon after taking office, and he wanted to include archives from his administration, a museum of personal items, and a political science institute. After the assassination, the list expanded to include a fitting memorial tribute to the slain president. The variety of necessary inclusions complicated the design process and caused significant delays.

Pei&#x27;s first proposed design included a large glass pyramid that would fill the interior with sunlight, meant to represent the optimism and hope that Kennedy&#x27;s administration had symbolized for so many in the United States. Mrs. Kennedy liked the design, but resistance began in Cambridge, the first proposed site for the building, as soon as the project was announced. Many community members worried that the library would become a tourist attraction, causing particular problems with traffic congestion. Others worried that the design would clash with the architectural feel of nearby Harvard Square. By the mid-1970s, Pei tried proposing a new design, but the library&#x27;s opponents resisted every effort. These events pained Pei, who had sent all three of his sons to Harvard, and although he rarely discussed his frustration, it was evident to his wife. &quot;I could tell how tired he was by the way he opened the door at the end of the day,&quot; she said. &quot;His footsteps were dragging. It was very hard for I. M. to see that so many people didn&#x27;t want the building.&quot;

Finally the project moved to Columbia Point, near the University of Massachusetts Boston. The new site was less than ideal; it was located on an old landfill, and just over a large sewage pipe. Pei&#x27;s architectural team added more fill to cover the pipe and developed an elaborate ventilation system to conquer the odor. A new design was unveiled, combining a large square glass-enclosed atrium with a triangular tower and a circular walkway.

The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum was dedicated on October 20, 1979. Critics generally liked the finished building, but the architect himself was unsatisfied. The years of conflict and compromise had changed the nature of the design, and Pei felt that the final result lacked its original passion. &quot;I wanted to give something very special to the memory of President Kennedy,&quot; he said in 2000. &quot;It could and should have been a great project.&quot; Pei&#x27;s work on the Kennedy project boosted his reputation as an architect of note.

=== &quot;Pei Plan&quot; in Oklahoma City ===
The Pei Plan was a failed urban redevelopment initiative designed for downtown Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, in 1964. The plan called for the demolition of hundreds of old downtown structures in favor of renewed parking, office building, and retail developments, in addition to public projects such as the Myriad Convention Center and the Myriad Botanical Gardens. It was the dominant template for downtown development in Oklahoma City from its inception through the 1970s. The plan generated mixed results and opinion, largely succeeding in re-developing office building and parking infrastructure but failing to attract its anticipated retail and residential development. Significant public resentment also developed as a result of the destruction of multiple historic structures. As a result, Oklahoma City&#x27;s leadership avoided large-scale urban planning for downtown throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, until the passage of the Metropolitan Area Projects (MAPS) initiative in 1993.

=== Providence&#x27;s Cathedral Square ===
Another city which turned to Pei for urban renewal during this time was Providence, Rhode Island. In the late 1960s, Providence hired Pei to redesign Cathedral Square, a once-bustling civic center which had become neglected and empty, as part of an ambitious larger plan to redesign downtown. Pei&#x27;s new plaza, modeled after the Greek Agora marketplace, opened in 1972. The city ran out of money before Pei&#x27;s vision could be fully realized. Also, recent construction of a low-income housing complex and Interstate 95 had changed the neighborhood&#x27;s character permanently. In 1974, The Providence Evening Bulletin called Pei&#x27;s new plaza a &quot;conspicuous failure&quot;. By 2016, media reports characterized the plaza as a neglected, little-visited &quot;hidden gem&quot;.

=== Augusta, Georgia ===
In 1974, the city of Augusta, Georgia turned to Pei and his firm for downtown revitalization. The Chamber of Commerce building and Bicentennial Park were completed from his plan. In 1976, Pei designed a distinctive modern penthouse that was added to the roof of architect William Lee Stoddart&#x27;s historic Lamar Building, designed in 1916. In 1980, Pei and his company designed the Augusta Civic Center, now known as the James Brown Arena.

=== Dallas City Hall ===
Kennedy&#x27;s assassination also led indirectly to another commission for Pei&#x27;s firm. In 1964 the acting mayor of Dallas, Erik Jonsson, began working to change the community&#x27;s image. Dallas was known and disliked as the city where the president had been killed, but Jonsson began a program designed to initiate a community renewal. One of the goals was a new city hall, which could be a &quot;symbol of the people&quot;. Jonsson, a co-founder of Texas Instruments, learned about Pei from his associate Cecil Howard Green, who had recruited the architect for MIT&#x27;s Earth Sciences building.

Pei&#x27;s approach to the new Dallas City Hall mirrored those of other projects; he surveyed the surrounding area and worked to make the building fit. In the case of Dallas, he spent days meeting with residents of the city and was impressed by their civic pride. He also found that the skyscrapers of the downtown business district dominated the skyline, and sought to create a building which could face the tall buildings and represent the importance of the public sector. He spoke of creating &quot;a public-private dialogue with the commercial high-rises&quot;.

Working with his associate Theodore Musho, Pei developed a design centered on a building with a top much wider than the bottom; the facade leans at an angle of 34 degrees, which shades the building from the Texas sun. A plaza stretches out before the building, and a series of support columns holds it up. It was influenced by Le Corbusier&#x27;s High Court building in Chandigarh, India; Pei sought to use the significant overhang to unify the building and plaza. The project cost much more than initially expected, and took 11 years to complete. Revenue was secured in part by including a subterranean parking garage. The interior of the city hall is large and spacious; windows in the ceiling above the eighth floor fill the main space with light.

The city of Dallas received the building well, and a local television news crew found unanimous approval of the new city hall when it officially opened to the public in 1978. Pei himself considered the project a success, even as he worried about the arrangement of its elements. He said: &quot;It&#x27;s perhaps stronger than I would have liked; it&#x27;s got more strength than finesse.&quot; He felt that his relative lack of experience left him without the necessary design tools to refine his vision, but the community liked the city hall enough to invite him back. Over the years he went on to design five additional buildings in the Dallas area.

=== Hancock Tower, Boston ===
While Pei and Musho were coordinating the Dallas project, their associate Henry Cobb had taken the helm for a commission in Boston. John Hancock Insurance chairman Robert Slater hired I. M. Pei &amp; Partners to design a building that could overshadow the Prudential Tower, erected by their rival.

After the firm&#x27;s first plan was discarded due to a need for more office space, Cobb developed a new plan around a towering parallelogram, slanted away from the Trinity Church and accented by a wedge cut into each narrow side. To minimize the visual impact, the building was covered in large reflective glass panels; Cobb said this would make the building a &quot;background and foil&quot; to the older structures around it. When the Hancock Tower was finished in 1976, it was the tallest building in New England.

Serious issues of execution became evident in the tower almost immediately. Many glass panels fractured in a windstorm during construction in 1973. Some detached and fell to the ground, causing no injuries but sparking concern among Boston residents. The entire tower was reglazed with smaller panels, significantly increasing costs. Hancock sued the glass manufacturers, Libbey-Owens-Ford, as well as I. M. Pei &amp; Partners, for submitting plans that were &quot;not good and workmanlike&quot;. LOF countersued Hancock for defamation, accusing Pei&#x27;s firm of poor use of their materials; I. M. Pei &amp; Partners sued LOF in return. All three companies settled out of court in 1981.

The project became an albatross for Pei&#x27;s firm. Pei himself refused to discuss it for many years. The pace of new commissions slowed and the firm&#x27;s architects began looking overseas for opportunities. Cobb worked in Australia and Pei took on jobs in Singapore, Iran, and Kuwait. Although it was a difficult time for everyone involved, Pei later reflected with patience on the experience. &quot;Going through this trial toughened us,&quot; he said. &quot;It helped to cement us as partners; we did not give up on each other.&quot;

=== National Gallery East Building, Washington, DC.. ===

In the mid-1960s, directors of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., declared the need for a new building. Paul Mellon, a primary benefactor of the gallery and a member of its building committee, set to work with his assistant J. Carter Brown (who became gallery director in 1969) to find an architect. The new structure would be located to the east of the original building, and tasked with two functions: offer a large space for public appreciation of various popular collections; and house office space as well as archives for scholarship and research. They likened the scope of the new facility to the Library of Alexandria. After inspecting Pei&#x27;s work at the Des Moines Art Center in Iowa and the Johnson Museum at Cornell University, they offered him the commission.

Pei took to the project with vigor, and set to work with two young architects he had recently recruited to the firm, William Pedersen and Yann Weymouth. Their first obstacle was the unusual shape of the building site, a trapezoid of land at the intersection of Constitution and Pennsylvania Avenues. Inspiration struck Pei in 1968, when he scrawled a rough diagram of two triangles on a scrap of paper. The larger building would be the public gallery; the smaller would house offices and archives. This triangular shape became a singular vision for the architect. As the date for groundbreaking approached, Pedersen suggested to his boss that a slightly different approach would make construction easier. Pei simply smiled and said: &quot;No compromises.&quot;

The growing popularity of art museums presented unique challenges to the architecture. Mellon and Pei both expected large crowds of people to visit the new building, and they planned accordingly. To this end, Pei designed a large lobby roofed with enormous skylights. Individual galleries are located along the periphery, allowing visitors to return after viewing each exhibit to the spacious main room. A large mobile sculpture by American artist Alexander Calder was later added to the lobby. Pei hoped the lobby would be exciting to the public in the same way as the central room of the Guggenheim Museum is in New York City. The modern museum, he said later, &quot;must pay greater attention to its educational responsibility, especially to the young&quot;.

Materials for the building&#x27;s exterior were chosen with careful precision. To match the look and texture of the original gallery&#x27;s marble walls, builders re-opened the quarry in Knoxville, Tennessee, from which the first batch of stone had been harvested. The project even found and hired Malcolm Rice, a quarry supervisor who had overseen the original 1941 gallery project. The marble was cut into three-inch-thick blocks and arranged over the concrete foundation, with darker blocks at the bottom and lighter blocks on top.

The East Building was honored on May 30, 1978, two days before its public unveiling, with a black-tie party attended by celebrities, politicians, benefactors, and artists. When the building opened, popular opinion was enthusiastic. Large crowds visited the new museum, and critics generally voiced their approval. Ada Louise Huxtable wrote in &quot;The New York Times&quot; that Pei&#x27;s building was &quot;a palatial statement of the creative accommodation of contemporary art and architecture&quot;. The sharp angle of the smaller building has been a particular note of praise for the public; over the years it has become stained and worn from the hands of visitors.

Some critics disliked the unusual design, however, and criticized the reliance on triangles throughout the building. Others took issue with the large main lobby, particularly its attempt to lure casual visitors. In his review for &quot;Artforum&quot;, critic Richard Hennessy described a &quot;shocking fun-house atmosphere&quot; and &quot;aura of ancient Roman patronage&quot;. One of the earliest and most vocal critics, however, came to appreciate the new gallery once he saw it in person. Allan Greenberg had scorned the design when it was first unveiled, but wrote later to J. Carter Brown: &quot;I am forced to admit that you are right and I was wrong! The building is a masterpiece.&quot;
=== Fragrant Hills, China ===
After U.S. President Richard Nixon made his famous 1972 visit to China, a wave of exchanges took place between the two countries. One of these was a delegation of the American Institute of Architects in 1974, which Pei joined. It was his first trip back to China since leaving in 1935. He was favorably received, returned the welcome with positive comments, and a series of lectures ensued. Pei noted in one lecture that since the 1950s Chinese architects had been content to imitate Western styles; he urged his audience in one lecture to search China&#x27;s native traditions for inspiration.

In 1978, Pei was asked to initiate a project for his home country. After surveying a number of different locations, Pei fell in love with a valley that had once served as an imperial garden and hunting preserve known as Fragrant Hills. The site housed a decrepit hotel; Pei was invited to tear it down and build a new one. As usual, he approached the project by carefully considering the context and purpose. Likewise, he considered modernist styles inappropriate for the setting. Thus, he said, it was necessary to find &quot;a third way&quot;.

After visiting his ancestral home in Suzhou, Pei created a design based on some simple but nuanced techniques he admired in traditional residential Chinese buildings. Among these were abundant gardens, integration with nature, and consideration of the relationship between enclosure and opening. Pei&#x27;s design included a large central atrium covered by glass panels that functioned much like the large central space in his East Building of the National Gallery. Openings of various shapes in walls invited guests to view the natural scenery beyond. Younger Chinese who had hoped the building would exhibit some of Cubist flavor for which Pei had become known were disappointed, but the new hotel found more favor with government officials and architects.

The hotel, with 325 guest rooms and a four-story central atrium, was designed to fit perfectly into its natural habitat. The trees in the area were of special concern, and particular care was taken to cut down as few as possible. He worked with an expert from Suzhou to preserve and renovate a water maze from the original hotel, one of only five in the country. Pei was also meticulous about the arrangement of items in the garden behind the hotel; he even insisted on transporting of rocks from a location in southwest China to suit the natural aesthetic. An associate of Pei&#x27;s said later that he never saw the architect so involved in a project.

During construction, a series of mistakes collided with the nation&#x27;s lack of technology to strain relations between architects and builders. Whereas 200 or so workers might have been used for a similar building in the US, the Fragrant Hill project employed over 3,000 workers. This was mostly because the construction company lacked the sophisticated machines used elsewhere. The problems continued for months, until Pei had an uncharacteristically emotional moment during a meeting with Chinese officials. He later explained that his actions included &quot;shouting and pounding the table&quot; in frustration. The design staff noticed a difference in the manner of work among the crew after the meeting. As the opening neared, however, Pei found the hotel still needed work. He began scrubbing floors with his wife and ordered his children to make beds and vacuum floors. The project&#x27;s difficulties took an emotional and physical strain on the Pei family.

The Fragrant Hill Hotel opened on October 17, 1982, but quickly fell into disrepair. A member of Pei&#x27;s staff returned for a visit several years later and confirmed the dilapidated condition of the hotel. He and Pei attributed this to the country&#x27;s general unfamiliarity with deluxe buildings. The Chinese architectural community at the time gave the structure little attention, as their interest at the time centered on the work of American postmodernists such as Michael Graves.

=== Javits Center, New York ===

As the Fragrant Hill project neared completion, Pei began work on the Javits Center in New York City, for which his associate James Freed served as lead designer. Hoping to create a vibrant community institution in what was then a run-down neighborhood on Manhattan&#x27;s west side, Freed developed a glass-coated structure with an intricate space frame of interconnected metal rods and spheres.

The convention center was plagued from the start by budget problems and construction blunders. City regulations forbid a general contractor having final authority over the project, so architects and program manager Richard Kahan had to coordinate the wide array of builders, plumbers, electricians, and other workers. The forged steel globes to be used in the space frame came to the site with hairline cracks and other defects: 12,000 were rejected. These and other problems led to media comparisons with the disastrous Hancock Tower. One New York City official blamed Kahan for the difficulties, indicating that the building&#x27;s architectural flourishes were responsible for delays and financial crises. The Javits Center opened on April 3, 1986, to a generally positive reception.

=== Grand Louvre, Paris ===

When François Mitterrand was elected President of France in 1981, he laid out an ambitious plan for a variety of construction projects. One of these was the renovation of the Louvre. Mitterrand appointed a civil servant named to oversee it. After visiting museums in Europe and the United States, including the U.S. National Gallery, he asked Pei to join the team. The architect made three secretive trips to Paris, to determine the feasibility of the project; only one museum employee knew why he was there. Pei finally agreed that a new construction project was not only possible, but necessary for the future of the museum. He thus became the first foreign architect to work on the Louvre.

The heart of the new design included not only a renovation of the Cour Napoléon in the midst of the buildings, but also a transformation of the interiors. Pei proposed a central entrance, not unlike the lobby of the National Gallery East Building, which would link the three major wings around the central space. Below would be a complex of additional floors for research, storage, and maintenance purposes. At the center of the courtyard he designed a glass and steel pyramid, first proposed with the Kennedy Library, to serve as entrance and anteroom skylight. It was mirrored by an inverted pyramid to the west, to reflect sunlight into the complex. These designs were partly an homage to the fastidious geometry of the French landscape architect André Le Nôtre. Pei also found the pyramid shape best suited for stable transparency, and considered it &quot;most compatible with the architecture of the Louvre, especially with the faceted planes of its roofs&quot;.

Biasini and Mitterrand liked the plans, but the scope of the renovation displeased Louvre administrator André Chabaud. He resigned from his post, complaining that the project was &quot;unfeasible&quot; and posed &quot;architectural risks&quot;. Some sections of the French public also reacted harshly to the design, mostly because of the proposed pyramid. One critic called it a &quot;gigantic, ruinous gadget&quot;; another charged Mitterrand with &quot;despotism&quot; for inflicting Paris with the &quot;atrocity&quot;. Pei estimated that 90 percent of Parisians opposed his design. &quot;I received many angry glances in the streets of Paris,&quot; he said. Some condemnations carried nationalistic overtones. One opponent wrote: &quot;I am surprised that one would go looking for a Chinese architect in America to deal with the historic heart of the capital of France.&quot;
Soon, however, Pei and his team won the support of several key cultural icons, including the conductor Pierre Boulez and Claude Pompidou, widow of former French President Georges Pompidou, after whom the similarly controversial Centre Georges Pompidou was named. In an attempt to soothe public ire, Pei took a suggestion from then-mayor of Paris Jacques Chirac and placed a full-sized cable model of the pyramid in the courtyard. During the four days of its exhibition, an estimated 60,000 people visited the site. Some critics eased their opposition after witnessing the proposed scale of the pyramid.

Pei demanded a method of glass production that resulted in clear panes. The pyramid was constructed at the same time as the subterranean levels below, which caused difficulties during the building stages. As they worked, construction teams came upon an abandoned set of rooms containing 25,000 historical items; these were incorporated into the rest of the structure to add a new exhibition zone.

The new Cour Napoléon was opened to the public on October 14, 1988, and the Pyramid entrance was opened the following March. By this time, public opposition had softened; a poll found a 56 percent approval rating for the pyramid, with 23 percent still opposed. The newspaper &quot;Le Figaro&quot; had vehemently criticized Pei&#x27;s design, but later celebrated the tenth anniversary of its magazine supplement at the pyramid. Prince Charles of Britain surveyed the new site with curiosity, and declared it &quot;marvelous, very exciting&quot;. A writer in &quot;Le Quotidien de Paris&quot; wrote: &quot;The much-feared pyramid has become adorable.&quot;

The experience was exhausting for Pei, but also rewarding. &quot;After the Louvre,&quot; he said later, &quot;I thought no project would be too difficult.&quot; The pyramid achieved further widespread international recognition for its central role in the plot at the denouement of &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; by Dan Brown and its appearance in the final scene of the subsequent screen adaptation. The &quot;Louvre Pyramid&quot; became Pei&#x27;s most famous structure.

=== Meyerson Symphony Center, Dallas ===
The opening of the Louvre Pyramid coincided with four other projects on which Pei had been working, prompting architecture critic Paul Goldberger to declare 1989 &quot;the year of Pei&quot; in &quot;The New York Times&quot;. It was also the year in which Pei&#x27;s firm changed its name to Pei Cobb Freed &amp; Partners, to reflect the increasing stature and prominence of his associates. At the age of 72, Pei had begun thinking about retirement, but continued working long hours to see his designs come to light.
One of the projects took Pei back to Dallas, Texas, to design the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center. The success of city&#x27;s performing artists, particularly the Dallas Symphony Orchestra then led by conductor Eduardo Mata, led to interest by city leaders in creating a modern center for musical arts that could rival the best halls in Europe. The organizing committee contacted 45 architects, but at first Pei did not respond, thinking that his work on the Dallas City Hall had left a negative impression. One of his colleagues from that project, however, insisted that he meet with the committee. He did and, although it would be his first concert hall, the committee voted unanimously to offer him the commission. As one member put it: &quot;We were convinced that we would get the world&#x27;s greatest architect putting his best foot forward.&quot;

Because its main purpose was the presentation of live music, the hall needed a design focused on acoustics first, then public access and exterior aesthetics. To this end, a professional sound technician was hired to design the interior. He proposed a shoebox auditorium, used in the acclaimed designs of top European symphony halls such as the Amsterdam Concertgebouw and Vienna Musikverein. Pei drew inspiration for his adjustments from the designs of the German architect Johann Balthasar Neumann, especially the Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers. He also sought to incorporate some of the panache of the Paris Opéra designed by Charles Garnier.

Pei&#x27;s design placed the rigid shoebox at an angle to the surrounding street grid, connected at the north end to a long rectangular office building, and cut through the middle with an assortment of circles and cones. The design attempted to reproduce with modern features the acoustic and visual functions of traditional elements like filigree. The project was risky: its goals were ambitious and any unforeseen acoustic flaws would be virtually impossible to remedy after the hall&#x27;s completion. Pei admitted that he did not completely know how everything would come together. &quot;I can imagine only 60 percent of the space in this building,&quot; he said during the early stages. &quot;The rest will be as surprising to me as to everyone else.&quot; As the project developed, costs rose steadily and some sponsors considered withdrawing their support. Billionaire tycoon Ross Perot made a donation of US$10 million, on the condition that it be named in honor of Morton H. Meyerson, the longtime patron of the arts in Dallas.

The building opened and immediately garnered widespread praise, especially for its acoustics. After attending a week of performances in the hall, a music critic for &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote an enthusiastic account of the experience and congratulated the architects. One of Pei&#x27;s associates told him during a party before the opening that the symphony hall was &quot;a very mature building&quot;; he smiled and replied: &quot;Ah, but did I have to wait this long?&quot;

=== Bank of China, Hong Kong ===

A new offer had arrived for Pei from the Chinese government in 1982. With an eye toward the handover of Hong Kong from the British in 1997, authorities in China sought Pei&#x27;s aid on a new tower for the local branch of the Bank of China. The Chinese government was preparing for a new wave of engagement with the outside world and sought a tower to represent modernity and economic strength. Given the elder Pei&#x27;s history with the bank before the Communist takeover, government officials visited the 89-year-old man in New York to gain approval for his son&#x27;s involvement. Pei then spoke with his father at length about the proposal. Although the architect remained pained by his experience with Fragrant Hills, he agreed to accept the commission.
The proposed site in Hong Kong&#x27;s Central District was less than ideal; a tangle of highways lined it on three sides. The area had also been home to a headquarters for Japanese military police during World War II, and was notorious for prisoner torture. The small parcel of land made a tall tower necessary, and Pei had usually shied away from such projects; in Hong Kong especially, the skyscrapers lacked any real architectural character. Lacking inspiration and unsure of how to approach the building, Pei took a weekend vacation to the family home in Katonah, New York. There he found himself experimenting with a bundle of sticks until he happened upon a cascading sequence.

Pei felt that his design for the Bank of China Tower needed to reflect &quot;the aspirations of the Chinese people&quot;. The design that he developed for the skyscraper was not only unique in appearance, but also sound enough to pass the city&#x27;s rigorous standards for wind-resistance. The building is composed of four triangular shafts rising up from a square base, supported by a visible truss structure that distributes stress to the four corners of the base. Using the reflective glass that had become something of a trademark for him, Pei organized the facade around diagonal bracing in a union of structure and form that reiterates the triangle motif established in the plan. At the top, he designed the roofs at sloping angles to match the rising aesthetic of the building. Some influential advocates of &quot;feng shui&quot; in Hong Kong and China criticized the design, and Pei and government officials responded with token adjustments.

As the tower neared completion, Pei was shocked to witness the government&#x27;s massacre of unarmed civilians at the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. He wrote an opinion piece for &quot;The New York Times&quot; titled &quot;China Won&#x27;t Ever Be the Same&quot;, in which he said that the killings &quot;tore the heart out of a generation that carries the hope for the future of the country&quot;. The massacre deeply disturbed his entire family, and he wrote that &quot;China is besmirched.&quot;

=== 1990–2019: museum projects ===
As the 1990s began, Pei transitioned into a role of decreased involvement with his firm. The staff had begun to shrink, and Pei wanted to dedicate himself to smaller projects allowing for more creativity. Before he made this change, however, he set to work on his last major project as active partner: the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland, Ohio. Considering his work on such bastions of high culture as the Louvre and U.S. National Gallery, some critics were surprised by his association with what many considered a tribute to low culture. The sponsors of the hall, however, sought Pei for specifically this reason; they wanted the building to have an aura of respectability from the beginning. Pei accepted the commission in part because of the unique challenge it presented.

Using a glass wall for the entrance, similar in appearance to his Louvre pyramid, Pei coated the exterior of the main building in white metal, and placed a large cylinder on a narrow perch to serve as a performance space. The combination of off-centered wraparounds and angled walls was, Pei said, designed to provide &quot;a sense of tumultuous youthful energy, rebelling, flailing about&quot;.

The building opened in 1995, and was received with moderate praise. &quot;The New York Times&quot; called it &quot;a fine building&quot;, but Pei was among those who felt disappointed with the results. The museum&#x27;s early beginnings in New York combined with an unclear mission created a fuzzy understanding among project leaders for precisely what was needed. Although the city of Cleveland benefited greatly from the new tourist attraction, Pei was unhappy with it.

At the same time, Pei designed a new museum for Luxembourg, the &quot;Musée d&#x27;art moderne Grand-Duc Jean&quot;, commonly known as the Mudam. Drawing from the original shape of the Fort Thüngen walls where the museum was located, Pei planned to remove a portion of the original foundation. Public resistance to the historical loss forced a revision of his plan, however, and the project was nearly abandoned. The size of the building was halved, and it was set back from the original wall segments to preserve the foundation. Pei was disappointed with the alterations, but remained involved in the building process even during construction.

In 1995, Pei was hired to design an extension to the &quot;Deutsches Historisches Museum&quot;, or German Historical Museum in Berlin. Returning to the challenge of the East Building of the U.S. National Gallery, Pei worked to combine a modernist approach with a classical main structure. He described the glass cylinder addition as a &quot;beacon&quot;, and topped it with a glass roof to allow plentiful sunlight inside. Pei had difficulty working with German government officials on the project; their utilitarian approach clashed with his passion for aesthetics. &quot;They thought I was nothing but trouble&quot;, he said.

Pei also worked at this time on two projects for a new Japanese religious movement called &quot;Shinji Shumeikai&quot;. He was approached by the movement&#x27;s spiritual leader, Kaishu Koyama, who impressed the architect with her sincerity and willingness to give him significant artistic freedom. One of the buildings was a bell tower, designed to resemble the &quot;bachi&quot; used when playing traditional instruments like the &quot;shamisen&quot;. Pei was unfamiliar with the movement&#x27;s beliefs, but explored them in order to represent something meaningful in the tower. As he said: &quot;It was a search for the sort of expression that is not at all technical.&quot;
The experience was rewarding for Pei, and he agreed immediately to work with the group again. The new project was the Miho Museum, to display Koyama&#x27;s collection of tea ceremony artifacts. Pei visited the site in Shiga Prefecture, and during their conversations convinced Koyama to expand her collection. She conducted a global search and acquired more than 300 items showcasing the history of the Silk Road.

One major challenge was the approach to the museum. The Japanese team proposed a winding road up the mountain, not unlike the approach to the NCAR building in Colorado. Instead, Pei ordered a hole cut through a nearby mountain, connected to a major road via a bridge suspended from ninety-six steel cables and supported by a post set into the mountain. The museum itself was built into the mountain, with 80 percent of the building underground.

When designing the exterior, Pei borrowed from the tradition of Japanese temples, particularly those found in nearby Kyoto. He created a concise spaceframe wrapped into French limestone and covered with a glass roof. Pei also oversaw specific decorative details, including a bench in the entrance lobby, carved from a 350-year-old &quot;keyaki&quot; tree. Because of Koyama&#x27;s considerable wealth, money was rarely considered an obstacle; estimates at the time of completion put the cost of the project at US$350 million.

During the first decade of the 2000s, Pei designed a variety of buildings, including the Suzhou Museum near his childhood home. He also designed the Museum of Islamic Art in Doha, Qatar, at the request of the Al-Thani Family. Although it was originally planned for the corniche road along Doha Bay, Pei convinced the project coordinators to build a new island to provide the needed space. He then spent six months touring the region and surveying mosques in Spain, Syria, and Tunisia. He was especially impressed with the elegant simplicity of the Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo.

Once again, Pei sought to combine new design elements with the classical aesthetic most appropriate for the location of the building. The sand-colored rectangular boxes rotate evenly to create a subtle movement, with small arched windows at regular intervals into the limestone exterior. Inside, galleries are arranged around a massive atrium, lit from above. The museum&#x27;s coordinators were pleased with the project; its official website describes its &quot;true splendour unveiled in the sunlight,&quot; and speaks of &quot;the shades of colour and the interplay of shadows paying tribute to the essence of Islamic architecture&quot;.
The Macao Science Center in Macau was designed by Pei Partnership Architects in association with I. M. Pei. The project to build the science center was conceived in 2001 and construction started in 2006. The center was completed in 2009 and opened by the Chinese President Hu Jintao. The main part of the building is a distinctive conical shape with a spiral walkway and large atrium inside, similar to that of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City. Galleries lead off the walkway, mainly consisting of interactive exhibits aimed at science education. The building is in a prominent position by the sea and is now a Macau landmark.

Pei&#x27;s career ended with his death in May 2019, at 102 years of age.

== Style and method ==
Pei&#x27;s style was described as thoroughly modernist, with significant cubist themes. He was known for combining traditional architectural principles with progressive designs based on simple geometric patterns—circles, squares, and triangles are common elements of his work in both plan and elevation. As one critic wrote: &quot;Pei has been aptly described as combining a classical sense of form with a contemporary mastery of method.&quot; In 2000, biographer Carter Wiseman called Pei &quot;the most distinguished member of his Late-Modernist generation still in practice&quot;. At the same time, Pei himself rejected simple dichotomies of architectural trends. He once said: 

Pei&#x27;s work is celebrated throughout the world of architecture. His colleague John Portman once told him: &quot;Just once, I&#x27;d like to do something like the East Building.&quot; But this originality did not always bring large financial reward; as Pei replied to the successful architect: &quot;Just once, I&#x27;d like to make the kind of money you do.&quot; His concepts, moreover, were too individualized and dependent on context to have given rise to a particular school of design. Pei referred to his own &quot;analytical approach&quot; when explaining the lack of a &quot;Pei School&quot;.

&quot;For me,&quot; he said, &quot;the important distinction is between a stylistic approach to the design; and an analytical approach giving the process of due consideration to time, place, and purpose ... My analytical approach requires a full understanding of the three essential elements ... to arrive at an ideal balance among them.&quot;

== Awards and honors ==
In the words of his biographer, Pei won &quot;every award of any consequence in his art&quot;, including the Arnold Brunner Award from the National Institute of Arts and Letters (1963), the Gold Medal for Architecture from the American Academy of Arts and Letters (1979), the AIA Gold Medal (1979), the first &quot;Praemium Imperiale&quot; for Architecture from the Japan Art Association (1989), the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum, the 1998 Edward MacDowell Medal in the Arts, and the 2010 Royal Gold Medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects. In 1983 he was awarded the Pritzker Prize, sometimes referred to as the Nobel Prize of architecture. In its citation, the jury said: &quot;Ieoh Ming Pei has given this century some of its most beautiful interior spaces and exterior forms ... His versatility and skill in the use of materials approach the level of poetry.&quot; The prize was accompanied by a US$100,000 award, which Pei used to create a scholarship for Chinese students to study architecture in the U.S., on the condition that they return to China to work. In 1986, he was one of twelve recipients of the Medal of Liberty. When he was awarded the 2003 Henry C. Turner Prize by the National Building Museum, museum board chair Carolyn Brody praised his impact on construction innovation: &quot;His magnificent designs have challenged engineers to devise innovative structural solutions, and his exacting expectations for construction quality have encouraged contractors to achieve high standards.&quot; In December 1992, Pei was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George H. W. Bush. In 1996, Pei became the first person to be elected a foreign member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering. Pei was also an elected member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society.

== Personal life ==
Pei&#x27;s wife, Eileen Loo, died on June 20, 2014. Together they had three sons, T&#x27;ing Chung (1945–2003), Chien Chung (1946–2023; known as Didi), and Li Chung (b. 1949; known as Sandi); and a daughter, Liane (b. 1960). T&#x27;ing Chung was an urban planner and alumnus of his father&#x27;s alma mater MIT and Harvard. Chieng Chung and Li Chung, who are both Harvard Graduate School of Design alumni, founded and run Pei Partnership Architects. Liane is a lawyer.

In 2015, Pei&#x27;s home health aide, Eter Nikolaishvili, grabbed Pei&#x27;s right forearm and twisted it, resulting in bruising and bleeding and hospital treatment. Pei alleged that the assault occurred when Pei threatened to call the police about Nikolaishvili. Nikolaishvili agreed to plead guilty in 2016.

Pei celebrated his 100th birthday on April 26, 2017. He died at his Manhattan apartment on May 16, 2019, at the age of 102.

== See also ==
* Chinese Americans in New York City
* List of I. M. Pei projects

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Bibliography ===
* Boehm, Gero von. &quot;Conversations with I. M. Pei: Light Is the Key&quot;. Munich: Prestel, 2000. .
* Cobb, Henry Nichols (2018). &quot;Henry N. Cobb: Words and Works 1948–2018: Scenes from a Life in Architecture&quot;. New York: Monacelli Press. .
* Diamonstein, Barbaralee. &quot;American Architecture Now&quot;. New York: Rizzoli, 1980. .
* Heyer, Paul. &quot;Architects on Architecture: New Directions in America&quot;. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993. .
* Lenci, Ruggero. &quot;I. M. Pei: teoremi spaziali&quot;. Turin, Testo &amp; Immagine, 2004. .
* Moeller, Gerard M. and Weeks, Christopher. &quot;AIA Guide to the Architecture of Washington, D.C.&quot; Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006.
* Williams, Paul Kelsey. &quot;Southwest Washington, D.C.&quot; Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia, 2005.
* Wiseman, Carter. &quot;I. M. Pei: A Profile in American Architecture&quot;. New York: H. N. Abrams, 2001. .

===Documentaries===
*&quot;The Museum on the Mountain&quot;, 1998, aired on Ovation. The 60-minute documentary interviewed I. M. Pei in Japan on his design of Miho Museum, Japan. Compiled into a 2-hour home video documentary as &quot;I.M. Pei: The Museum on the Mountain&quot;, 2003.
*&quot;First Person Singular: I. M. Pei&quot;, 1997, aired on PBS. The 90-minute documentary interviewed I. M. Pei all over the world on his works. Compiled into a 2-hour home video documentary as &quot;I.M. Pei: The Museum on the Mountain&quot;, 2003.

== External links ==

* Pei Partnership Architects
* Pei Cobb Freed &amp; Partners
* I. M. Pei at the Digital Archive of American Architecture
* Pritzker Prize information and acceptance speech
* Concept sketches for The Musée d&#x27;Art Moderne
* I. M. Pei architecture on Google Maps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="0" end="13" title="I. M. Pei" label="Ieoh Ming Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="189" end="195" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959900" start="228" end="242" title="scholar-gentry" label="scholar-gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="332" end="358" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="418" end="455" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="483" end="506" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="591" end="603" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128016" start="653" end="686" title="Harvard Graduate School of Design" label="Harvard Graduate School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q61071" start="729" end="743" title="Walter Gropius" label="Walter Gropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q57588" start="748" end="761" title="Marcel Breuer" label="Marcel Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="803" end="810" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q903119" start="909" end="927" title="William Zeckendorf" label="William Zeckendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623279" start="1100" end="1129" title="Pei Cobb Freed &amp;amp; Partners" label="Pei Cobb Freed &amp;amp; Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110346" start="1285" end="1311" title="Pei Partnership Architects" label="Pei Partnership Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821069" start="1363" end="1378" title="Mesa Laboratory" label="Mesa Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q934589" start="1386" end="1426" title="National Center for Atmospheric Research" label="National Center for Atmospheric Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007919" start="1546" end="1569" title="John F. Kennedy Library" label="John F. Kennedy Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157989" start="1609" end="1625" title="Dallas City Hall" label="Dallas City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1634" end="1647" title="National Gallery of Art#Architecture" label="East Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="1655" end="1678" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q943688" start="1749" end="1763" title="Fragrant Hills" label="Fragrant Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q214855" start="1799" end="1829" title="Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong" label="Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13397" start="1901" end="1926" title="Louvre Pyramid" label="a glass-and-steel pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="1935" end="1941" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q670323" start="1968" end="2002" title="Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center" label="Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="2006" end="2012" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268542" start="2018" end="2029" title="Miho Museum" label="Miho Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q998042" start="2143" end="2156" title="Suzhou Museum" label="Suzhou Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148353" start="2168" end="2189" title="Museum of Islamic Art, Doha" label="Museum of Islamic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955758" start="2208" end="2244" title="Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art" label="Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317387" start="2331" end="2345" title="AIA Gold Medal" label="AIA Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q268670" start="2365" end="2383" title="Praemium Imperiale" label="Praemium Imperiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129820" start="2454" end="2491" title="Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum" label="Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="2522" end="2536" title="Pritzker Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="2667" end="2679" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="2708" end="2713" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="2717" end="2723" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959900" start="2803" end="2817" title="scholar-gentry" label="scholar-gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057437" start="2864" end="2870" title="Tsuyee Pei" label="Tsuyee"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3027" end="3035" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591075" start="3651" end="3674" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s College, Hong Kong" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578297" start="3860" end="3886" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s University, Shanghai" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="3903" end="3911" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341285" start="4044" end="4053" title="Cue sports" label="billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="4105" end="4118" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="4123" end="4138" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="4211" end="4226" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q125474" start="4404" end="4412" title="The Bund (Shanghai)" label="The Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q23812" start="4436" end="4446" title="Park Hotel Shanghai" label="Park Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555424" start="4617" end="4632" title="Lion Grove Garden" label="Shizilin Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="4941" end="4946" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="5547" end="5573" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="5925" end="5936" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6590" end="6603" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6631" end="6643" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="6787" end="6803" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts style"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="6843" end="6857" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6862" end="6866" title="ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="6894" end="6913" title="modern architecture" label="modern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184784" start="6962" end="6970" title="architectural drawing" label="drafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="7089" end="7126" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="7467" end="7479" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="7535" end="7554" title="International Style (architecture)" label="International Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="7916" end="7934" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046759" start="7956" end="7979" title="Spring Green, Wisconsin" label="Spring Green, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q734970" start="8011" end="8019" title="Taliesin (studio)" label="Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838776" start="8378" end="8383" title="Bachelor of Architecture" label="BArch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="8558" end="8575" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q47844" start="8675" end="8697" title="landscape architecture" label="landscape architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="8709" end="8727" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128016" start="8801" end="8826" title="Harvard Graduate School of Design" label="Graduate School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q501421" start="8970" end="9005" title="National Defense Research Committee" label="National Defense Research Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9081" end="9093" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="9338" end="9349" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="9541" end="9557" title="incendiary device" label="incendiary bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="9998" end="10005" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10094" end="10105" title="Nazi regime" label="Nazi regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q61071" start="10183" end="10197" title="Walter Gropius" label="Walter Gropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q57588" start="10202" end="10215" title="Marcel Breuer" label="Marcel Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q611694" start="10835" end="10840" title="Master of Architecture" label="MArch"/>
<link wikidata="Q903119" start="11041" end="11059" title="William Zeckendorf" label="William Zeckendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566992" start="11106" end="11120" title="Webb and Knapp" label="Webb and Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985066" start="11601" end="11620" title="Housing Act of 1949" label="Housing Act of 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549032" start="12120" end="12151" title="131 Ponce de Leon Avenue" label="corporate building for Gulf Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="12155" end="12162" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370962" start="12329" end="12341" title="curtain wall (architecture)" label="curtain wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="12445" end="12462" title="Mies van der Rohe" label="Mies van der Rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888777" start="12536" end="12553" title="Katonah, New York" label="Katonah, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726216" start="12702" end="12715" title="Henry N. Cobb" label="Henry N. Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475808" start="12720" end="12734" title="Ulrich Franzen" label="Ulrich Franzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q528994" start="12794" end="12823" title="Roosevelt Field (Shopping Mall)" label="Roosevelt Field Shopping Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="12827" end="12838" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="12966" end="12970" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="12989" end="12999" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="13277" end="13293" title="Denver" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455669" start="13959" end="13978" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q264764" start="14016" end="14044" title="Pierre Charles L&amp;#x27;Enfant" label="Pierre Charles L&amp;#x27;Enfant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17612211" start="14068" end="14083" title="Araldo Cossutta" label="Araldo Cossutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939037" start="14163" end="14179" title="Vlastimil Koubek" label="Vlastimil Koubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455670" start="14221" end="14246" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="14286" end="14314" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="14398" end="14417" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489540" start="14434" end="14449" title="Washington Star" label="Washington Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352349" start="14941" end="14960" title="architectural model" label="architectural model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501208" start="14980" end="14988" title="Kips Bay" label="Kips Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q500402" start="15013" end="15022" title="East Side (Manhattan)" label="East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="15026" end="15035" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414703" start="15054" end="15069" title="Kips Bay Towers" label="Kips Bay Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717906" start="15384" end="15396" title="Society Hill" label="Society Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="15416" end="15428" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552028" start="15447" end="15466" title="Society Hill Towers" label="Society Hill Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202402" start="15671" end="15680" title="townhouse" label="townhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420628" start="15765" end="15776" title="Ray Affleck" label="Ray Affleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="15811" end="15819" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344856" start="15968" end="15985" title="Place Ville Marie" label="Place Ville Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q130334" start="16007" end="16032" title="The Canadian Encyclopedia" label="The Canadian Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008" start="16204" end="16217" title="Earth science" label="Earth science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602382" start="16231" end="16245" title="Green Building (MIT)" label="Green Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="16490" end="16501" title="wind-tunnel" label="wind-tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415390" start="16554" end="16574" title="Luce Memorial Chapel" label="Luce Memorial Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q707948" start="16578" end="16596" title="Tunghai University" label="Tunghai University"/>
<link wikidata="Q245023" start="16600" end="16608" title="Taichung" label="Taichung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965750" start="17667" end="17685" title="Walter Orr Roberts" label="Walter Orr Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821069" start="17704" end="17719" title="Mesa Laboratory" label="Mesa Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q934589" start="17728" end="17768" title="National Center for Atmospheric Research" label="National Center for Atmospheric Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="17777" end="17784" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="17910" end="17925" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="18057" end="18088" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q237128" start="18689" end="18699" title="Mesa Verde National Park" label="Mesa Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q478805" start="18723" end="18742" title="Ancestral Puebloans" label="Ancestral Puebloans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="19514" end="19520" title="cubism" label="cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387536" start="20223" end="20269" title="S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications" label="S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="20273" end="20292" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417350" start="20298" end="20319" title="Everson Museum of Art" label="Everson Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="20323" end="20341" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639869" start="20347" end="20355" title="Sundrome" label="Sundrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="20368" end="20405" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982482" start="20443" end="20465" title="New College of Florida" label="New College of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="20508" end="20523" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="20528" end="20540" title="John F. Kennedy assassination" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="20696" end="20706" title="Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis" label="Jacqueline"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="22241" end="22250" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587858" start="22549" end="22563" title="Harvard Square" label="Harvard Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112511" start="23084" end="23098" title="Columbia Point (Boston)" label="Columbia Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144" start="23109" end="23143" title="University of Massachusetts Boston" label="University of Massachusetts Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007919" start="23507" end="23554" title="John F. Kennedy Library" label="John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="24196" end="24209" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824979" start="25051" end="25077" title="Metropolitan Area Projects Plan" label="Metropolitan Area Projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="25221" end="25245" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25299" end="25315" title="Cathedral of Saints Peter and Paul (Providence, Rhode Island)#Cathedral Square" label="Cathedral Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="25488" end="25493" title="Agora" label="Agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q821179" start="25661" end="25674" title="Interstate 95 in Rhode Island" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522349" start="25743" end="25774" title="The Providence Journal" label="The Providence Evening Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="25987" end="26003" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014437" start="26238" end="26258" title="William Lee Stoddart" label="William Lee Stoddart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480832" start="26275" end="26289" title="Lamar Building" label="Lamar Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686674" start="26390" end="26407" title="James Brown Arena" label="James Brown Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891705" start="26563" end="26575" title="J. Erik Jonsson" label="Erik Jonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="26892" end="26909" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357288" start="26948" end="26966" title="Cecil Howard Green" label="Cecil Howard Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602382" start="27015" end="27038" title="Green Building (MIT)" label="Earth Sciences building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157989" start="27072" end="27088" title="Dallas City Hall" label="Dallas City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="27955" end="27988" title="Government of Chandigarh" label="High Court building in Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726216" start="29117" end="29127" title="Henry N. Cobb" label="Henry Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237561" start="29175" end="29197" title="John Hancock Insurance" label="John Hancock Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q606823" start="29299" end="29315" title="Prudential Tower" label="Prudential Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114414" start="29328" end="29339" title="Prudential Insurance" label="their rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q901259" start="29507" end="29521" title="Trinity Church (Boston)" label="Trinity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q798416" start="29780" end="29793" title="200 Clarendon Street" label="Hancock Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="29847" end="29858" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709452" start="30573" end="30582" title="Albatross (metaphor)" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="30822" end="30826" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="30832" end="30838" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="31185" end="31208" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542805" start="31268" end="31279" title="Paul Mellon" label="Paul Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105100" start="31388" end="31403" title="J. Carter Brown" label="J. Carter Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="31767" end="31788" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263501" start="31830" end="31851" title="Des Moines Art Center" label="Des Moines Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734055" start="31868" end="31882" title="Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art" label="Johnson Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="31886" end="31904" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q212487" start="32057" end="32073" title="William Pedersen (architect)" label="William Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048857" start="32078" end="32091" title="Yann Weymouth" label="Yann Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q46303" start="32160" end="32169" title="trapezoid" label="trapezoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406648" start="32201" end="32213" title="Constitution Avenue" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455053" start="32218" end="32238" title="Pennsylvania Avenue (Washington, D.C.)" label="Pennsylvania Avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q784445" start="33114" end="33130" title="Mobile (sculpture)" label="mobile sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q151580" start="33150" end="33166" title="Alexander Calder" label="Alexander Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="33292" end="33309" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="33652" end="33661" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791138" start="34315" end="34334" title="Ada Louise Huxtable" label="Ada Louise Huxtable"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="34350" end="34368" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q386599" start="34909" end="34917" title="Artforum" label="Artforum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730642" start="35166" end="35181" title="Allan Greenberg" label="Allan Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105100" start="35252" end="35267" title="J. Carter Brown" label="J. Carter Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="35420" end="35433" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="35450" end="35469" title="1972 Nixon visit to China" label="1972 visit to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="35566" end="35598" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q943688" start="36215" end="36229" title="Fragrant Hills" label="Fragrant Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="39377" end="39391" title="postmodern architecture" label="postmodernists"/>
<link wikidata="Q314636" start="39400" end="39414" title="Michael Graves" label="Michael Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q564793" start="39520" end="39533" title="Javits Center" label="Javits Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q95330" start="39576" end="39587" title="James Ingo Freed" label="James Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q578444" start="39793" end="39804" title="space frame" label="space frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="40670" end="40689" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="40840" end="40846" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726910" start="41425" end="41438" title="Cour Napoléon" label="Cour Napoléon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13397" start="41812" end="41835" title="Louvre Pyramid" label="glass and steel pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177458" start="41944" end="41960" title="Pyramide Inversée" label="inverted pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q273849" start="42109" end="42123" title="André Le Nôtre" label="André Le Nôtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="43017" end="43030" title="nationalism" label="nationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="43311" end="43324" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q269422" start="43329" end="43344" title="Claude Pompidou" label="Claude Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="43379" end="43395" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="43436" end="43459" title="Centre Georges Pompidou" label="Centre Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="43554" end="43568" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726910" start="44218" end="44231" title="Cour Napoléon" label="Cour Napoléon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="44491" end="44500" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="44638" end="44652" title="Charles III of the United Kingdom" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226208" start="44774" end="44795" title="Le Quotidien de Paris" label="Le Quotidien de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q81689" start="45154" end="45171" title="The Da Vinci Code" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345" start="45181" end="45190" title="Dan Brown" label="Dan Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="45247" end="45264" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="screen adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13397" start="45276" end="45290" title="Louvre Pyramid" label="Louvre Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150934" start="45510" end="45525" title="Paul Goldberger" label="Paul Goldberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623279" start="45671" end="45700" title="Pei Cobb Freed &amp;amp; Partners" label="Pei Cobb Freed &amp;amp; Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q670323" start="45962" end="45996" title="Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center" label="Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q597572" start="46062" end="46087" title="Dallas Symphony Orchestra" label="Dallas Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q953007" start="46110" end="46122" title="Eduardo Mata" label="Eduardo Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="46852" end="46861" title="acoustics" label="acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500024" start="47006" end="47013" title="Shoebox style (architecture)" label="shoebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q849957" start="47099" end="47122" title="Concertgebouw, Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam Concertgebouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q686720" start="47127" end="47145" title="Musikverein" label="Vienna Musikverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q61349" start="47229" end="47253" title="Johann Balthasar Neumann" label="Johann Balthasar Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q694252" start="47270" end="47307" title="Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers" label="Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187840" start="47366" end="47377" title="Palais Garnier" label="Paris Opéra"/>
<link wikidata="Q313556" start="47390" end="47405" title="Charles Garnier (architect)" label="Charles Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001313" start="47747" end="47755" title="filigree" label="filigree"/>
<link wikidata="Q313697" start="48291" end="48301" title="Ross Perot" label="Ross Perot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="49059" end="49080" title="handover of Hong Kong" label="handover of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q790068" start="49193" end="49206" title="Bank of China" label="Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q14767" start="49765" end="49781" title="Central, Hong Kong" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888777" start="50286" end="50293" title="Katonah, New York" label="Katonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q214855" start="50445" end="50464" title="Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong" label="Bank of China Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="50807" end="50812" title="truss" label="truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q170537" start="51234" end="51243" title="feng shui" label="feng shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="51482" end="51515" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="52209" end="52235" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="52239" end="52248" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479257" start="52297" end="52309" title="high culture" label="high culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630264" start="52437" end="52448" title="low culture" label="low culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="53606" end="53616" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955758" start="53697" end="53702" title="Mudam" label="Mudam"/>
<link wikidata="Q585990" start="53743" end="53755" title="Fort Thüngen" label="Fort Thüngen"/>
<link wikidata="Q688335" start="54263" end="54292" title="Deutsches Historisches Museum" label="Deutsches Historisches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="54441" end="54450" title="Modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263926" start="54884" end="54915" title="Japanese new religions" label="new Japanese religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582528" start="54929" end="54945" title="Shinji Shumeikai" label="Shinji Shumeikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q263120" start="55202" end="55207" title="bachi" label="bachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q241337" start="55271" end="55279" title="shamisen" label="shamisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268542" start="55630" end="55641" title="Miho Museum" label="Miho Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q202298" start="55682" end="55694" title="Japanese tea ceremony" label="tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q131358" start="55730" end="55746" title="Shiga Prefecture" label="Shiga Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="55915" end="55924" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="56490" end="56495" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q578444" start="56518" end="56528" title="Space frame" label="spaceframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q920344" start="56710" end="56716" title="Zelkova serrata" label="keyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q998042" start="56989" end="57002" title="Suzhou Museum" label="Suzhou Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148353" start="57049" end="57070" title="Museum of Islamic Art, Doha" label="Museum of Islamic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="57074" end="57078" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258654" start="57105" end="57124" title="Collecting practices of the Al-Thani Family" label="the Al-Thani Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q489768" start="57169" end="57177" title="corniche" label="corniche"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812174" start="57189" end="57197" title="Doha Bay" label="Doha Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q915413" start="57448" end="57467" title="Mosque of Ibn Tulun" label="Mosque of Ibn Tulun"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="57471" end="57476" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084238" start="58124" end="58144" title="Macao Science Center" label="Macao Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110346" start="58170" end="58196" title="Pei Partnership Architects" label="Pei Partnership Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="58393" end="58402" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="58535" end="58563" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q764692" start="59627" end="59639" title="John Portman" label="John Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="59711" end="59724" title="East Building" label="East Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="60658" end="60696" title="National Institute of Arts and Letters" label="National Institute of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213551" start="60709" end="60719" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters Gold Medals" label="Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="60746" end="60782" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317387" start="60795" end="60809" title="AIA Gold Medal" label="AIA Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q268670" start="60834" end="60852" title="Praemium Imperiale" label="Praemium Imperiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129820" start="60955" end="60992" title="Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum" label="Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344291" start="61003" end="61025" title="Edward MacDowell Medal" label="Edward MacDowell Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q920783" start="61052" end="61068" title="Royal Gold Medal" label="Royal Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="61078" end="61115" title="Royal Institute of British Architects" label="Royal Institute of British Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="61144" end="61158" title="Pritzker Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130759" start="61689" end="61705" title="Medal of Liberty" label="Medal of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719070" start="61736" end="61757" title="Henry C. Turner Prize" label="Henry C. Turner Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q624008" start="61765" end="61789" title="National Building Museum" label="National Building Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="62124" end="62153" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="62167" end="62184" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q689633" start="62261" end="62291" title="Chinese Academy of Engineering" label="Chinese Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="62331" end="62368" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="62377" end="62407" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="62679" end="62692" title="Urban planning" label="urban planner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128016" start="62794" end="62827" title="Harvard Graduate School of Design" label="Harvard Graduate School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110346" start="62852" end="62878" title="Pei Partnership Architects" label="Pei Partnership Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944360" start="63230" end="63244" title="centenarian" label="100th birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="63279" end="63288" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30941369" start="63353" end="63387" title="Chinese people in New York City" label="Chinese Americans in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573713" start="63390" end="63416" title="List of I. M. Pei projects" label="List of I. M. Pei projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q118304" start="63472" end="63487" title="Gero von Boehm" label="Boehm, Gero von"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942516" start="63941" end="63955" title="Ruggero Lenci" label="Lenci, Ruggero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113263" start="64475" end="64482" title="Ovation (American TV channel)" label="Ovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268542" start="64558" end="64569" title="Miho Museum" label="Miho Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="64745" end="64748" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="65211" end="65222" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15156" wikidata="Q341911" url="?curid=15156" title="ICD (disambiguation)">
<text>[[ICD]] is the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, an international standard diagnostic tool.

ICD may also refer to:

==Organizations==
* Information Control Division of the US Army in Germany after WWII
* United States Army Medical Research Institute of Chemical Defense (USAMRICD or ICD)
* Iranian Club, Dubai
* Islamic Corporation for the Development of the Private Sector, of the Islamic Development Bank
* International Clothing Designs, UK clothing importer

==Science and technology==
* In-circuit debugger, in electronic hardware development
* Interface control document, in systems and software engineering
* MPLAB devices ICD (In-circuit debugger)
* Interatomic Coulombic decay, a relaxation process

===Medicine===
*Intrauterine contraceptive device
*Immunogenic cell death
*Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator
*Impulse control disorder
*Isobaric counterdiffusion

==Other uses==
* Doctor of Canon Law (Latin: &quot;Iuris Canonici Doctor&quot;)
* Incentive-centered design
* Inland container depot of Container Corporation of India
* Independence Commemorative Decoration (postnominal letters), an award in the Rhodesian honours system

==See also==
* Intelligence Community Directive 301 (ICD-301) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q341911" start="0" end="7" title="ICD (disambiguation)" label="[[ICD]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q341911" start="141" end="144" title="ICD (disambiguation)" label="ICD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662479" start="185" end="213" title="Information Control Division" label="Information Control Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889495" start="253" end="318" title="United States Army Medical Research Institute of Chemical Defense" label="United States Army Medical Research Institute of Chemical Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987837" start="339" end="358" title="Iranian Club, Dubai" label="Iranian Club, Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="431" end="455" title="Islamic Development Bank#Structure" label="Islamic Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878326" start="458" end="488" title="International Clothing Designs" label="International Clothing Designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660551" start="541" end="560" title="In-circuit debugger" label="In-circuit debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666037" start="599" end="625" title="Interface control document" label="Interface control document"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121870" start="665" end="678" title="MPLAB devices" label="MPLAB devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045511" start="707" end="734" title="Interatomic Coulombic decay" label="Interatomic Coulombic decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q899868" start="774" end="807" title="Intrauterine contraceptive device" label="Intrauterine contraceptive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144704" start="809" end="831" title="Immunogenic cell death" label="Immunogenic cell death"/>
<link wikidata="Q594446" start="833" end="871" title="Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator" label="Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201835" start="873" end="897" title="Impulse control disorder" label="Impulse control disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085253" start="899" end="924" title="Isobaric counterdiffusion" label="Isobaric counterdiffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43923" start="943" end="962" title="Doctor of Canon Law" label="Doctor of Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014254" start="1008" end="1033" title="Incentive-centered design" label="Incentive-centered design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632550" start="1062" end="1092" title="Container Corporation of India" label="Container Corporation of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015955" start="1095" end="1132" title="Independence Commemorative Decoration" label="Independence Commemorative Decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673489" start="1213" end="1249" title="Intelligence Community Directive 301" label="Intelligence Community Directive 301"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15158" wikidata="Q1179002" url="?curid=15158" title="Islamic Jihad">
<text>Islamic Jihad may refer to:

* Types of Islamic Jihad
* Jihad, the Islamic theological concept, literally meaning &quot;struggle&quot;
* Jihadism, a neologism for militant Islamic movements
* Islam and war
* Islamic Jihad Organization, defunct group active in Lebanon 1983-1992, precursor to Hezbollah
* Islamic Jihad Union, al-Qaeda affiliate active in Afghanistan and Pakistan since 2005
* Islamic Jihad of Yemen, defunct al-Qaeda affiliate active in Yemen 2008
* Military career of Muhammad
* List of expeditions of Muhammad
* Egyptian Islamic Jihad, al-Qaeda affiliate active in Egypt since the late 1970s
* Palestinian Islamic Jihad, group active in Gaza since 1981
* Turkish Islamic Jihad, group active in Turkey 1991-1996, now probably defunct

==See also==
*Jihad (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1179002" start="0" end="13" title="Islamic Jihad" label="Islamic Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31" end="53" title="Glossary_of_Islam#Jihad" label="Types of Islamic Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="56" end="61" title="Jihad" label="Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757343" start="137" end="145" title="Jihadism" label="Jihadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005933" start="192" end="205" title="Islam and war" label="Islam and war"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005981" start="208" end="234" title="Islamic Jihad Organization" label="Islamic Jihad Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674120" start="304" end="323" title="Islamic Jihad Union" label="Islamic Jihad Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12207542" start="392" end="414" title="Islamic Jihad of Yemen" label="Islamic Jihad of Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249599" start="466" end="493" title="Military career of Muhammad" label="Military career of Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q106223212" start="496" end="527" title="List of expeditions of Muhammad" label="List of expeditions of Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q310214" start="530" end="552" title="Egyptian Islamic Jihad" label="Egyptian Islamic Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q117907" start="612" end="637" title="Palestinian Islamic Jihad" label="Palestinian Islamic Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855281" start="673" end="694" title="Turkish Islamic Jihad" label="Turkish Islamic Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306412" start="766" end="788" title="Jihad (disambiguation)" label="Jihad (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15161" wikidata="Q213423" url="?curid=15161" title="I486">
<text>The Intel 486, officially named i486 and also known as 80486, is a microprocessor introduced in 1989. It is a higher-performance follow-up to the Intel 386. It represents the fourth generation of binary compatible CPUs following the 8086 of 1978, the Intel 80286 of 1982, and 1985&#x27;s i386.

It was the first tightly-pipelined x86 design as well as the first x86 chip to include more than one million transistors. It offered a large on-chip cache and an integrated floating-point unit. When it was announced, the initial performance was originally published between 15 and 20 VAX MIPS, between 37,000 and 49,000 dhrystones per second, and between 6.1 and 8.2 double-precision megawhetstones per second for both 25 and 33 MHz version. A typical 50 MHz i486 executes 41 million instructions per second Dhrystone MIPS and SPEC integer rating of 27.9. It is approximately twice as fast as the i386 or i286 per clock cycle. The i486&#x27;s improved performance is thanks to its five-stage pipeline with all stages bound to a single cycle. The enhanced FPU unit on the chip was significantly faster than the i387 FPU per cycle. The i387 FPU was a separate, optional math coprocessor installed in a motherboard socket alongside the i386.

The i486 was succeeded by the original Pentium. Orders were discontinued for the i486 on March 30, 2007 and the last shipments were on September 28, 2007.

==History==
The concept of this microprocessor generation was discussed with Pat Gelsinger and John Crawford shortly after the release of 386 processor in 1985. The team started the computer simulation in early 1987. They finalized the logic and microcode function during 1988. The team finalized the database in February 1989 until the tape out on March 1. They received the first silicon from the fabrication on March 20.

The i486 was announced at Spring Comdex in April 10, 1989. At the announcement, Intel stated that samples would be available in the third quarter and production quantities would ship in the fourth quarter. The first i486-based PCs were announced in late 1989.

In fall of 1991, Intel introduced the 50 MHz i486 DX using the three layer 800 nm process CHMOS-V technology. They were available for US$665 in 1,000-unit quantities.

In that season, Intel introduced low-power 25 MHz Intel486 DX microprocessor. This one was available for US$471. Also, there were low-power 16, 20, and 25 MHz Intel486 SX microprocessors. They were available at $235, $266, and $366 for these frequency range respectively. All pricing were in quantities of 1,000 pieces. These low-power microprocessors have power consumption reduced by 50–75% compared to similar regular versions of these CPUs.

The first major update to the i486 design came in March 1992 with the release of the clock-doubled 486DX2 series. It was the first time that the CPU core clock frequency was separated from the system bus clock frequency by using a dual clock multiplier, supporting 486DX2 chips at 40 and 50 MHz. The faster 66 MHz 486DX2-66 was released that August.

The fifth-generation Pentium processor launched in 1993, while Intel continued to produce i486 processors, including the triple-clock-rate 486DX4-100 with a 100 MHz clock speed and a L1 cache doubled to 16 KB.

Earlier, Intel had decided not to share its 80386 and 80486 technologies with AMD. However, AMD believed that their technology sharing agreement extended to the 80386 as a derivative of the 80286. AMD reverse-engineered the 386 and produced the 40 MHz Am386DX-40 chip, which was cheaper and had lower power consumption than Intel&#x27;s best 33 MHz version. Intel attempted to prevent AMD from selling the processor, but AMD won in court, which allowed it to establish itself as a competitor.

AMD continued to create clones, releasing the first-generation Am486 chip in April 1993 with clock frequencies of 25, 33 and 40 MHz. Second-generation Am486DX2 chips with 50, 66 and 80 MHz clock frequencies were released the following year. The Am486 series was completed with a 120 MHz DX4 chip in 1995.

AMD&#x27;s long-running 1987 arbitration lawsuit against Intel was settled in 1995, and AMD gained access to Intel&#x27;s 80486 microcode. This led to the creation of two versions of AMD&#x27;s 486 processor one reverse-engineered from Intel&#x27;s microcode, while the other used AMD&#x27;s microcode in a clean-room design process. However, the settlement also concluded that the 80486 would be AMD&#x27;s last Intel clone.

Another 486 clone manufacturer was Cyrix, which was a fabless co-processor chip maker for 80286/386 systems. The first Cyrix 486 processors, the 486SLC and 486DLC, were released in 1992 and used the 80386 package. Both Texas Instruments-manufactured Cyrix processors were pin-compatible with 386SX/DX systems, which allowed them to become an upgrade option. However, these chips could not match the Intel 486 processors, having only 1 KB of cache memory and no built-in math coprocessor. In 1993, Cyrix released its own Cx486DX and DX2 processors, which were closer in performance to Intel&#x27;s counterparts. Intel and Cyrix sued each other, with Intel filing for patent infringement, and Cyrix for antitrust claims. In 1994, Cyrix won the patent infringement case and dropped its antitrust claim.

In 1995, both Cyrix and AMD began looking at a ready market for users wanting to upgrade their processors. Cyrix released a derivative 486 processor called the 5x86, based on the Cyrix M1 core, which was clocked up to 120 MHz and was an option for 486 Socket 3 motherboards. AMD released a 133 MHz Am5x86 upgrade chip, which was essentially an improved 80486 with double the cache and a quad multiplier that also worked with the original 486DX motherboards. Am5x86 was the first processor to use AMD&#x27;s performance rating and was marketed as Am5x86-P75, with claims that it was equivalent to the Pentium 75. Kingston Technology launched a &quot;TurboChip&quot; 486 system upgrade that used a 133 MHz Am5x86.

Intel responded by making a Pentium OverDrive upgrade chip for 486 motherboards, which was a modified Pentium core that ran up to 83 MHz on boards with a 25 or 33 MHz front-side bus clock. OverDrive wasn&#x27;t popular due to speed and price. New computers equipped with 486 processors in discount warehouses became scarce, and an IBM spokesperson called it a &quot;dinosaur&quot;. Even after the Pentium series of processors gained a foothold in the market, however, Intel continued to produce 486 cores for industrial embedded applications. Intel discontinued production of i486 processors in late 2007.

==Improvements==

The instruction set of the i486 is very similar to the i386, with the addition of a few extra instructions, such as CMPXCHG, a compare-and-swap atomic operation, and XADD, a fetch-and-add atomic operation that returned the original value (unlike a standard ADD, which returns flags only). This generation CPU has brought up to 156 different instructions listing.

The i486&#x27;s performance architecture is a vast improvement over the i386. It has an on-chip unified instruction and data cache, an on-chip floating-point unit (FPU) and an enhanced bus interface unit. Due to the tight pipelining, sequences of simple instructions (such as codice_1 and codice_2) could sustain single-clock-cycle throughput (one instruction completed every clock). In other words, it was running about 1.8 clocks per instruction. These improvements yielded a rough doubling in integer ALU performance over the i386 at the same clock rate. A 16 MHz i486 therefore had performance similar to a 33 MHz i386. The combination of both CPU and FPU housed on a single die results in bus utilization rates of 50% for the 25 MHz Intel486 version. In other words, with the combination of both CPU and MCP (math coprocessor) provides 40% more performance than with both Intel386 DX and Intel387 DX math coprocessor combined. The older design had to reach 50 MHz to be comparable with a 25 MHz i486 part.

===Differences between i386 and i486===
* An 8 KB on-chip (level 1) SRAM cache stores the most recently used instructions and data (16 KB and/or write-back on some later models). The i386 had no internal cache but supported a slower off-chip cache (not officially a level 2 cache because i386 had no internal level 1 cache).
* An enhanced external bus protocol to enable cache coherency and a new burst mode for memory accesses to fill a cache line of 16 bytes within five bus cycles. The 386 needed eight bus cycles to transfer the same amount of data.
* Tightly coupled pipelining completes a simple instruction like ALU &quot;reg,reg&quot; or ALU &quot;reg,im&quot; every clock cycle (after a latency of several cycles). The i386 needed two clock cycles.
* Integrated FPU (disabled or absent in SX models) with a dedicated local bus; together with faster algorithms on more extensive hardware than in the i387, this performed floating-point calculations faster than the i386/i387 combination.
* Improved MMU performance.
* New instructions: XADD, BSWAP, CMPXCHG, INVD, WBINVD, INVLPG.

Just as in the i386, a flat 4 GB memory model could be implemented. All &quot;segment selector&quot; registers could be set to a neutral value in protected mode, or to zero in real mode, and using only the 32-bit &quot;offset registers&quot; (x86-terminology for general CPU registers used as address registers) as a linear 32-bit virtual address bypassing the segmentation logic. Virtual addresses were then normally mapped onto physical addresses by the paging system except when it was disabled (&quot;real&quot; mode had no &quot;virtual&quot; addresses). Just as with the i386, circumventing memory segmentation could substantially improve performance for some operating systems and applications.

On a typical PC motherboard, either four matched 30-pin (8-bit) SIMMs or one 72-pin (32-bit) SIMM per bank were required to fit the i486&#x27;s 32-bit data bus. The address bus used 30-bits (A31..A2) complemented by four byte-select pins (instead of A0,A1) to allow for any 8/16/32-bit selection. This meant that the limit of directly addressable physical memory was 4 gigabytes as well (230 &quot;32-bit&quot; words = 232 &quot;8-bit&quot; words).

==Models==
Intel offered several suffixes and variants (see table). Variants include:
* &quot;Intel RapidCAD&quot;: a specially packaged Intel 486DX and a dummy floating-point unit (FPU) designed as pin-compatible replacements for an i386 processor and 80387 FPU.
* &quot;i486SL-NM&quot;: i486SL based on i486SX.
* &quot;i487SX (P23N)&quot;: i486DX with one extra pin sold as an FPU upgrade to i486SX systems; When the i487SX was installed, it ensured that an i486SX was present on the motherboard but disabled it, taking over all of its functions.
* &quot;i486 OverDrive (P23T/P24T)&quot;: i486SX, i486SX2, i486DX2 or i486DX4. Marked as upgrade processors, some models had different pinouts or voltage-handling abilities from &quot;standard&quot; chips of the same speed. Fitted to a coprocessor or &quot;OverDrive&quot; socket on the motherboard, they worked the same as the i487SX.

The maximal internal clock frequency (on Intel&#x27;s versions) ranged from 16 to 100 MHz. The 16 MHz i486SX model was used by Dell Computers.

One of the few i486 models specified for a 50 MHz bus (486DX-50) initially had overheating problems and was moved to the 0.8-micrometer fabrication process. However, problems continued when the 486DX-50 was installed in local-bus systems due to the high bus speed, making it unpopular with mainstream consumers. Local-bus video was considered a requirement at the time, though it remained popular with users of EISA systems. The 486DX-50 was soon eclipsed by the clock-doubled i486DX2, which although running the internal CPU logic at twice the external bus speed (50 MHz), was nevertheless slower because the external bus ran at only 25 MHz. The i486DX2 at 66 MHz (with 33 MHz external bus) was faster than the 486DX-50, overall.

More powerful i486 iterations such as the OverDrive and DX4 were less popular (the latter available as an OEM part only), as they came out after Intel had released the next-generation Pentium processor family. Certain steppings of the DX4 also officially supported 50 MHz bus operation, but it was a seldom-used feature.

==Other makers of 486-like CPUs==

Processors compatible with the i486 were produced by companies such as IBM, Texas Instruments, AMD, Cyrix, UMC, and STMicroelectronics (formerly SGS-Thomson). Some were clones (identical at the microarchitectural level), others were clean room implementations of the Intel instruction set. (IBM&#x27;s multiple-source requirement was one of the reasons behind its x86 manufacturing since the 80286.) The i486 was, however, covered by many Intel patents, including from the prior i386. Intel and IBM had broad cross-licenses of these patents, and AMD was granted rights to the relevant patents in the 1995 settlement of a lawsuit between the companies.

AMD produced several clones using a 40 MHz bus (486DX-40, 486DX/2-80, and 486DX/4-120) which had no Intel equivalent, as well as a part specified for 90 MHz, using a 30 MHz external clock, that was sold only to OEMs. The fastest running i486-compatible CPU, the Am5x86, ran at 133 MHz and was released by AMD in 1995. 150 MHz and 160 MHz parts were planned but never officially released.

Cyrix made a variety of i486-compatible processors, positioned at the cost-sensitive desktop and low-power (laptop) markets. Unlike AMD&#x27;s 486 clones, the Cyrix processors were the result of clean-room reverse engineering. Cyrix&#x27;s early offerings included the 486DLC and 486SLC, two hybrid chips that plugged into 386DX or SX sockets respectively, and offered 1 KB of cache (versus 8 KB for the then-current Intel/AMD parts). Cyrix also made &quot;real&quot; 486 processors, which plugged into the i486&#x27;s socket and offered 2 or 8 KB of cache. Clock-for-clock, the Cyrix-made chips were generally slower than their Intel/AMD equivalents, though later products with 8 KB caches were more competitive, albeit late to market.

The Motorola 68040, while not i486 compatible, was often positioned as its equivalent in features and performance. Clock-for-clock basis the Motorola 68040 could significantly outperform the Intel chip. However, the i486 had the ability to be clocked significantly faster without overheating. Motorola 68040 performance lagged behind the later production i486 systems.

==Motherboards and buses==
Early i486-based computers were equipped with several ISA slots (using an emulated PC/AT-bus) and sometimes one or two 8-bit-only slots (compatible with the PC/XT-bus). Many motherboards enabled overclocking of these from the default 6 or 8 MHz to perhaps 16.7 or 20 MHz (half the i486 bus clock) in several steps, often from within the BIOS setup. Especially older peripheral cards normally worked well at such speeds as they often used standard MSI chips instead of slower (at the time) custom VLSI designs. This could give significant performance gains (such as for old video cards moved from a 386 or 286 computer, for example). However, operation beyond 8 or 10 MHz could sometimes lead to stability problems, at least in systems equipped with SCSI or sound cards.

Some motherboards came equipped with a 32-bit EISA bus that was backward compatible with the ISA-standard. EISA offered attractive features such as increased bandwidth, extended addressing, IRQ sharing, and card configuration through software (rather than through jumpers, DIP switches, etc.) However, EISA cards were expensive and therefore mostly employed in servers and workstations. Consumer desktops often used the simpler, faster VESA Local Bus (VLB). Unfortunately prone to electrical and timing-based instability; typical consumer desktops had ISA slots combined with a single VLB slot for a video card. VLB was gradually replaced by PCI during the final years of the i486 period. Few Pentium class motherboards had VLB support as VLB was based directly on the i486 bus; much different from the P5 Pentium-bus. ISA persisted through the P5 Pentium generation and was not completely displaced by PCI until the Pentium III era, although ISA persisted well into the Pentium 4 era, especially among industrial PCs.

Late i486 boards were normally equipped with both PCI and ISA slots, and sometimes a single VLB slot. In this configuration, VLB or PCI throughput suffered depending on how buses were bridged. Initially, the VLB slot in these systems was usually fully compatible only with video cards (fitting as &quot;VESA&quot; stands for &quot;Video Electronics Standards Association&quot;); VLB-IDE, multi I/O, or SCSI cards could have problems on motherboards with PCI slots. The VL-Bus operated at the same clock speed as the i486-bus (basically a local bus) while the PCI bus also usually depended on the i486 clock but sometimes had a divider setting available via the BIOS. This could be set to 1/1 or 1/2, sometimes even 2/3 (for 50 MHz CPU clocks). Some motherboards limited the PCI clock to the specified maximum of 33 MHz and certain network cards depended on this frequency for correct bit-rates. The ISA clock was typically generated by a divider of the CPU/VLB/PCI clock.

One of the earliest complete systems to use the i486 chip was the Apricot VX FT, produced by British hardware manufacturer Apricot Computers. Even overseas in the United States it was popularized as &quot;The World&#x27;s First 486&quot;.

Later i486 boards supported Plug-And-Play, a specification designed by Microsoft that began as a part of Windows 95 to make component installation easier for consumers.

==Obsolescence==
The AMD Am5x86 and Cyrix Cx5x86 were the last i486 processors often used in late-generation i486 motherboards. They came with PCI slots and 72-pin SIMMs that were designed to run Windows 95, and also used for 80486 motherboards upgrades. While the Cyrix Cx5x86 faded when the Cyrix 6x86 took over, the AMD Am5x86 remained important given AMD K5 delays.

Computers based on the i486 remained popular through the late 1990s, serving as low-end processors for entry-level PCs. Production for traditional desktop and laptop systems ceased in 1998, when Intel introduced the Celeron brand, though it continued to be produced for embedded systems through the late 2000s.

In the general-purpose desktop computer role, i486-based machines remained in use into the early 2000s, especially as Windows 95 through 98 and Windows NT 4.0 were the last Microsoft operating systems to officially support i486-based systems. Windows 2000 could run on a i486-based machine, although with a less than optimal performance, due to the minimum hardware requirement of a Pentium processor. However, as they were overtaken by newer operating systems, i486 systems fell out of use except for backward compatibility with older programs (most notably games), especially given problems running on newer operating systems. However, DOSBox was available for later operating systems and provides emulation of the i486 instruction set, as well as full compatibility with most DOS-based programs.

The i486 was eventually overtaken by the Pentium for personal computer applications, although Intel continued production for use in embedded systems. In May 2006, Intel announced that production of the i486 would stop at the end of September 2007.

==See also==

*List of Intel microprocessors
*Motorola 68040, although not compatible, was often positioned as the Motorola equivalent to the Intel 486 in terms of performance and features.
*VL86C020, ARM3 core of similar time frame and comparable MIPS performance on integer code (25 MHz for both), with 310,000 transistors (in a 1.5 μm process) instead of 1 million

== Notes ==
== Further reading ==

==References==
==External links==
* Intel486 datasheets
** Low power SX and DX with variable freq. Dec 1992
** EMBEDDED ULTRA-LOW POWER Intel 486 SX
** Embedded Write-Back Enhanced Intel DX4. Oct 1995
* Intel i486 DX images and descriptions at cpu-collection.de
* Die photo of Intel 386DX</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="4" end="9" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="10" end="13" title="I486" label="486"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="32" end="36" title="I486" label="i486"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="55" end="60" title="I486" label="80486"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="67" end="81" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="146" end="155" title="i386" label="Intel 386"/>
<link wikidata="Q13912071" start="196" end="213" title="binary compatible" label="binary compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="233" end="237" title="Intel 8086" label="8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="251" end="262" title="Intel 80286" label="Intel 80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="288" end="292" title="i386" label="i386"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="320" end="329" title="instruction pipeline" label="pipelined"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="330" end="333" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="444" end="449" title="Cache (computing)" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="468" end="487" title="floating-point unit" label="floating-point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098900" start="579" end="587" title="VAX Unit of Performance" label="VAX MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207761" start="615" end="636" title="Dhrystone" label="dhrystones per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q608140" start="679" end="704" title="Whetstone (benchmark)" label="megawhetstones per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q71486" start="779" end="802" title="instructions per second" label="instructions per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392520" start="822" end="834" title="SPECint" label="SPEC integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="909" end="920" title="Clock signal" label="clock cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="1105" end="1109" title="i387" label="i387"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="1265" end="1281" title="Pentium (original)" label="original Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143480" start="1468" end="1481" title="Pat Gelsinger" label="Pat Gelsinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181290" start="1486" end="1499" title="John Crawford (engineer)" label="John Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="1529" end="1542" title="I386" label="386 processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q926498" start="1728" end="1736" title="Tape-out" label="tape out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023993" start="1849" end="1855" title="COMDEX" label="Comdex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2152" end="2166" title="800 nm process" label="800 nm process"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599396" start="2167" end="2174" title="CHMOS" label="CHMOS-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272893" start="2790" end="2796" title="Intel DX2" label="486DX2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377054" start="2884" end="2894" title="system bus" label="system bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="3063" end="3070" title="Pentium (original)" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748030" start="3181" end="3191" title="Intel DX4" label="486DX4-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q294855" start="3505" end="3515" title="Am386" label="Am386DX-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q294857" start="3810" end="3815" title="Am486" label="Am486"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899125" start="4360" end="4377" title="clean-room design" label="clean-room design"/>
<link wikidata="Q747489" start="4515" end="4520" title="Cyrix" label="Cyrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191383" start="4534" end="4541" title="Fabless manufacturing" label="fabless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148846" start="4599" end="4608" title="Cyrix Cx486" label="Cyrix 486"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="4699" end="4716" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144498" start="5146" end="5165" title="patent infringement" label="patent infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="5181" end="5190" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148836" start="5441" end="5445" title="Cyrix 5x86" label="5x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q294860" start="5579" end="5585" title="Am5x86" label="Am5x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q683771" start="5893" end="5912" title="Kingston Technology" label="Kingston Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208177" start="6022" end="6039" title="Pentium OverDrive" label="Pentium OverDrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="6325" end="6328" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="6623" end="6638" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q128562" start="6746" end="6762" title="compare-and-swap" label="compare-and-swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q513932" start="6763" end="6779" title="atomic operation" label="atomic operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127412" start="6793" end="6806" title="fetch-and-add" label="fetch-and-add"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="7108" end="7113" title="CPU cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="7126" end="7145" title="floating-point unit" label="floating-point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="7168" end="7171" title="computer bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="7487" end="7490" title="Arithmetic logic unit" label="ALU"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="7529" end="7539" title="clock rate" label="clock rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="8042" end="8044" title="Kilobyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="8063" end="8067" title="Static random access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="8068" end="8073" title="CPU cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8140" end="8150" title="Cache (computing)#Operation" label="write-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="8178" end="8182" title="i386" label="i386"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="8261" end="8274" title="level 2 cache" label="level 2 cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="8567" end="8577" title="Instruction pipeline" label="pipelining"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="8766" end="8769" title="floating point unit" label="FPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635535" start="8793" end="8802" title="Intel 80486SX" label="SX models"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664300" start="8821" end="8830" title="local bus" label="local bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="8968" end="8972" title="i386" label="i386"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="8973" end="8977" title="i387" label="i387"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="9002" end="9005" title="memory management unit" label="MMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q841064" start="9230" end="9244" title="protected mode" label="protected mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064456" start="9260" end="9269" title="real mode" label="real mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="9750" end="9767" title="operating systems" label="operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321" start="9803" end="9814" title="motherboard" label="motherboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063762" start="9851" end="9855" title="SIMM" label="SIMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="9931" end="9937" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="9938" end="9946" title="bus (computing)" label="data bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="9952" end="9963" title="address bus" label="address bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="10156" end="10164" title="gigabyte" label="gigabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184649" start="10331" end="10345" title="RapidCAD" label="Intel RapidCAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="10398" end="10417" title="floating-point unit" label="floating-point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="10471" end="10475" title="i386" label="i386"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="10490" end="10495" title="Intel 80387" label="80387"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="10558" end="10571" title="Intel 80487SX" label="i487SX (P23N)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635535" start="10631" end="10637" title="i486SX" label="i486SX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321" start="10723" end="10734" title="motherboard" label="motherboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q763656" start="10794" end="10820" title="Intel 80486 OverDrive" label="i486 OverDrive (P23T/P24T)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="11250" end="11264" title="Dell Computers" label="Dell Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="11392" end="11402" title="Micrometre" label="micrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q863838" start="11678" end="11682" title="Extended Industry Standard Architecture" label="EISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272893" start="11744" end="11751" title="Intel 80486DX2" label="i486DX2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748030" start="12055" end="12058" title="DX4" label="DX4"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="12167" end="12190" title="Pentium (original)" label="next-generation Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="12427" end="12430" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="12432" end="12449" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="12451" end="12454" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q747489" start="12456" end="12461" title="Cyrix" label="Cyrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q143616" start="12463" end="12466" title="United Microelectronics Corporation" label="UMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q661845" start="12472" end="12490" title="STMicroelectronics" label="STMicroelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899125" start="12589" end="12615" title="clean room design" label="clean room implementations"/>
<link wikidata="Q294860" start="13271" end="13277" title="Am5x86" label="Am5x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q488609" start="13667" end="13673" title="Cyrix_Cx486DLC" label="486DLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q674007" start="14140" end="14154" title="Motorola 68040" label="Motorola 68040"/>
<link wikidata="Q674007" start="14277" end="14291" title="Motorola 68040" label="Motorola 68040"/>
<link wikidata="Q674007" start="14429" end="14443" title="Motorola 68040" label="Motorola 68040"/>
<link wikidata="Q273326" start="14587" end="14590" title="Industry Standard Architecture" label="ISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="14607" end="14615" title="emulated" label="emulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q273326" start="14616" end="14625" title="Industry Standard Architecture" label="PC/AT-bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="14652" end="14657" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321" start="14707" end="14718" title="motherboard" label="motherboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="14870" end="14874" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q876049" start="15029" end="15033" title="VLSI" label="VLSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="15282" end="15286" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343" start="15290" end="15301" title="sound cards" label="sound cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="15343" end="15349" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q225386" start="15740" end="15754" title="VESA Local Bus" label="VESA Local Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="15946" end="15949" title="Peripheral Component Interconnect" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="15997" end="16010" title="Pentium class" label="Pentium class"/>
<link wikidata="Q647003" start="16655" end="16694" title="VESA" label="Video Electronics Standards Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858969" start="17420" end="17437" title="Apricot Computers" label="Apricot Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q857815" start="17565" end="17578" title="Plug-And-Play" label="Plug-And-Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="17608" end="17617" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="17642" end="17652" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q294860" start="17728" end="17738" title="AMD Am5x86" label="AMD Am5x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148836" start="17743" end="17755" title="Cyrix Cx5x86" label="Cyrix Cx5x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="17903" end="17913" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148836" start="17972" end="17984" title="Cyrix Cx5x86" label="Cyrix Cx5x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148844" start="18000" end="18010" title="Cyrix 6x86" label="Cyrix 6x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q294860" start="18026" end="18036" title="AMD Am5x86" label="AMD Am5x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q294988" start="18062" end="18068" title="AMD K5" label="AMD K5"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="18294" end="18301" title="Celeron" label="Celeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="18348" end="18364" title="embedded systems" label="embedded systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="18527" end="18529" title="Windows 98" label="98"/>
<link wikidata="Q488978" start="18534" end="18548" title="Windows NT 4.0" label="Windows NT 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="18633" end="18645" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="18892" end="18914" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q479783" start="19028" end="19034" title="DOSBox" label="DOSBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="19243" end="19260" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="19322" end="19338" title="embedded systems" label="embedded systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q921015" start="19454" end="19483" title="List of Intel microprocessors" label="List of Intel microprocessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q674007" start="19485" end="19499" title="Motorola 68040" label="Motorola 68040"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="19554" end="19562" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560350" start="19640" end="19644" title="ARM3" label="ARM3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15164" wikidata="Q2635535" url="?curid=15164" title="I486SX">
<text>The i486SX was a microprocessor originally released by Intel in 1991. It was a modified Intel i486DX microprocessor with its floating-point unit (FPU) disabled. It was intended as a lower-cost CPU for use in low-end systems—selling for US$258—adapting the &quot;SX&quot; suffix of the earlier i386SX in order to connote a lower-cost option. However, unlike the i386SX, which had a 16-bit external data bus and a 24-bit external address bus (compared to the fully 32-bit i386DX, its higher-cost counterpoint), the i486SX was entirely 32-bit. The Intel486 SX-20 CPU can perform up 20 MIPS at 25 MHz while this can also perform 70% faster than the 33 MHz Intel386 DX with external cache.

==Overview==
In the early 1990s, common applications, such as word processors and database applications, did not need or benefit from a floating-point unit, such as that included in the i486, introduced in 1989. Among the rare exceptions were CAD applications, which could often simulate floating point operations in software, but benefited from a hardware floating point unit immensely. AMD had begun manufacturing its i386DX clone, the Am386, which was faster than Intel&#x27;s. To respond to this new situation, Intel wanted to provide a lower cost i486 CPU for system integrators, but without sacrificing the better profit margins of a full i486. Intel were able to accomplish this with the i486SX, the first revisions of which were practically identical to the i486 but with its floating-point unit internally wired to be disabled. The i486SX was introduced in mid-1991 at 20 MHz, one core with 8kb of cache in a pin grid array (PGA) package. There were low-power version of 16, 20, and 25 MHz Intel486 SX microprocessors. They were available USD $235, USD $266, and USD $366 for these frequency range respectfully. All pricing were in quantities of 1,000 pieces. Later versions of the i486SX, from 1992 onward, had the FPU entirely removed for cost-cutting reasons and comes in surface-mount packages as well.

The first computer system to ship with an i486SX on its motherboard from the factory was Advanced Logic Research&#x27;s Business VEISA 486/20SX in April 1991. Initial reviews of the i486SX chip were generally poor among technology publications and the buying public, who deemed it an example of crippleware.

Many systems allowed the user to upgrade the i486SX to a CPU with the FPU enabled. The upgrade was shipped as the i487, which was a full-blown i486DX chip with an extra pin. The extra pin prevents the chip from being installed incorrectly. Although i486SX devices were not used at all when the i487 was installed, they were hard to remove because the i486SX was typically installed in non-ZIF sockets or in a plastic package that was surface mounted on the motherboard. Later OverDrive processors also plugged into the socket and offered performance enhancements as well.

==Explanatory notes==
==References==
== External links ==
* Intel 80486SX images and descriptions at cpu-collection.de
; Intel datasheets
* Embedded i486SX
* Embedded Ultra-Low Power i486SX</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2635535" start="4" end="10" title="I486SX" label="i486SX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="17" end="31" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="55" end="60" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="94" end="100" title="i486" label="i486DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="125" end="150" title="Floating-point unit" label="floating-point unit (FPU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="236" end="239" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="293" end="299" title="i386SX" label="i386SX"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="470" end="474" title="i386" label="i386"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="594" end="596" title="Hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="872" end="876" title="i486" label="i486"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="929" end="932" title="Computer-aided design" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="1074" end="1077" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="1106" end="1112" title="i386" label="i386DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q294855" start="1124" end="1129" title="Am386" label="Am386"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="1238" end="1242" title="i486" label="i486"/>
<link wikidata="Q130985" start="1604" end="1624" title="Pin grid array" label="pin grid array (PGA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664398" start="2092" end="2115" title="Advanced Logic Research" label="Advanced Logic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q259856" start="2298" end="2309" title="crippleware" label="crippleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="2426" end="2430" title="Intel 80487" label="i487"/>
<link wikidata="Q191941" start="2701" end="2704" title="Zero insertion force" label="ZIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q117597158" start="2788" end="2797" title="Intel OverDrive" label="OverDrive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15165" wikidata="Q82001" url="?curid=15165" title="Ivory">
<text>Ivory is a hard, white material from the tusks (traditionally from elephants) and teeth of animals, that consists mainly of dentine, one of the physical structures of teeth and tusks. The chemical structure of the teeth and tusks of mammals is the same, regardless of the species of origin, but ivory contains structures of mineralised collagen. The trade in certain teeth and tusks other than elephant is well established and widespread; therefore, &quot;ivory&quot; can correctly be used to describe any mammalian teeth or tusks of commercial interest which are large enough to be carved or scrimshawed.

Besides natural ivory, ivory can also be produced synthetically, hence (unlike natural ivory) not requiring the retrieval of the material from animals. Tagua nuts can also be carved like ivory.

The trade of finished goods of ivory products has its origins in the Indus Valley. Ivory is a main product that is seen in abundance and was used for trading in Harappan civilization. Finished ivory products that were seen in Harappan sites include kohl sticks, pins, awls, hooks, toggles, combs, game pieces, dice, inlay and other personal ornaments.

Ivory has been valued since ancient times in art or manufacturing for making a range of items from ivory carvings to false teeth, piano keys, fans, and dominoes. Elephant ivory is the most important source, but ivory from mammoth, walrus, hippopotamus, sperm whale, orca, narwhal and warthog are used as well. Elk also have two ivory teeth, which are believed to be the remnants of tusks from their ancestors.

The national and international trade in natural ivory of threatened species such as African and Asian elephants is illegal. The word &quot;ivory&quot; ultimately derives from the ancient Egyptian (&#x27;elephant&#x27;), through the Latin or .

==Uses==


Both the Greek and Roman civilizations practiced ivory carving to make large quantities of high value works of art, precious religious objects, and decorative boxes for costly objects. Ivory was often used to form the white of the eyes of statues.

There is some evidence of either whale or walrus ivory used by the ancient Irish. Solinus, a Roman writer in the 3rd century claimed that the Celtic peoples in Ireland would decorate their sword-hilts with the &#x27;teeth of beasts that swim in the sea&#x27;. Adomnan of Iona wrote a story about St Columba giving a sword decorated with carved ivory as a gift that a penitent would bring to his master so he could redeem himself from slavery.

The Syrian and North African elephant populations were reduced to extinction, probably due to the demand for ivory in the Classical world.

The Chinese have long valued ivory for both art and utilitarian objects. Early reference to the Chinese export of ivory is recorded after the Chinese explorer Zhang Qian ventured to the west to form alliances to enable the eventual free movement of Chinese goods to the west; as early as the first century BC, ivory was moved along the Northern Silk Road for consumption by western nations. Southeast Asian kingdoms included tusks of the Indian elephant in their annual tribute caravans to China. Chinese craftsmen carved ivory to make everything from images of deities to the pipe stems and end pieces of opium pipes.

In Japan, ivory carvings became popular in the 17th century during the Edo period, and many &quot;netsuke&quot; and &quot;kiseru&quot;, on which animals and legendary creatures were carved, and &quot;inro&quot;, on which ivory was inlaid, were made. From the mid-1800s, the new Meiji government&#x27;s policy of promoting and exporting arts and crafts led to the frequent display of elaborate ivory crafts at World&#x27;s fair. Among them, the best works were admired because they were purchased by Western museums, wealthy people, and the Japanese Imperial Family.

The Buddhist cultures of Southeast Asia, including Myanmar, Thailand, Laos and Cambodia, traditionally harvested ivory from their domesticated elephants. Ivory was prized for containers due to its ability to keep an airtight seal. It was also commonly carved into elaborate seals utilized by officials to &quot;sign&quot; documents and decrees by stamping them with their unique official seal.

In Southeast Asian countries, where Muslim Malay peoples live, such as Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines, ivory was the material of choice for making the handles of kris daggers. 
In the Philippines, ivory was also used to craft the faces and hands of Catholic icons and images of saints prevalent in the Santero culture.

Tooth and tusk ivory can be carved into a vast variety of shapes and objects. Examples of modern carved ivory objects are okimono, netsukes, jewelry, flatware handles, furniture inlays, and piano keys. Additionally, warthog tusks, and teeth from sperm whales, orcas and hippos can also be scrimshawed or superficially carved, thus retaining their morphologically recognizable shapes.

As trade with Africa expanded during the first part of the 1800s, ivory became readily available. Up to 90 percent of the ivory imported into the United States was processed, at one time, in Connecticut where Deep River and Ivoryton in 1860s became the centers of ivory milling, in particular, due to the demand for ivory piano keys.

Ivory usage in the last thirty years has moved towards mass production of souvenirs and jewelry. In Japan, the increase in wealth sparked consumption of solid ivory &quot;hanko&quot; – name seals – which before this time had been made of wood. These &quot;hanko&quot; can be carved out in a matter of seconds using machinery and were partly responsible for massive African elephant decline in the 1980s, when the African elephant population went from 1.3 million to around 600,000 in ten years.

==Consumption before plastics==

Before plastics were introduced, ivory had many ornamental and practical uses, mainly because of the white color it presents when processed. It was formerly used to make cutlery handles, billiard balls, piano keys, Scottish bagpipes, buttons and a wide range of ornamental items.

Synthetic substitutes for ivory in the use of most of these items have been developed since 1800: the billiard industry challenged inventors to come up with an alternative material that could be manufactured; the piano industry abandoned ivory as a key covering material in the 1970s.

Ivory can be taken from dead animals – however, most ivory came from elephants that were killed for their tusks. For example, in 1930 to acquire 40 tons of ivory required the killing of approximately 700 elephants. Other animals which are now endangered were also preyed upon, for example, hippos, which have very hard white ivory prized for making artificial teeth. In the first half of the 20th century, Kenyan elephant herds were devastated because of demand for ivory, to be used for piano keys.

During the Art Deco era from 1912 to 1940, dozens (if not hundreds) of European artists used ivory in the production of chryselephantine statues. Two of the most frequent users of ivory in their sculptured artworks were Ferdinand Preiss and Claire Colinet.

== Mechanical characteristics ==
While many uses of ivory are purely ornamental in nature, it often must be carved and manipulated into different shapes to achieve the desired form. Other applications, such as ivory piano keys, introduce repeated wear and surface handling of the material. It is therefore essential to consider the mechanical properties of ivory when designing alternatives.

Elephant tusks are the animal&#x27;s incisors, so the composition of ivory is unsurprisingly similar to that of teeth in several other mammals. It is composed of dentine, a biomineral composite constructed from collagen fibers mineralized with hydroxyapatite. This composite lends ivory the impressive mechanical properties—high stiffness, strength, hardness, and toughness—required for its use in the animal&#x27;s day-to-day activities. Ivory has a measured hardness of 35 on the Vickers scale, exceeding that of bone. It also has a flexural modulus of 14 GPa, a flexural strength of 378 MPa a fracture toughness of 2.05 MPam1/2. These measured values indicate that ivory mechanically outperforms most of its most common alternatives, including celluloid plastic and polyethylene terephthalate.

Ivory&#x27;s mechanical properties result from the microstructure of the dentine tissue. It is thought that the structural arrangement of mineralized collagen fibers could contribute to the checkerboard-like Schreger pattern observed in polished ivory samples. This is often used as an attribute in ivory identification. As well as being an optical feature, the Schreger pattern could point towards a micropattern well-designed to prevent crack propagation by dispersing stresses. Additionally, this intricate microstructure lends a strong anisotropy to ivory&#x27;s mechanical characteristics. Separate hardness measurements on three orthogonal tusk directions indicated that circumferential planes of tusk had up to 25% greater hardness than radial planes of the same specimen. During hardness testing, inelastic and elastic recovery was observed on circumferential planes while the radial planes displayed plastic deformation. This implies that ivory has directional viscoelasticity. These anisotropic properties can be explained by the reinforcement of collagen fibers in the composite oriented along the circumference.

==Availability==

Owing to the rapid decline in the populations of the animals that produce it, the importation and sale of ivory in many countries is banned or severely restricted. In the ten years preceding a decision in 1989 by CITES to ban international trade in African elephant ivory, the population of African elephants declined from 1.3 million to around 600,000. It was found by investigators from the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA) that CITES sales of stockpiles from Singapore and Burundi (270 tonnes and 89.5 tonnes respectively) had created a system that increased the value of ivory on the international market, thus rewarding international smugglers and giving them the ability to control the trade and continue smuggling new ivory.

Since the ivory ban, some Southern African countries have claimed their elephant populations are stable or increasing, and argued that ivory sales would support their conservation efforts. Other African countries oppose this position, stating that renewed ivory trading puts their own elephant populations under greater threat from poachers reacting to demand. CITES allowed the sale of 49 tonnes of ivory from Zimbabwe, Namibia and Botswana in 1997 to Japan.

In 2007, under pressure from the International Fund for Animal Welfare, eBay banned all international sales of elephant-ivory products. The decision came after several mass slaughters of African elephants, most notably the 2006 Zakouma elephant slaughter in Chad. The IFAW found that up to 90% of the elephant-ivory transactions on eBay violated their own wildlife policies and could potentially be illegal. In October 2008, eBay expanded the ban, disallowing any sales of ivory on eBay.

A more recent sale in 2008 of 108 tonnes from the three countries and South Africa took place to Japan and China. The inclusion of China as an &quot;approved&quot; importing country created enormous controversy, despite being supported by CITES, the World Wide Fund for Nature and Traffic. They argued that China had controls in place and the sale might depress prices. However, the price of ivory in China has skyrocketed. Some believe this may be due to deliberate price fixing by those who bought the stockpile, echoing the warnings from the Japan Wildlife Conservation Society on price-fixing after sales to Japan in 1997, and monopoly given to traders who bought stockpiles from Burundi and Singapore in the 1980s.

A 2019 peer-reviewed study reported that the rate of African elephant poaching was in decline, with the annual poaching mortality rate peaking at over 10% in 2011 and falling to below 4% by 2017. The study found that the &quot;annual poaching rates in 53 sites strongly correlate with proxies of ivory demand in the main Chinese markets, whereas between-country and between-site variation is strongly associated with indicators of corruption and poverty.&quot; Based on these findings, the study authors recommended action to both reduce demand for ivory in China and other main markets and to decrease corruption and poverty in Africa.

In 2006, nineteen African countries signed the &quot;Accra Declaration&quot; calling for a total ivory trade ban, and twenty range states attended a meeting in Kenya calling for a 20-year moratorium in 2007.

Methods of obtaining ivory can be divided into:
* Shooting the elephant to take its tusks: this method is of concern here.
* Taking tusks from an elephant which has died of natural causes.
* Taking tusks from an elephant which has had to be put down for another reason, for example, severe arthritis, or if its last molar teeth are worn out and can no longer chew its food.
* Among working elephants which use their tusks to carry logs, there is a best length for their tusks. In former times in India, often their tusks were cut back to this length (and often the shortened tusks&#x27; ends were bound in copper). This periodically freed pieces of ivory for the carving trade.

===Controversy and conservation issues===
The use and trade of elephant ivory have become controversial because they have contributed to seriously declining elephant populations in many countries. It is estimated that consumption in Great Britain alone in 1831 amounted to the deaths of nearly 4,000 elephants. In 1975, the Asian elephant was placed on Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), which prevents international trade between member states of species that are threatened by trade. The African elephant was placed on Appendix I in January 1990. Since then, some southern African countries have had their populations of elephants &quot;downlisted&quot; to Appendix II, allowing the domestic trade of non-ivory items; there have also been two &quot;one off&quot; sales of ivory stockpiles.

In June 2015, more than a ton of confiscated ivory was crushed in New York City&#x27;s Times Square by the Wildlife Conservation Society to send a message that the illegal trade will not be tolerated. The ivory, confiscated in New York and Philadelphia, was sent up a conveyor belt into a rock crusher. The Wildlife Conservation Society has pointed out that the global ivory trade leads to the slaughter of up to 35,000 elephants a year in Africa. In June 2018, Conservative MEPs&#x27; Deputy Leader Jacqueline Foster MEP urged the EU to follow the UK&#x27;s lead and introduce a tougher ivory ban across Europe.

China was the biggest market for poached ivory but announced they would phase out the legal domestic manufacture and sale of ivory products in May 2015. In September of the same year, China and the U.S. announced they would &quot;enact a nearly complete ban on the import and export of ivory.&quot; The Chinese market has a high degree of influence on the elephant population.

===Alternatives===
====Fossil mammoth tusks====
Trade in the ivory from the tusks of dead woolly mammoths frozen in the tundra has occurred for 300 years and continues to be legal. Mammoth ivory is used today to make handcrafted knives and similar implements. Mammoth ivory is rare and costly because mammoths have been extinct for millennia, and scientists are hesitant to sell museum-worthy specimens in pieces. Some estimates suggest that 10 or more million mammoths are still buried in Siberia.

====Fossil walrus ivory====
Fossil walrus ivory from animals that died before 1972 is legal to buy and sell in the United States, unlike many other types of ivory.

==== Elk Ivory ====
The ancestors of elk had teeth, also known as elk ivory, that protruded outwards, similar to animals that have tusks. These served as protection from predators, and for asserting dominance during the mating season. These elk once had much smaller antlers compared to the size of modern day species’ antlers. Elk antlers evolved to become bigger and the use of their tusks diminished as antlers grew, thus evolving towards a smaller size over time, making them nothing more than teeth in their mouths.

These teeth have the same chemical compound as the ivory found in the highly used and poached elephant tusks, making it another good alternative when it comes to taking ivory as the teeth can be possibly removed without harming the elk themselves.

Among Indian tribes, elk teeth has major significance when it comes to jewelry. Among women, men wore them as well. Either through bracelets, earrings, and chokers, there was deeper meaning for both men and women within the tribes. For the women, it was believed that it would bring in good luck and good health. As for the men, it was seen that they were a good hunter.

====Synthetic ivory====
Ivory can also be produced synthetically.

====Nuts====
A species of hard nut is gaining popularity as a replacement for ivory, although its size limits its usability. It is sometimes called vegetable ivory, or tagua, and is the seed endosperm of the ivory nut palm commonly found in coastal rainforests of Ecuador, Peru and Colombia.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Biobased economy
* Ivory tower
* Jim Nyamu
* RAL 1014 Ivory
* Schreger line

==References==
==External links==

* TRAFFIC; &quot;New report confirms &#x27;major surge&#x27; in ivory smuggling in 2011&quot;
* EIA &quot;Blood Ivory: Exposing the myth of a regulated market&quot;
* Federation of Environmental Organizations Sri Lanka: &quot;Blood Ivory to Buddhist Temples?&quot;
* Gemological properties of ivory
* The International Ivory Society
* Includes several diagrams.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="0" end="5" title="Ivory" label="Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q185635" start="41" end="45" title="tusk" label="tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="67" end="75" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="82" end="87" title="Tooth" label="teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189637" start="124" end="131" title="dentine" label="dentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="233" end="239" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="336" end="344" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261659" start="593" end="602" title="scrimshaw" label="scrimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q161190" start="759" end="764" title="Tagua" label="Tagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408229" start="815" end="829" title="finished goods" label="finished goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="871" end="883" title="Indus Valley" label="Indus Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="963" end="984" title="Harappan civilization" label="Harappan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="1028" end="1035" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838312" start="1064" end="1067" title="pin" label="pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243098" start="1076" end="1080" title="hook" label="hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q23834" start="1092" end="1096" title="comb" label="comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="1112" end="1116" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q351853" start="1254" end="1267" title="ivory carving" label="ivory carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q143567" start="1272" end="1283" title="false teeth" label="false teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117156" start="1285" end="1295" title="piano keys" label="piano keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q193220" start="1297" end="1300" title="Hand fan" label="fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32907" start="1307" end="1313" title="domino" label="domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="1377" end="1384" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="1386" end="1392" title="walrus" label="walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="1394" end="1406" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="1408" end="1419" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="1421" end="1425" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q159426" start="1427" end="1434" title="narwhal" label="narwhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645260" start="1439" end="1446" title="warthog" label="warthog"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="1465" end="1468" title="Elk" label="Elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141338" start="1597" end="1602" title="Wildlife trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197023" start="1623" end="1633" title="threatened" label="threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q185038" start="1650" end="1657" title="African elephant" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q133006" start="1662" end="1676" title="Asian elephant" label="Asian elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="1745" end="1761" title="Egyptian language" label="ancient Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1798" end="1803" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1830" end="1835" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1840" end="1845" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="2103" end="2108" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352389" start="2112" end="2124" title="walrus ivory" label="walrus ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q520487" start="2152" end="2159" title="Gaius Julius Solinus" label="Solinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120132" start="2330" end="2345" title="Adomnan of Iona" label="Adomnan of Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="2366" end="2376" title="St Columba" label="St Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="2636" end="2651" title="Classical Antiquity" label="Classical world"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="2804" end="2812" title="explorer" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q197276" start="2813" end="2823" title="Zhang Qian" label="Zhang Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446144" start="2990" end="3008" title="Northern Silk Road" label="Northern Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059715" start="3260" end="3271" title="opium pipes" label="opium pipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="3345" end="3355" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q543901" start="3372" end="3379" title="netsuke" label="netsuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483983" start="3396" end="3402" title="kiseru" label="kiseru"/>
<link wikidata="Q557164" start="3474" end="3478" title="inro" label="inro"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="3683" end="3700" title="World&amp;#x27;s fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q909452" start="3814" end="3838" title="Imperial house of Japan" label="Japanese Imperial Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="3866" end="3880" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="3892" end="3899" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="3901" end="3909" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="3911" end="3915" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3920" end="3928" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="4307" end="4315" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="4317" end="4326" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="4335" end="4346" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q331220" start="4407" end="4411" title="kris" label="kris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420459" start="4547" end="4554" title="Santo (art)" label="Santero"/>
<link wikidata="Q750735" start="4687" end="4694" title="okimono" label="okimono"/>
<link wikidata="Q543901" start="4696" end="4703" title="netsuke" label="netsuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645260" start="4781" end="4788" title="warthog" label="warthog"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="4811" end="4822" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="4825" end="4829" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5096" end="5109" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="5141" end="5152" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q755260" start="5159" end="5169" title="Deep River, Connecticut" label="Deep River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099731" start="5174" end="5182" title="Ivoryton" label="Ivoryton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850202" start="5456" end="5461" title="Hanko (stamp)" label="hanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="5821" end="5828" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q862747" start="6001" end="6014" title="billiard ball" label="billiard ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117156" start="6017" end="6027" title="Key (instrument)" label="piano keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164192" start="6029" end="6046" title="Great Highland Bagpipes" label="Scottish bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="6290" end="6302" title="Manufacturing" label="manufactured"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="6893" end="6901" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088535" start="7002" end="7018" title="chryselephantine" label="chryselephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443890" start="7102" end="7118" title="Ferdinand Preiss" label="Ferdinand Preiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q23584049" start="7123" end="7137" title="Claire Colinet" label="Claire Colinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q413478" start="7777" end="7791" title="hydroxyapatite" label="hydroxyapatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q223404" start="8015" end="8028" title="Vickers hardness test" label="Vickers scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459047" start="8068" end="8084" title="flexural modulus" label="flexural modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q857201" start="8098" end="8115" title="flexural strength" label="flexural strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q911969" start="8129" end="8147" title="fracture toughness" label="fracture toughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="8302" end="8328" title="polyethylene terephthalate" label="polyethylene terephthalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q910483" start="9301" end="9316" title="viscoelasticity" label="viscoelasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="9687" end="9692" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345905" start="9867" end="9901" title="Environmental Investigation Agency" label="Environmental Investigation Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="10241" end="10256" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="10547" end="10554" title="Poaching" label="poacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666594" start="10709" end="10746" title="International Fund for Animal Welfare" label="International Fund for Animal Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="10748" end="10752" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607213" start="10899" end="10930" title="2006 Zakouma elephant slaughter" label="2006 Zakouma elephant slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="10934" end="10938" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="11415" end="11441" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512342" start="11446" end="11453" title="Traffic (conservation programme)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="13023" end="13032" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="13049" end="13060" title="molar teeth" label="molar teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820248" start="13466" end="13489" title="ivory trade" label="trade of elephant ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q133006" start="13736" end="13750" title="Asian elephant" label="Asian elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="13840" end="13845" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q185038" start="13950" end="13966" title="African elephant" label="African elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q275038" start="14286" end="14297" title="confiscation" label="confiscated"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579877" start="14308" end="14315" title="destruction of ivory" label="crushed"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14319" end="14332" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="14340" end="14352" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="14417" end="14430" title="illegal trade" label="illegal trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="14493" end="14505" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699044" start="15335" end="15349" title="woolly mammoth" label="woolly mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="15365" end="15371" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352389" start="15780" end="15792" title="walrus ivory" label="walrus ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668576" start="17268" end="17283" title="vegetable ivory" label="vegetable ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="17306" end="17310" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="17311" end="17320" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q161190" start="17328" end="17342" title="ivory nut palm" label="ivory nut palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="17369" end="17379" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="17384" end="17391" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="17393" end="17397" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="17402" end="17410" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232188" start="17440" end="17456" title="Biobased economy" label="Biobased economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q396569" start="17459" end="17470" title="Ivory tower" label="Ivory tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730297" start="17473" end="17482" title="Jim Nyamu" label="Jim Nyamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163521" start="17485" end="17499" title="RAL 1014 Ivory" label="RAL 1014 Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832879" start="17502" end="17515" title="Schreger line" label="Schreger line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15166" wikidata="Q202825" url="?curid=15166" title="Infantry fighting vehicle">
<text>An infantry fighting vehicle (IFV), also known as a mechanized infantry combat vehicle (MICV), is a type of armoured fighting vehicle and armoured personnel carrier used to carry infantry into battle and provide direct-fire support. The 1990 Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe defines an infantry fighting vehicle as &quot;an armoured combat vehicle which is designed and equipped primarily to transport a combat infantry squad, and which is armed with an integral or organic cannon of at least 20 millimeters calibre and sometimes an antitank missile launcher&quot;. IFVs often serve both as the principal weapons system and as the mode of transport for a mechanized infantry unit.

Infantry fighting vehicles are distinct from general armored personnel carriers (APCs), which are transport vehicles armed only for self-defense and not specifically engineered to fight on their own. IFVs are designed to be more mobile than tanks and are equipped with a rapid-firing autocannon or a large conventional gun; they may include side ports for infantrymen to fire their personal weapons while on board.

The IFV rapidly gained popularity with armies worldwide due to a demand for vehicles with higher firepower than APCs that were less expensive and easier to maintain than tanks. Nevertheless, it did not supersede the APC concept altogether, due to the latter&#x27;s continued usefulness in specialized roles. Some armies continue to maintain fleets of both IFVs and APCs.

== History ==
===Early Cold War===
The infantry fighting vehicle (IFV) concept evolved directly out of that of the armored personnel carrier (APC). During the Cold War of 1947-1991 armies increasingly fitted heavier and heavier weapons systems on an APC chassis to deliver suppressive fire for infantry debussing from the vehicle&#x27;s troop compartment. With the growing mechanization of infantry units worldwide, some armies also came to believe that the embarked personnel should fire their weapons from inside the protection of the APC and only fight on foot as a last resort. These two trends led to the IFV, with firing ports in the troop compartment and a crew-operated weapons system. The IFV established a new niche between those combat vehicles which functioned primarily as armored weapons-carriers or as APCs.

During the 1950s, the Soviet, US, and most European armies had adopted tracked APCs. In 1958, however, the Federal Republic of Germany&#x27;s newly organized adopted the Schützenpanzer Lang HS.30 (also known simply as the &quot;SPz 12-3&quot;), which resembled a conventional tracked APC but carried a turret-mounted 20 mm autocannon that enabled it to engage other armored vehicles. The SPz 12-3 was the first purpose-built IFV.

The &#x27;s doctrine called for mounted infantry to fight and maneuver alongside tank formations rather than simply being ferried to the edge of the battlefield before dismounting. Each SPz 12-3 could carry five troops in addition to a three-man crew. Despite this, the design lacked firing ports, forcing the embarked infantry to expose themselves through open hatches to return fire. 

As the SPz 12-3 was being inducted into service, the French and Austrian armies adopted new APCs which possessed firing ports, allowing embarked infantry to observe and fire their weapons from inside the vehicle. These were known as the AMX-VCI and Saurer 4K, respectively. Austria subsequently introduced an IFV variant of the Saurer 4K which carried a 20 mm autocannon, making it the first vehicle of this class to possess both firing ports and a turreted weapons-system.

In the early to mid-1960s, the Swedish Army adopted two IFVs armed with 20 mm autocannon turrets and roof firing hatches: Pansarbandvagn 301 and Pansarbandvagn 302, having experimented with the IFV concept already during WWII in the Terrängbil m/42 KP wheeled machine gun armed proto-IFV. Following the trend towards converting preexisting APCs into IFVs, the Dutch, US, and Belgian armies experimented with a variety of modified M113s during the late 1960s; these were collectively identified as the AIFV (Armored Infantry Fighting Vehicle).

The first US M113-based IFV appeared in 1969; known as the XM765, it had a sharply angled hull, ten vision blocks, and a cupola-mounted 20 mm autocannon. The XM765 design, though rejected for service, later became the basis for the very similar Dutch YPR-765. The YPR-765 had five firing ports and a 25 mm autocannon with a co-axial machine gun.

The Soviet Army fielded its first tracked APC, the BTR-50, in 1957. Its first wheeled APC, the BTR-152, had been designed as early as the late 1940s. Early versions of both these lightly armored vehicles were open-topped and carried only general-purpose machine guns for armament. As Soviet strategists became more preoccupied with the possibility of a war involving weapons of mass destruction, they became convinced of the need to deliver mounted troops to a battlefield without exposing them to the radioactive fallout from an atomic weapon. The IFV concept was received favorably because it would enable a Soviet infantry squad to fight from inside their vehicles when operating in contaminated environments. Soviet design work on a new tracked IFV began in the late 1950s and the first prototype appeared as the &quot;Obyekt 765&quot; in 1961. After evaluating and rejecting a number of other wheeled and tracked prototypes, the Soviet Army accepted the &quot;Obyekt 765&quot; for service. It entered serial production as the BMP-1 in 1966.

The BMP-1 was heavily armed and armored, combining the qualities of a light tank with those of the traditional APC. In addition to being amphibious and superior in cross-country mobility to its predecessors, the BMP-1 carried a 73mm smoothbore cannon, a co-axial PKT machine gun, and a launcher for 9M14 Malyutka anti-tank missiles. Its hull had sufficiently heavy armor to resist .50 caliber armor-piercing ammunition along its frontal arc. Eight firing ports and vision blocks allowed the embarked infantry squad to observe and engage targets with rifles or machine guns. The BMP-1&#x27;s use of a relatively large caliber main gun marked a departure from the Western trend of fitting IFVs with automatic cannon, which were more suitable for engaging low-flying aircraft, light armor, and dismounted personnel.

The Soviet Union produced about 20,000 BMP-1s from 1966 to 1983, at which time it was considered the most widely adopted IFV design in the world. In Soviet service, the BMP-1 was ultimately superseded by the more sophisticated BMP-2 (in service from 1980) and by the BMP-3 (in service from 1987). A similar vehicle known as the BMD-1 was designed to accompany Soviet airborne infantry and for a number of years was the world&#x27;s only airborne IFV.

In 1971 the adopted the Marder, which became increasingly heavily armored through its successive marks and – like the BMP – was later fitted as standard with a launcher for anti-tank guided missiles. Between 1973 and 1975 the French and Yugoslav armies developed the AMX-10P and BVP M-80, respectively – the first amphibious IFVs to appear outside the Soviet Union. The Marder, AMX-10P, and M-80 were all armed with similar 20 mm autocannon and carried seven to eight passengers. They could also be armed with various anti-tank missile configurations.

=== Late Cold War ===
Wheeled IFVs did not begin appearing until 1976, when the Ratel was introduced in response to a South African Army specification for a wheeled combat vehicle suited to the demands of rapid offensives combining maximum firepower and strategic mobility. Unlike European IFVs, the Ratel was not designed to allow mounted infantrymen to fight in concert with tanks but rather to operate independently across vast distances. South African officials chose a very simple, economical design because it helped reduce the significant logistical commitment necessary to keep heavier combat vehicles operational in undeveloped areas. Excessive track wear was also an issue in the region&#x27;s abrasive, sandy terrain, making the Ratel&#x27;s wheeled configuration more attractive. The Ratel was typically armed with a 20 mm autocannon featuring what was then a unique twin-linked ammunition feed, allowing its gunner to rapidly switch between armor-piercing and high-explosive ammunition. Other variants were also fitted with mortars, a bank of anti-tank guided missiles, or a 90 mm cannon. Most notably, the Ratel was the first mine-protected IFV; it had a blastproof hull and was built to withstand the explosive force of anti-tank mines favored by local insurgents.

Like the BMP-1, the Ratel proved to be a major watershed in IFV development, albeit for different reasons: until its debut wheeled IFV designs were evaluated unfavorably, since they lacked the weight-carrying capacity and off-road mobility of tracked vehicles, and their wheels were more vulnerable to hostile fire. However, improvements during the 1970s in power trains, suspension technology, and tires had increased their potential strategic mobility. Reduced production, operation, and maintenance costs also helped make wheeled IFVs attractive to several nations.

During the late 1960s and early 1970s, the United States Army had gradually abandoned its attempts to utilize the M113 as an IFV and refocused on creating a dedicated IFV design able to match the BMP. Although considered reliable, the M113 chassis did not meet the necessary requirements for protection or stealth. The US also considered the M113 too heavy and slow to serve as an IFV capable of keeping pace with tanks. Its MICV-65 program produced a number of unique prototypes, none of which were accepted for service owing to concerns about speed, armor protection, and weight. US Army evaluation staff were sent to Europe to review the AMX-10P and the Marder, both of which were rejected due to high cost, insufficient armor, or lackluster amphibious capabilities. 

In 1973, the FMC Corporation developed and tested the XM723, which was a 21-ton tracked chassis which could accommodate three crew members and eight passengers. It initially carried a single 20 mm autocannon in a one-man turret but in 1976 a two-man turret was introduced; this carried a 25 mm autocannon like M242 or Oerlikon KBA, a co-axial machine gun, and a TOW anti-tank missile launcher. The XM723 possessed amphibious capability, nine firing ports, and spaced laminate armor on its hull. It was accepted for service with the US Army in 1980 as the Bradley Fighting Vehicle. Successive variants have been retrofitted with improved missile systems, gas particulate filter systems, Kevlar spall liners, and increased stowage. The amount of space taken up by the hull and stowage modifications has reduced the number of passengers to six.

By 1982 30,000 IFVs had entered service worldwide, and the IFV concept appeared in the doctrines of 30 national armies. The popularity of the IFV was increased by the growing trend on the part of many nations to mechanize armies previously dominated by light infantry. However, contrary to expectation the IFV did not render APCs obsolete. The US, Russian, French, and German armies have all retained large fleets of IFVs and APCs, finding the APC more suitable for multi-purpose or auxiliary roles.

The British Army was one of the few Western armies which had neither recognized a niche for IFVs nor adopted a dedicated IFV design by the late 1970s. In 1980, it made the decision to adopt a new tracked armored vehicle, the FV510 Warrior. British doctrine is that a vehicle should carry troops under protection to the objective and then give firepower support when they have disembarked. While normally classified as an IFV, the Warrior fills the role of an APC in British service and infantrymen do not remain embarked during combat.

== Doctrine ==

The role of the IFV is closely linked to mechanized infantry doctrine. While some IFVs are armed with a direct fire gun or anti-tank guided missiles for close infantry support, they are not intended to assault armored and mechanized forces with any type of infantry on their own, mounted or not. Rather, the IFV&#x27;s role is to give an infantry unit battlefield, tactical, and operational mobility during combined arms operations.

Most IFVs either complement tanks as part of an armored battalion, brigade, or division. Others perform traditional infantry missions supported by tanks. Early development of IFVs in a number of Western nations was promoted primarily by armor officers who wanted to integrate tanks with supporting infantry in armored divisions. There were a few exceptions to the rule: for example, the &#x27;s decision to adopt the SPz 12-3 was largely due to the experiences of Wehrmacht s who had been inappropriately ordered to undertake combat operations better suited for armor. Hence, the concluded that infantry should only fight while mounted in their own armored vehicles, ideally supported by tanks. This doctrinal trend was later subsumed into the armies of other Western nations, including the US, leading to the widespread conclusion that IFVs should be confined largely to assisting the forward momentum of tanks.

The Soviet Army granted more flexibility in this regard to its IFV doctrine, allowing for the mechanized infantry to occupy terrain that compromised an enemy defense, carry out flanking movements, or lure armor into ill-advised counterattacks. While they still performed an auxiliary role to tanks, the notion of using IFVs in these types of engagements dictated that they be heavily armed, which was reflected in the BMP-1 and its successors. Additionally, Soviet airborne doctrine made use of the BMD series of IFVs to operate in concert with paratroops rather than traditional mechanized or armored formations.

IFVs assumed a new significance after the 1973 Arab-Israeli War. In addition to heralding the combat debut of the BMP-1, that conflict demonstrated the newfound significance of anti-tank guided missiles and the obsolescence of independent armored attacks. More emphasis was placed on combined arms offensives, and the importance of mechanized infantry to support tanks reemerged.

As a result of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the Soviet Union attached more infantry to its armored formations and the US accelerated its long-delayed IFV development program. An IFV capable of accompanying tanks for the purpose of suppressing anti-tank weapons and the hostile infantry which operated them was seen as necessary to avoid the devastation wreaked on purely armored Israeli formations.

== Design ==
The US Army defines all vehicles classed as IFVs as having three essential characteristics: they are armed with at least a medium-caliber cannon or automatic grenade launcher, at least sufficiently protected against small arms fire, and possess off-road mobility. It also identifies all IFVs as having some characteristics of an APC and a light tank.

The United Nations Register for Conventional Arms (UNROCA) simply defines an IFV as any armored vehicle &quot;designed to fight with soldiers on board&quot; and &quot;to accompany tanks&quot;. UNROCA makes a clear distinction between IFVs and APCs, as the former&#x27;s primary mission is combat rather than general transport.

=== Protection ===

All IFVs possess armored hulls protected against rifle and machine gun fire, and some are equipped with active protection systems. Most have lighter armor than main battle tanks to ensure mobility. Armies have generally accepted risk in reduced protection to recapitalize on an IFV&#x27;s mobility, weight and speed. Their fully enclosed hulls offer protection from artillery fragments and residual environmental contaminants as well as limit exposure time to the mounted infantry during extended movements over open ground.

Many IFVs also have sharply angled hulls that offer a relatively high degree of protection for their armor thickness. The BMP, Boragh, BVP M-80, and their respective variants all possess steel hulls with a distribution of armor and steep angling that protect them during frontal advances. The BMP-1 was vulnerable to heavy machine guns at close range on its flanks or rear, leading to a variety of more heavily armored marks appearing from 1979 onward.

The Bradley possessed a lightweight aluminum alloy hull, which in most successive marks has been bolstered by the addition of explosive reactive and slat armor, spaced laminate belts, and steel track skirts. Throughout its life cycle, an IFV is expected to gain 30% more weight from armor additions.

As asymmetric conflicts become more common, an increasing concern with regards to IFV protection has been adequate countermeasures against land mines and improvised explosive devices. During the Iraq War, inadequate mine protection in US Bradleys forced their crews to resort to makeshift strategies such as lining the hull floors with sandbags. A few IFVs, such as the Ratel, have been specifically engineered to resist mine explosions.

===Armament===
IFVs may be equipped with: turrets carrying autocannons of various calibers, low or medium velocity tank guns, anti-tank guided missiles, or automatic grenade launchers.

With a few exceptions, such as the BMP-1 and the BMP-3, designs such as the Marder and the BMP-2 have set the trend of arming IFVs with an autocannon suitable for use against lightly armored vehicles, low-flying aircraft, and dismounted infantry. This reflected the growing inclination to view IFVs as auxiliaries of armored formations: a small or medium caliber autocannon was perceived as an ideal suppressive weapon to complement large caliber tank fire. IFVs armed with miniature tank guns did not prove popular because many of the roles they were expected to perform were better performed by accompanying tanks.

The BMP-1, which was the first IFV to carry a relatively large cannon, came under criticism during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War for its mediocre individual accuracy, due in part to the low velocities of its projectiles. During the Soviet–Afghan War, BMP-1 crews also complained that their armament lacked the elevation necessary to engage insurgents in mountainous terrain. The effectiveness of large caliber, low-velocity guns like the 2A28 Grom on the BMP-1 and BMD-1 was also much reduced by the appearance of Chobham armor on Western tanks.

The Ratel, which included a variant armed with a 90mm low-velocity gun, was utilized in South African combat operations against Angolan and Cuban armored formations during the South African Border War, with mixed results. Although the Ratels succeeded in destroying a large number of Angolan tanks and APCs, they were hampered by many of the same problems as the BMP-1: mediocre standoff ranges, inferior fire control, and a lack of stabilized main gun. The Ratels&#x27; heavy armament also tempted South African commanders to utilize them as light tanks rather than in their intended role of infantry support.

Another design feature of the BMP-1 did prove more successful in establishing a precedent for future IFVs: its inclusion of an anti-tank missile system. This consisted of a rail-launcher firing 9M14 Malyutka missiles which had to be reloaded manually from outside the BMP&#x27;s turret. Crew members had to expose themselves to enemy fire to reload the missiles, and they could not guide them effectively from inside the confines of the turret space.

The BMP-2 and later variants of the BMP-1 made use of semiautonomous guided missile systems. In 1978, the became the first Western army to embrace this trend when it retrofitted all its Marders with launchers for MILAN anti-tank missiles.

The US Army added a launcher for TOW anti-tank missiles to its fleet of Bradleys, despite the fact that this greatly reduced the interior space available for seating the embarked infantry. This was justified on the basis that the Bradley needed to not only engage and destroy other IFVs, but support tanks in the destruction of other tanks during combined arms operations.

===Mobility===

IFVs are designed to have the strategic and tactical mobility necessary to keep pace with tanks during rapid maneuvers. Some, like the BMD series, have airborne and amphibious capabilities. IFVs may be either wheeled or tracked; tracked IFVs are usually more heavily armored and possess greater carrying capacity. Wheeled IFVs are cheaper and simpler to produce, maintain, and operate. From a logistical perspective, they are also ideal for an army without widespread access to transporters or a developed rail network to deploy its armor.

==See also==

* List of infantry fighting vehicles
* Armored car (military)
* Armoured personnel carrier
* Armoured warfare
* BMP development
* Improvised fighting vehicle
* Infantry Squad Vehicle
* List of modern armoured fighting vehicles
* Lists of armoured fighting vehicles
* Mechanized infantry
* Motorized infantry
* Tank desant
== Explanatory notes ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="3" end="28" title="Infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="30" end="33" title="Infantry fighting vehicle" label="IFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="52" end="86" title="Infantry fighting vehicle" label="mechanized infantry combat vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="88" end="92" title="Infantry fighting vehicle" label="MICV"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="108" end="133" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="138" end="164" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="179" end="187" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="212" end="223" title="direct fire" label="direct-fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q834195" start="242" end="287" title="Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe" label="Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="668" end="687" title="mechanized infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="748" end="773" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="936" end="940" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="979" end="989" title="autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="1598" end="1623" title="armored personnel carrier" label="armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1642" end="1650" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164253" start="1756" end="1772" title="suppressive fire" label="suppressive fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q315554" start="2477" end="2502" title="Schützenpanzer Lang HS.30" label="Schützenpanzer Lang HS.30"/>
<link wikidata="Q295449" start="3363" end="3370" title="AMX-VCI" label="AMX-VCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q694742" start="3375" end="3384" title="Saurer 4K 4FA" label="Saurer 4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="3632" end="3644" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811919" start="3723" end="3741" title="Pansarbandvagn 301" label="Pansarbandvagn 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q593745" start="3746" end="3764" title="Pansarbandvagn 302" label="Pansarbandvagn 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772587" start="3834" end="3852" title="Terrängbil m/42 KP" label="Terrängbil m/42 KP"/>
<link wikidata="Q462407" start="4031" end="4036" title="M113 armored personnel carrier" label="M113s"/>
<link wikidata="Q192434" start="4102" end="4106" title="AIFV" label="AIFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="4496" end="4507" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q682951" start="4543" end="4549" title="BTR-50" label="BTR-50"/>
<link wikidata="Q312465" start="4587" end="4594" title="BTR-152" label="BTR-152"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="4859" end="4886" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835995" start="5205" end="5244" title="BMP development" label="Soviet design work on a new tracked IFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q155494" start="5523" end="5528" title="BMP-1" label="BMP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q875583" start="5609" end="5619" title="light tank" label="light tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030611" start="5767" end="5789" title="2A28 Grom" label="73mm smoothbore cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159495" start="5802" end="5817" title="PK machine gun" label="PKT machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q277443" start="5838" end="5851" title="9M14 Malyutka" label="9M14 Malyutka"/>
<link wikidata="Q160357" start="6580" end="6585" title="BMP-2" label="BMP-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q796368" start="6620" end="6625" title="BMP-3" label="BMP-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q796336" start="6681" end="6686" title="BMD-1" label="BMD-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q523029" start="6829" end="6835" title="Marder (IFV)" label="Marder"/>
<link wikidata="Q295398" start="7072" end="7079" title="AMX-10P" label="AMX-10P"/>
<link wikidata="Q797156" start="7084" end="7092" title="BVP M-80" label="BVP M-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726481" start="7438" end="7443" title="Ratel IFV" label="Ratel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815399" start="7476" end="7494" title="South African Army" label="South African Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="9252" end="9270" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11987468" start="9634" end="9641" title="MICV-65" label="MICV-65"/>
<link wikidata="Q899183" start="9994" end="10009" title="FMC Corporation" label="FMC Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q138729" start="10291" end="10295" title="M242 Bushmaster" label="M242"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880981" start="10299" end="10311" title="Oerlikon KBA" label="Oerlikon KBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q747313" start="10343" end="10346" title="BGM-71 TOW" label="TOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q20030127" start="10536" end="10560" title="Bradley Fighting Vehicle" label="Bradley Fighting Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="11329" end="11341" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q589212" start="11550" end="11563" title="Warrior tracked armoured vehicle" label="FV510 Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="11919" end="11938" title="mechanized infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="12285" end="12298" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="13883" end="13904" title="Yom Kippur War" label="1973 Arab-Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="14849" end="14859" title="small arms" label="small arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q875583" start="14972" end="14982" title="light tank" label="light tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="14989" end="15003" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q333043" start="15437" end="15461" title="active protection system" label="active protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="15493" end="15509" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q893302" start="15986" end="15992" title="Boragh" label="Boragh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195448" start="16176" end="16193" title="heavy machine gun" label="heavy machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="16617" end="16636" title="Asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="16753" end="16762" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="16768" end="16795" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="16809" end="16817" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726481" start="16984" end="16989" title="Ratel IFV" label="Ratel"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="17095" end="17101" title="gun turret" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="17112" end="17122" title="autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="17168" end="17176" title="tank gun" label="tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="17179" end="17204" title="anti-tank guided missiles" label="anti-tank guided missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991775" start="17209" end="17235" title="automatic grenade launcher" label="automatic grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q523029" start="17315" end="17321" title="Marder (IFV)" label="Marder"/>
<link wikidata="Q160357" start="17330" end="17335" title="BMP-2" label="BMP-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="17960" end="17981" title="Yom Kippur War" label="1973 Arab-Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="18085" end="18102" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030611" start="18291" end="18300" title="2A28 Grom" label="2A28 Grom"/>
<link wikidata="Q672645" start="18367" end="18380" title="Chobham armour" label="Chobham armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="18528" end="18534" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="18540" end="18544" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="18576" end="18600" title="South African Border War" label="South African Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463375" start="19677" end="19682" title="MILAN" label="MILAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q131831104" start="20651" end="20685" title="List of infantry fighting vehicles" label="List of infantry fighting vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="20688" end="20710" title="Armored car (military)" label="Armored car (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="20713" end="20739" title="Armoured personnel carrier" label="Armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="20742" end="20758" title="Armoured warfare" label="Armoured warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835995" start="20761" end="20776" title="BMP development" label="BMP development"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060705" start="20779" end="20806" title="Improvised fighting vehicle" label="Improvised fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q97190590" start="20809" end="20831" title="Infantry Squad Vehicle" label="Infantry Squad Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038060" start="20834" end="20875" title="List of modern armoured fighting vehicles" label="List of modern armoured fighting vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945441" start="20878" end="20913" title="Lists of armoured fighting vehicles" label="Lists of armoured fighting vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="20916" end="20935" title="Mechanized infantry" label="Mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="20938" end="20956" title="Motorized infantry" label="Motorized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984942" start="20959" end="20970" title="Tank desant" label="Tank desant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15167" wikidata="Q58166" url="?curid=15167" title="ICQ">
<text>ICQ was a cross-platform instant messaging (IM) and VoIP client founded in June 1996 by Yair Goldfinger, Sefi Vigiser, Amnon Amir, Arik Vardi, and Arik&#x27;s father, Yossi Vardi. The name ICQ derives from the English phrase &quot;I Seek You&quot;. Originally developed by the Israeli company Mirabilis in 1996, the client was bought by AOL in 1998, and then by Mail.Ru Group (now VK) in 2010.

The ICQ client application and service were initially released in November 1996, freely available to download. The business did not have traditional marketing and relied mostly on word-of-mouth advertising instead, with customers telling their friends about it, who then informed their friends, and so on. ICQ was among the first stand-alone instant messenger (IM) applications—while real-time chat was not in itself new (Internet Relay Chat [IRC] being the most common platform at the time), the concept of a fully centralized service with individual user accounts focused on one-on-one conversations set the blueprint for later instant messaging services like AIM, and its influence is seen in modern social media applications. ICQ became the first widely adopted IM platform.

At its peak around 2001, ICQ had more than 100 million accounts registered. At the time of the Mail.Ru acquisition in 2010, there were around 42 million daily users. In 2022, ICQ had about 11 million monthly users.

The service was shut down on June 26, 2024, following an announcement on ICQ&#x27;s website in May 2024. 

== Features of ICQ New ==

The last version of the service, launched in 2020 as &quot;ICQ New&quot;, featured a number of different messaging functions:

* Private chats: conversations between two users, with history synchronized to the cloud. A user could delete a sent message at any time, and a notification will be shown indicating that the message has been deleted.
* A chat with oneself, which could be used to save messages from group or private chats, or upload media content as a form of cloud storage.
* Group chats with up to 25 thousand participants at the same time, which any user could create. Users could hide their phone number from other participants, see which group members have read a message, and switched off notifications for messages from specific group members.
* Audio and video calls with up to five people.
* Sending and receiving of audio messages, with automatic transcription to text.
* Channels, where authors could publish posts as text messages and attach media files, similar to a blog. Once the post was published, subscribers receive a notification as they would from regular and group chats. The channel author could remain anonymous.
* Polls inside group chats.
* An API-bot which could be used by anyone to create a bot, to perform specific actions and interact with users.
* &quot;Stickers&quot;: small images or photos expressing some form of emotion, could be selected from a provided sticker library or users could upload their own. Machine learning was used to recommend stickers automatically.
* &quot;Masks&quot;: images that could be superimposed onto the camera in real-time during video calls, or onto photos to be sent to other users. 
* Nicknames, which users could set to use in place of a phone number for others to search for and contact them.
* &quot;Smart answers&quot;: short phrases that appear above the message box which can be used to answer messages. ICQ New analyzed the contents of a conversation and suggests a few pre-set answers.

==UIN==
ICQ users were identified and distinguished from one another by UIN, or User Identification Numbers, distributed in sequential order. The UIN was invented by Mirabilis, as the user name assigned to each user upon registration. Issued UINs started at &#x27;10,000&#x27; (5 digits) and every user received a UIN when first registering with ICQ. As of ICQ6 users were also able to log in using the specific e-mail address they associated with their UIN during the initial registration process.
Unlike other instant messaging software or web applications, on ICQ the only permanent user info was the UIN, although it was possible to search for other users using their associated e-mail address or any other detail they made public by updating it in their account&#x27;s public profile. In addition the user could change all of his or her personal information, including screen name and e-mail address, without having to re-register. Since 2000, ICQ and AIM users were able to add each other to their contact list without the need for any external clients. As a response to UIN theft or sale of attractive UINs, ICQ started to store email addresses previously associated with a UIN. As such UINs that are stolen could sometimes be reclaimed, if a valid primary email address was entered into the user profile.

==History==
The founding company of ICQ, Mirabilis, was established in June 1996 by five Israeli developers: Yair Goldfinger, Sefi Vigiser, Amnon Amir, Arik Vardi, and Arik&#x27;s father Yossi Vardi. ICQ was one of the first text-based messengers to reach a wide range of users.

The technology Mirabilis developed for ICQ was distributed free of charge. The technology&#x27;s success encouraged AOL to acquire Mirabilis on June 8, 1998, for $287 million up front and $120 million in additional payments over three years based on performance levels. In 2002 AOL successfully patented the technology.

After the purchase, the product was initially managed by Ariel Yarnitsky and Avi Shechter. ICQ&#x27;s management changed at the end of 2003. Under the leadership of the new CEO, Orey Gilliam, who also assumed the responsibility for all of AOL&#x27;s messaging business in 2007, ICQ resumed its growth; it was not only a highly profitable company, but one of AOL&#x27;s most successful businesses. Eliav Moshe replaced Gilliam in 2009 and became ICQ&#x27;s managing director.
In April 2010, AOL sold ICQ to Digital Sky Technologies, headed by Alisher Usmanov, for $187.5 million. While ICQ was displaced by AOL Instant Messenger, Google Talk, and other competitors in the US and many other countries over the 2000s, it remained the most popular instant messaging network in Russian-speaking countries, and an important part of online culture. Popular UINs demanded over 11,000₽ in 2010.

In September of that year, Digital Sky Technologies changed its name to Mail.Ru Group. Since the acquisition, Mail.ru has invested in turning ICQ from a desktop client to a mobile messaging system. As of 2013, around half of ICQ&#x27;s users were using its mobile apps, and in 2014, the number of users began growing for the first time since the purchase.

In March 2016, the source code of the client was released under the Apache license on GitHub.
In 2020, Mail.Ru Group decided to launch a new version, &quot;ICQ New&quot;, based on the original ICQ. The updated software was presented to the general public on April 6, 2020. 

During the second week of January 2021, ICQ saw a renewed increase in popularity in Hong Kong, spurred on by the controversy over WhatsApp&#x27;s privacy policy update. The number of downloads for the application increased 35-fold in the region.

On May 24, 2024, the main page of ICQ&#x27;s website announced that the service would be shutting down on June 26, 2024. ICQ recommended that users migrate to VK Messenger and VK WorkSpace.

===Development history===
*ICQ 99a/b the first releases that were widely available.
*ICQ 2000 incorporated into &quot;Notes&quot; and &quot;Reminder&quot; features.
*ICQ 2001 included server-side storage of the contact list. This provided synchronization between multiple computers and enforced obtaining consent before adding UINs to the contact list by preventing clients from modifying the local contact list directly.
*In 2002, AOL Time Warner announced that ICQ had been issued a United States patent for instant messaging.
*ICQ 2002 was the last completely advertising-free ICQ version.
*ICQ Pro 2003b was the first ICQ version to use the ICQ protocol version 10. However, &quot;ICQ 5&quot; and 5.1 use version 9 of the protocol. &quot;ICQ 2002&quot; and &quot;2003a&quot; used version 8 of the ICQ protocol. Earlier versions (&quot;ICQ 2001b&quot; and all ICQ clients before it) used ICQ protocol version 7.
*ICQ 4 and later ICQ 5 (released on Monday, February 7, 2005), were upgrades on ICQ Lite. One addition was Xtraz, which offers games and features intended to appeal to younger users of the Internet. ICQ Lite was originally an idea to offer the lighter users of instant messaging an alternative client which was a smaller download and less resource-hungry for relatively slow computers.
*ICQ 5 introduced skins support. There are few official skins available for the current ICQ 5.1 at the official website; however, a number of user-generated skins have been made available for download.
*ICQ 6, released on April 17, 2007, was the first major update since ICQ 4. The user interface has been redesigned using Boxely, the same rendering engine used in AIM Triton. This change adds new features such as the ability to send IMs directly from the client&#x27;s contact list. ICQ has recently started forcing users of v5.1 to upgrade to version 6 (and XP). Those who do not upgrade will find their older version of ICQ does not start up. Although the upgrade to version 6 should be seen as a positive thing, some users may find that useful features such as sending multiple files at one time is no longer supported in the new version. At the beginning of July 2008, a network upgrade forced users to stop using ICQ 5.1 – applications that identified themselves as ICQ 5, such as Pidgin, were forced to identify themselves as ICQ 6. There seems to be no alternative for users other than using a different IM program or patching ICQ 5.1 with a special application.
*ICQ 7.0, released on January 18, 2010. This update includes integration with Facebook and other websites. It also allows custom personal status similar to Windows Live Messenger (MSN Messenger). ICQ 7.0 does not support traditional Chinese on standard installation or with the addition of an official language pack. This has made its adoption difficult with the established user base from Hong Kong and Taiwan where traditional Chinese is the official language.
*ICQ 8, released on February 5, 2012 – &quot;Meet the new generation of ICQ, Enjoy free video calls, messages and SMS, social networks support and more.&quot;
*ICQ 10.0, released January 18, 2016. Final update was 10.0 Build 46867, released on May 27, 2022.

==Criticism==
===Policy against unofficial clients===
AOL (and later Mail.ru) pursued an aggressive policy regarding alternative (&quot;unauthorized&quot;) ICQ clients.
*In July 2008, changes were implemented on ICQ servers causing many unofficial clients to stop working. These users received an official notification from &quot;ICQ System&quot;.
*On December 9, 2008, another change to the ICQ servers occurred: clients sending Client IDs not matching ICQ 5.1 or higher stopped working.
*On December 29, 2008, the ICQ press service distributed a statement characterizing alternative clients as dangerous.
*On January 21, 2009, ICQ servers started blocking all unofficial clients in Russia and Commonwealth of Independent States countries. Users in Russia and Ukraine received a message from UIN 1:

&quot;Системное сообщение
:ICQ не поддерживает используемую вами версию. Скачайте бесплатную авторизованную версию ICQ с официального web-сайта ICQ.
System Message
:The version you are using is not supported by ICQ. Download a free authorized ICQ version from ICQ&#x27;s official website.&quot;

On icq.com there was an &quot;important message&quot; for Russian-speaking ICQ users: &quot;ICQ осуществляет поддержку только авторизированных версий программ: ICQ Lite и ICQ 6.5.&quot; (&quot;ICQ supports only authorized versions of programs: ICQ Lite and ICQ 6.5.&quot;)
*On February 3, 2009, the events of January 21 were repeated.
*On December 27, 2018, ICQ announced it was to stop supporting unofficial clients, affecting many users who prefer a compact size using Miranda NG and other clients.
*On December 28, 2018, ICQ stopped working on some unofficial clients.
*In late March, 2019, ICQ stopped working on the Pidgin client, as initiated in December 2018.

===Cooperation with Russian intelligence services===
According to a &quot;Novaya Gazeta&quot; article published in May 2018, Russian intelligence agencies had access to online reading of ICQ users&#x27; correspondence during crime investigations. The article examined 34 sentences of Russian courts, during the investigation of which the evidence of the defendants&#x27; guilt was obtained by reading correspondence on a PC or mobile devices. In six of the fourteen cases in which ICQ was involved, the capturing of information occurred before the seizure of the device. Because the rival service Telegram blocks all access for the agencies, the Advisor of the Russian President, Herman Klimenko, recommended to use ICQ instead.

=== Child pornography ===
In 2023, an investigation by Brazilian news outlet &quot;Núcleo Jornalismo&quot; found that ICQ was used to freely share child pornography due to lax moderation policies.

==Clients==
AOL&#x27;s OSCAR network protocol used by ICQ was proprietary and using a third party client was a violation of ICQ Terms of Service. Nevertheless, a number of third-party clients were created by using reverse-engineering and protocol descriptions. These clients included:

* Adium: supports ICQ, Yahoo!, AIM, MSN, Google Talk, XMPP, and others, for macOS
* Ayttm: supports ICQ, Yahoo!, AIM, MSN, IRC, and XMPP
* BitlBee: IRC gateway, supports ICQ, Yahoo!, AIM, MSN, Google Talk, and XMPP
* Centericq: supports ICQ, Yahoo!, AIM, MSN, IRC and XMPP, text-based
* climm (formerly mICQ): text-based
* Jimm: supports ICQ, for Java ME mobile devices
* Kopete: supports AIM, ICQ, MSN, Yahoo, XMPP, Google Talk, IRC, Gadu-Gadu, Novell GroupWise Messenger and others, for Unix-like
* Meetro: IM and social networking combined with location; supports AIM, ICQ, MSN, Yahoo!
* Miranda NG: supports ICQ, Yahoo!, AIM, MSN, IRC, Google Talk, XMPP, Gadu-Gadu, BNet and others, for Windows
* Naim: ncurses-based
* Pidgin (formerly Gaim): supports ICQ, Yahoo!, AIM, Gtalk, MSN, IRC, XMPP, Gadu-Gadu, SILC, Meanwhile, (IBM Lotus Sametime) and others
* QIP: supports ICQ, AIM, XMPP and XIMSS
* stICQ: supports ICQ, for Symbian OS
* Trillian: supports ICQ, IRC, Google Talk, XMPP and others

AOL supported clients include:
* AOL Instant Messenger (discontinued in 2017)
* Messages/iChat: uses ICQ&#x27;s UIN as an AIM screenname, for macOS

==See also==
*Comparison of instant messaging clients
*Comparison of instant messaging protocols
*LAN messenger
*Online chat
*Windows Live Messenger
*Tencent QQ

==References==
==External links==

* Official ICQ website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58166" start="0" end="3" title="ICQ" label="ICQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="25" end="42" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="52" end="56" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407487" start="193" end="205" title="gramogram" label="derives from"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="277" end="284" title="State of Israel" label="Israeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423522" start="293" end="302" title="Mirabilis (company)" label="Mirabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="337" end="340" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885456" start="362" end="375" title="Mail.Ru Group" label="Mail.Ru Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="737" end="754" title="instant messenger" label="instant messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="817" end="836" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="Internet Relay Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="1057" end="1060" title="AOL Instant Messenger" label="AIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q914359" start="1995" end="2008" title="cloud storage" label="cloud storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="2515" end="2519" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136656" start="2755" end="2758" title="social bot" label="bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="2976" end="2992" title="Machine learning" label="Machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="3188" end="3196" title="Nickname" label="Nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423522" start="3664" end="3673" title="Mirabilis (company)" label="Mirabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="3910" end="3916" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="4040" end="4055" title="web application" label="web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q278368" start="4372" end="4383" title="User (computing)" label="screen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="4455" end="4458" title="AOL Instant Messenger" label="AIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q875556" start="4901" end="4908" title="Israelis" label="Israeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027187" start="4999" end="5010" title="Yossi Vardi" label="Yossi Vardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="5208" end="5211" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q503147" start="5955" end="5970" title="Alisher Usmanov" label="Alisher Usmanov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6263" end="6266" title="ICQ#UIN" label="UIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885456" start="6327" end="6351" title="Digital Sky Technologies" label="Digital Sky Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="6676" end="6687" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q616526" start="6725" end="6739" title="Apache license" label="Apache license"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="6743" end="6749" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="7016" end="7025" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="7062" end="7070" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q116933" start="7338" end="7367" title="VK (service)" label="VK Messenger and VK WorkSpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="7802" end="7817" title="AOL Time Warner" label="AOL Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="7869" end="7875" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065927" start="8689" end="8694" title="Skin (computing)" label="skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065927" start="8727" end="8732" title="Skin (computing)" label="skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="8953" end="8967" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8994" end="9000" title="Boxely" label="Boxely"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="9036" end="9046" title="AIM Triton" label="AIM Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q71380" start="9659" end="9665" title="Pidgin (software)" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="9921" end="9929" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="9999" end="10021" title="Windows Live Messenger" label="Windows Live Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="10023" end="10036" title="MSN Messenger" label="MSN Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="10064" end="10083" title="traditional Chinese" label="traditional Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="10619" end="10622" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="11260" end="11294" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15835307" start="12133" end="12143" title="Miranda NG" label="Miranda NG"/>
<link wikidata="Q71380" start="12283" end="12289" title="Pidgin (software)" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170135" start="12404" end="12417" title="Novaya Gazeta" label="Novaya Gazeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="12927" end="12935" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="13207" end="13224" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="13270" end="13273" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008089" start="13281" end="13286" title="OSCAR protocol" label="OSCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="13287" end="13303" title="network protocol" label="network protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="13320" end="13331" title="Proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q58058" start="13546" end="13551" title="Adium" label="Adium"/>
<link wikidata="Q71694" start="13567" end="13573" title="Yahoo! Messenger" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="13575" end="13578" title="AOL Instant Messenger" label="AIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468684" start="13580" end="13583" title="Microsoft Messenger service" label="MSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q51713" start="13585" end="13596" title="Google Talk" label="Google Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="13598" end="13602" title="Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol" label="XMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="13620" end="13625" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875030" start="13628" end="13633" title="Ayttm" label="Ayttm"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="13667" end="13670" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="IRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q878823" start="13683" end="13690" title="BitlBee" label="BitlBee"/>
<link wikidata="Q859388" start="13761" end="13770" title="Centericq" label="Centericq"/>
<link wikidata="Q291934" start="13831" end="13836" title="climm" label="climm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471481" start="13867" end="13871" title="Jimm" label="Jimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q193828" start="13891" end="13898" title="Java ME" label="Java ME"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="13899" end="13913" title="mobile devices" label="mobile devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q58443" start="13916" end="13922" title="Kopete" label="Kopete"/>
<link wikidata="Q58518" start="14045" end="14051" title="Meetro" label="Meetro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15835307" start="14135" end="14145" title="Miranda NG" label="Miranda NG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="14235" end="14242" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q58551" start="14245" end="14249" title="Naim (chat program)" label="Naim"/>
<link wikidata="Q310974" start="14251" end="14258" title="ncurses" label="ncurses"/>
<link wikidata="Q71380" start="14267" end="14273" title="Pidgin (instant messaging client)" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58455" start="14370" end="14388" title="Lotus Sametime" label="IBM Lotus Sametime"/>
<link wikidata="Q34000" start="14403" end="14406" title="Quiet Internet Pager" label="QIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047719" start="14444" end="14449" title="stICQ" label="stICQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="14469" end="14479" title="Symbian OS" label="Symbian OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q71483" start="14482" end="14490" title="Trillian (software)" label="Trillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="14574" end="14595" title="AOL Instant Messenger" label="AOL Instant Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801742" start="14621" end="14629" title="Messages (Apple)" label="Messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q58144" start="14630" end="14635" title="iChat" label="iChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="14683" end="14688" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618972" start="14704" end="14743" title="Comparison of instant messaging clients" label="Comparison of instant messaging clients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863582" start="14745" end="14786" title="Comparison of instant messaging protocols" label="Comparison of instant messaging protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q734413" start="14788" end="14801" title="LAN messenger" label="LAN messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="14803" end="14814" title="Online chat" label="Online chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="14816" end="14838" title="Windows Live Messenger" label="Windows Live Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q857640" start="14840" end="14850" title="Tencent QQ" label="Tencent QQ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15169" wikidata="Q40415" url="?curid=15169" title="Impressionism">
<text>Impressionism was a 19th-century art movement characterized by relatively small, thin, yet visible brush strokes, open composition, emphasis on accurate depiction of light in its changing qualities (often accentuating the effects of the passage of time), ordinary subject matter, unusual visual angles, and inclusion of movement as a crucial element of human perception and experience. Impressionism originated with a group of Paris-based artists whose independent exhibitions brought them to prominence during the 1870s and 1880s.

The Impressionists faced harsh opposition from the conventional art community in France. The name of the style derives from the title of a Claude Monet work, &quot;Impression, soleil levant&quot; (&quot;Impression, Sunrise&quot;), which provoked the critic Louis Leroy to coin the term in a satirical 1874 review of the First Impressionist Exhibition published in the Parisian newspaper &quot;Le Charivari&quot;. The development of Impressionism in the visual arts was soon followed by analogous styles in other media that became known as Impressionist music and Impressionist literature.

== Overview ==
Radicals in their time, the early Impressionists violated the rules of academic painting. They constructed their pictures from freely brushed colours that took precedence over lines and contours, following the example of painters such as Eugène Delacroix and J. M. W. Turner. They also painted realistic scenes of everyday life in natural settings, often outdoors, attempting to capture a moment as experienced. 

Previously, paintings were accomplished in studio, whether landscape art, still life or portrait, with an emphasis on verisimilitude. The Impressionists found that they could capture the momentary and transient effects of sunlight by painting outdoors or &quot;en plein air&quot;. They portrayed overall visual effects instead of details, and used short &quot;broken&quot; brush strokes of mixed and pure unmixed colour—not blended smoothly or shaded, as was customary—to achieve an effect of intense colour vibration.

Impressionism emerged in France at the same time that a number of other painters, including the Italian artists known as the Macchiaioli, and Winslow Homer in the United States, were also exploring &quot;plein-air&quot; painting. The Impressionists, however, developed new techniques specific to the style. Encompassing what its adherents argued was a different way of seeing, it is an art of immediacy and movement, of candid poses and compositions, of the play of light expressed in a bright and varied use of colour. In 1876, the poet and critic Stéphane Mallarmé said of the new style: &quot;The represented subject, being composed of a harmony of reflected and ever-changing lights, cannot be supposed always to look the same but palpitates with movement, light, and life&quot;.

The public, at first hostile, gradually came to believe that the Impressionists had captured a fresh and original vision, even if the art critics and art establishment disapproved of the new style. By recreating the sensation in the eye that views the subject, rather than delineating the details of the subject, and by creating a welter of techniques and forms, Impressionism is a precursor of various painting styles, including Post-Impressionism, Fauvism, and Cubism.

== Beginnings ==

In the middle of the 19th century—a time of rapid industrialization and unsettling social change in France, as Emperor Napoleon III rebuilt Paris and waged war—the dominated French art. The Académie was the preserver of traditional French painting standards of content and style. Historical subjects, religious themes, and portraits were valued; landscape and still life were not. The Académie preferred carefully finished images that looked realistic when examined closely. Paintings in this style were made up of precise brush strokes carefully blended to hide the artist&#x27;s hand in the work. Colour was restrained and often toned down further by the application of a thick golden varnish.

The Académie had an annual, juried art show, the Salon de Paris, and artists whose work was displayed in the show won prizes, garnered commissions, and enhanced their prestige. The standards of the juries represented the values of the Académie, represented by the works of such artists as Jean-Léon Gérôme and Alexandre Cabanel. Using an eclectic mix of techniques and formulas established in Western painting since the Renaissance—such as linear perspective and figure types derived from Classical Greek art—these artists produced escapist visions of a reassuringly ordered world. By the 1850s, some artists, notably the Realist painter Gustave Courbet, had gained public attention and critical censure by depicting contemporary realities without the idealization demanded by the Académie. 

In the early 1860s, four young painters—Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Alfred Sisley, and Frédéric Bazille—met while studying under the academic artist Charles Gleyre. They discovered that they shared an interest in painting landscape and contemporary life rather than historical or mythological scenes. Following a practice—pioneered by artists such as the Englishman John Constable— that had become increasingly popular by mid-century, they often ventured into the countryside together to paint in the open air. Their purpose was not to make sketches to be developed into carefully finished works in the studio, as was the usual custom, but to complete their paintings out-of-doors. 

By painting in sunlight directly from nature, and making bold use of the vivid synthetic pigments that had become available since the beginning of the century, they began to develop a lighter and brighter manner of painting that extended further the Realism of Courbet and the Barbizon school. A favourite meeting place for the artists was the Café Guerbois on Avenue de Clichy in Paris, where the discussions were often led by Édouard Manet, whom the younger artists greatly admired. They were soon joined by Camille Pissarro, Paul Cézanne, and Armand Guillaumin.

During the 1860s, the Salon jury routinely rejected about half of the works submitted by Monet and his friends in favour of works by artists faithful to the approved style. In 1863, the Salon jury rejected Manet&#x27;s &quot;The Luncheon on the Grass&quot; () primarily because it depicted a nude woman with two clothed men at a picnic. While the Salon jury routinely accepted nudes in historical and allegorical paintings, they condemned Manet for placing a realistic nude in a contemporary setting. The jury&#x27;s severely worded rejection of Manet&#x27;s painting appalled his admirers, and the unusually large number of rejected works that year perturbed many French artists.

After Emperor Napoleon III saw the rejected works of 1863, he decreed that the public be allowed to judge the work themselves, and the Salon des Refusés (Salon of the Refused) was organized. While many viewers came only to laugh, the Salon des Refusés drew attention to the existence of a new tendency in art and attracted more visitors than the regular Salon.

Artists&#x27; petitions requesting a new Salon des Refusés in 1867, and again in 1872, were denied. In December 1873, Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Sisley, Cézanne, Berthe Morisot, Edgar Degas and several other artists founded the to exhibit their artworks independently. Members of the association were expected to forswear participation in the Salon. The organizers invited a number of other progressive artists to join them in their inaugural exhibition, including the older Eugène Boudin, whose example had first persuaded Monet to adopt &quot;plein air&quot; painting years before. Another painter who greatly influenced Monet and his friends, Johan Jongkind, declined to participate, as did Édouard Manet. In total, thirty artists participated in their first exhibition, held in April 1874 at the studio of the photographer Nadar.

The critical response was mixed. Monet and Cézanne received the harshest attacks. Critic and humorist Louis Leroy wrote a scathing review in the newspaper &quot;Le Charivari&quot; in which, making wordplay with the title of Claude Monet&#x27;s &quot;Impression, Sunrise&quot; &quot;(Impression, soleil levant)&quot;, he gave the artists the name by which they became known. Derisively titling his article &quot;&quot;, Leroy declared that Monet&#x27;s painting was at most, a sketch, and could hardly be termed a finished work.

He wrote, in the form of a dialogue between viewers,

The term &quot;Impressionist&quot; quickly gained favour with the public. It was also accepted by the artists themselves, even though they were a diverse group in style and temperament, unified primarily by their spirit of independence and rebellion. They exhibited together—albeit with shifting membership—eight times between 1874 and 1886. The Impressionists&#x27; style, with its loose, spontaneous brushstrokes, would soon become synonymous with modern life.

Monet, Sisley, Morisot, and Pissarro may be considered the &quot;purest&quot; Impressionists, in their consistent pursuit of an art of spontaneity, sunlight, and colour. Degas rejected much of this, as he believed in the primacy of drawing over colour and belittled the practice of painting outdoors. Renoir turned away from Impressionism for a time during the 1880s, and never entirely regained his commitment to its ideas. Édouard Manet, although regarded by the Impressionists as their leader, never abandoned his liberal use of black as a colour (while Impressionists avoided its use and preferred to obtain darker colours by mixing), and never participated in the Impressionist exhibitions. He continued to submit his works to the Salon, where his painting &quot;Spanish Singer&quot; had won a 2nd class medal in 1861, and he urged the others to do likewise, arguing that &quot;the Salon is the real field of battle&quot; where a reputation could be made.

Among the artists of the core group (minus Bazille, who had died in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870), defections occurred as Cézanne, followed later by Renoir, Sisley, and Monet, abstained from the group exhibitions so they could submit their works to the Salon. Disagreements arose from issues such as Guillaumin&#x27;s membership in the group, championed by Pissarro and Cézanne against opposition from Monet and Degas, who thought him unworthy. Degas invited Mary Cassatt to display her work in the 1879 exhibition, but also insisted on the inclusion of Jean-François Raffaëlli, Ludovic Lepic, and other realists who did not represent Impressionist practices, causing Monet in 1880 to accuse the Impressionists of &quot;opening doors to first-come daubers&quot;. 

In this regard, the seventh Paris Impressionist exhibition in 1882 was the most selective of all including the works of only nine &quot;true&quot; impressionists, namely Gustave Caillebotte, Paul Gauguin, Armand Guillaumin, Claude Monet, Berthe Morisot, Camille Pissarro, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Alfred Sisley, and Victor Vignon. The group then divided again over the invitations to Paul Signac and Georges Seurat to exhibit with them at the 8th Impressionist exhibition in 1886. Pissarro was the only artist to show at all eight Paris Impressionist exhibitions.

The individual artists achieved few financial rewards from the Impressionist exhibitions, but their art gradually won a degree of public acceptance and support. Their dealer, Durand-Ruel, played a major role in this as he kept their work before the public and arranged shows for them in London and New York. Although Sisley died in poverty in 1899, Renoir had a great Salon success in 1879. Monet became secure financially during the early 1880s and so did Pissarro by the early 1890s. By this time the methods of Impressionist painting, in a diluted form, had become commonplace in Salon art.

== Impressionist techniques ==
French painters who prepared the way for Impressionism include the Romantic colourist Eugène Delacroix; the leader of the realists, Gustave Courbet; and painters of the Barbizon school such as Théodore Rousseau. The Impressionists learned much from the work of Johan Barthold Jongkind, Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot and Eugène Boudin, who painted from nature in a direct and spontaneous style that prefigured Impressionism, and who befriended and advised the younger artists.

A number of identifiable techniques and working habits contributed to the innovative style of the Impressionists. Although these methods had been used by previous artists—and are often conspicuous in the work of artists such as Frans Hals, Diego Velázquez, Peter Paul Rubens, John Constable, and J. M. W. Turner—the Impressionists were the first to use them all together, and with such consistency. These techniques include:

* Short, thick strokes of paint quickly capture the essence of the subject, rather than its details. The paint is often applied impasto.
* Colours are applied side by side with as little mixing as possible, a technique that exploits the principle of simultaneous contrast to make the colour appear more vivid to the viewer.
* Greys and dark tones are produced by mixing complementary colours. Pure impressionism avoids the use of black paint.
* Wet paint is placed into wet paint without waiting for successive applications to dry, producing softer edges and intermingling of colour.
* Impressionist paintings do not exploit the transparency of thin paint films (glazes), which earlier artists manipulated carefully to produce effects. The impressionist painting surface is typically opaque.
* The paint is applied to a white or light-coloured ground. Previously, painters often used dark grey or strongly coloured grounds.
* The play of natural light is emphasized. Close attention is paid to the reflection of colours from object to object. Painters often worked in the evening to produce &quot;effets de soir&quot;—the shadowy effects of evening or twilight.
* In paintings made &quot;en plein air&quot; (outdoors), shadows are boldly painted with the blue of the sky as it is reflected onto surfaces, giving a sense of freshness previously not represented in painting. Blue shadows on snow inspired the technique.

New technology played a role in the development of the style. Impressionists took advantage of the mid-century introduction of premixed paints in tin tubes (resembling modern toothpaste tubes), which allowed artists to work more spontaneously, both outdoors and indoors. Previously, painters made their own paints individually, by grinding and mixing dry pigment powders with linseed oil, which were then stored in animal bladders.

Many vivid synthetic pigments became commercially available to artists for the first time during the 19th century. These included cobalt blue, viridian, cadmium yellow, and synthetic ultramarine blue, all of which were in use by the 1840s, before Impressionism. The Impressionists&#x27; manner of painting made bold use of these pigments, and of even newer colours such as cerulean blue, which became commercially available to artists in the 1860s.

The Impressionists&#x27; progress toward a brighter style of painting was gradual. During the 1860s, Monet and Renoir sometimes painted on canvases prepared with the traditional red-brown or grey ground. By the 1870s, Monet, Renoir, and Pissarro usually chose to paint on grounds of a lighter grey or beige colour, which functioned as a middle tone in the finished painting. By the 1880s, some of the Impressionists had come to prefer white or slightly off-white grounds, and no longer allowed the ground colour a significant role in the finished painting.

== Content and composition ==
The Impressionists reacted to modernity by exploring &quot;a wide range of non-academic subjects in art&quot; such as middle-class leisure activities and &quot;urban themes, including train stations, cafés, brothels, the theater, and dance.&quot; They found inspiration in the newly widened avenues of Paris, bounded by new tall buildings that offered opportunities to depict bustling crowds, popular entertainments, and nocturnal lighting in artificially closed-off spaces. 

A painting such as Caillebotte&#x27;s &quot;Paris Street; Rainy Day&quot; (1877) strikes a modern note by emphasizing the isolation of individuals amid the outsized buildings and spaces of the urban environment. When painting landscapes, the Impressionists did not hesitate to include the factories that were proliferating in the countryside. Earlier painters of landscapes had conventionally avoided smokestacks and other signs of industrialization, regarding them as blights on nature&#x27;s order and unworthy of art.

Prior to the Impressionists, other painters, notably such 17th-century Dutch painters as Jan Steen, had emphasized common subjects, but their methods of composition were traditional. They arranged their compositions so that the main subject commanded the viewer&#x27;s attention. J. M. W. Turner, while an artist of the Romantic era, anticipated the style of impressionism with his artwork. The Impressionists relaxed the boundary between subject and background so that the effect of an Impressionist painting often resembles a snapshot, a part of a larger reality captured as if by chance. Photography was gaining popularity, and as cameras became more portable, photographs became more candid. Photography inspired Impressionists to represent momentary action, not only in the fleeting lights of a landscape, but in the day-to-day lives of people.

The development of Impressionism can be considered partly as a reaction by artists to the challenge presented by photography, which seemed to devalue the artist&#x27;s skill in reproducing reality. Both portrait and landscape paintings were deemed somewhat deficient and lacking in truth as photography &quot;produced lifelike images much more efficiently and reliably&quot;.

In spite of this, photography actually inspired artists to pursue other means of creative expression, and rather than compete with photography to emulate reality, artists focused &quot;on the one thing they could inevitably do better than the photograph—by further developing into an art form its very subjectivity in the conception of the image, the very subjectivity that photography eliminated&quot;. The Impressionists sought to express their perceptions of nature, rather than create exact representations. This allowed artists to depict subjectively what they saw with their &quot;tacit imperatives of taste and conscience&quot;. Photography encouraged painters to exploit aspects of the painting medium, like colour, which photography then lacked: &quot;The Impressionists were the first to consciously offer a subjective alternative to the photograph&quot;.

Another major influence was Japanese ukiyo-e art prints (Japonism). The art of these prints contributed significantly to the &quot;snapshot&quot; angles and unconventional compositions that became characteristic of Impressionism. An example is Monet&#x27;s &quot;Jardin à Sainte-Adresse&quot;, 1867, with its bold blocks of colour and composition on a strong diagonal slant showing the influence of Japanese prints.

Edgar Degas was both an avid photographer and a collector of Japanese prints. His &quot;The Dance Class&quot; &quot;(La classe de danse)&quot; of 1874 shows both influences in its asymmetrical composition. The dancers are seemingly caught off guard in various awkward poses, leaving an expanse of empty floor space in the lower right quadrant. He also captured his dancers in sculpture, such as the &quot;Little Dancer of Fourteen Years&quot;.

== Female Impressionists ==
Impressionists, in varying degrees, were looking for ways to depict visual experience and contemporary subjects. Female Impressionists were interested in these same ideals but had many social and career limitations compared to male Impressionists. They were particularly excluded from the imagery of the bourgeois social sphere of the boulevard, cafe, and dance hall. 

As well as imagery, women were excluded from the formative discussions that resulted in meetings in those places. That was where male Impressionists were able to form and share ideas about Impressionism. In the academic realm, women were believed to be incapable of handling complex subjects, which led teachers to restrict what they taught female students. It was also considered unladylike to excel in art, since women&#x27;s true talents were then believed to center on homemaking and mothering.

Yet several women were able to find success during their lifetime, even though their careers were affected by personal circumstances – Bracquemond, for example, had a husband who was resentful of her work which caused her to give up painting. The four most well known, namely, Mary Cassatt, Eva Gonzalès, Marie Bracquemond, and Berthe Morisot, are, and were, often referred to as the &#x27;Women Impressionists&#x27;. Their participation in the series of eight Impressionist exhibitions that took place in Paris from 1874 to 1886 varied: Morisot participated in seven, Cassatt in four, Bracquemond in three, and Gonzalès did not participate.

The critics of the time lumped these four together without regard to their personal styles, techniques, or subject matter. Critics viewing their works at the exhibitions often attempted to acknowledge the women artists&#x27; talents but circumscribed them within a limited notion of femininity. Arguing for the suitability of Impressionist technique to women&#x27;s manner of perception, Parisian critic S.C. de Soissons wrote:One can understand that women have no originality of thought, and that literature and music have no feminine character; but surely women know how to observe, and what they see is quite different from that which men see, and the art which they put in their gestures, in their toilet, in the decoration of their environment is sufficient to give is the idea of an instinctive, of a peculiar genius which resides in each one of them.

While Impressionism legitimized the domestic social life as subject matter, of which women had intimate knowledge, it also tended to limit them to that subject matter. Portrayals of often-identifiable sitters in domestic settings, which could offer commissions, were dominant in the exhibitions. The subjects of the paintings were often women interacting with their environment by either their gaze or movement. Cassatt, in particular, was aware of her placement of subjects: she kept her predominantly female figures from objectification and cliche; when they are not reading, they converse, sew, drink tea, and when they are inactive, they seem lost in thought.

The women Impressionists, like their male counterparts, were striving for &quot;truth&quot;, for new ways of seeing and new painting techniques; each artist had an individual painting style. Women Impressionists, particularly Morisot and Cassatt, were conscious of the balance of power between women and objects in their paintings – the bourgeois women depicted are not defined by decorative objects, but instead, interact with and dominate the things with which they live. There are many similarities in their depictions of women who seem both at ease and subtly confined. Gonzalès&#x27; &quot;Box at the Italian Opera&quot; depicts a woman staring into the distance, at ease in a social sphere but confined by the box and the man standing next to her. Cassatt&#x27;s painting &quot;Young Girl at a Window&quot; is brighter in color but remains constrained by the canvas edge as she looks out the window.

Despite their success in their ability to have a career and Impressionism&#x27;s demise attributed to its allegedly feminine characteristics—its sensuality, dependence on sensation, physicality, and fluidity—the four women artists, and other, lesser-known women Impressionists, were largely omitted from art historical textbooks covering Impressionist artists until Tamar Garb&#x27;s &quot;Women Impressionists&quot; published in 1986. For example, &quot;Impressionism&quot; by Jean Leymarie, published in 1955 included no information on any women Impressionists.

Painter Androniqi Zengo Antoniu is co-credited with the introduction of impressionism to Albania.

== Prominent Impressionists ==
The central figures in the development of Impressionism in France, listed alphabetically, were:
* Frédéric Bazille (1841–1870), who only posthumously participated in the Impressionist exhibitions
* Gustave Caillebotte (1848–1894), who, younger than the others, joined forces with them in the mid-1870s
* Mary Cassatt (1844–1926), American-born, she lived in Paris and participated in four Impressionist exhibitions
* Paul Cézanne (1839–1906), although he later broke away from the Impressionists
* Edgar Degas (1834–1917), who despised the term &quot;Impressionist&quot;
* Armand Guillaumin (1841–1927)
* Édouard Manet (1832–1883), who did not participate in any of the Impressionist exhibitions
* Claude Monet (1840–1926), the most prolific of the Impressionists and the one who embodies their aesthetic most obviously
* Berthe Morisot (1841–1895) who participated in all Impressionist exhibitions except in 1879
* Camille Pissarro (1830–1903), who was the only artist to participate in all eight Impressionist exhibitions.
* Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841–1919), who participated in Impressionist exhibitions in 1874, 1876, 1877 and 1882
* Alfred Sisley (1839–1899)

== Timeline: lives of the Impressionists ==


== Gallery ==
== Associates and influenced artists ==


Among the close associates of the Impressionists, Victor Vignon is the only artist outside the group of prominent names who participated to the most exclusive Seventh Paris Impressionist Exhibition in 1882, which was indeed a rejection to the previous less restricted exhibitions chiefly organized by Degas. Originally from the school of Corot, Vignon was a friend of Camille Pissarro, whose influence is evident in his impressionist style after the late 1870s, and a friend of post-impressionist Vincent van Gogh.

There were several other close associates of the Impressionists who adopted their methods to some degree. These include Jean-Louis Forain, who participated in Impressionist exhibitions in 1879, 1880, 1881 and 1886, and Giuseppe De Nittis, an Italian artist living in Paris who participated in the first Impressionist exhibit at the invitation of Degas, although the other Impressionists disparaged his work. Federico Zandomeneghi was another Italian friend of Degas who showed with the Impressionists. Eva Gonzalès was a follower of Manet who did not exhibit with the group. 

James Abbott McNeill Whistler was an American-born painter who played a part in Impressionism although he did not join the group and preferred grayed colours. Walter Sickert, an English artist, was initially a follower of Whistler, and later an important disciple of Degas. He did not exhibit with the Impressionists. In 1904, the artist and writer Wynford Dewhurst wrote the first important study of the French painters published in English, &quot;Impressionist Painting: its genesis and development&quot;, which did much to popularize Impressionism in Great Britain.

By the early 1880s, Impressionist methods were affecting, at least superficially, the art of the Salon. Fashionable painters such as Jean Béraud and Henri Gervex found critical and financial success by brightening their palettes while retaining the smooth finish expected of Salon art. Works by these artists are sometimes casually referred to as Impressionism, despite their remoteness from Impressionist practice.

The influence of the French Impressionists lasted long after most of them had died. Artists like J.D. Kirszenbaum were borrowing Impressionist techniques throughout the twentieth century.

== Beyond France ==

As the influence of Impressionism spread beyond France, artists, too numerous to list, became identified as practitioners of the new style. Some of the more important examples are:
* The American Impressionists, including Mary Cassatt, William Merritt Chase, Frederick Carl Frieseke, Childe Hassam, Willard Metcalf, Lilla Cabot Perry, Theodore Robinson, Edmund Charles Tarbell, John Henry Twachtman, Catherine Wiley and J. Alden Weir.
* The Australian Impressionists, including Tom Roberts, Arthur Streeton, Walter Withers, Charles Conder, Frederick McCubbin and E. Phillips Fox (who were prominent members of the Heidelberg School), and John Russell, a friend of Van Gogh, Rodin, Monet and Matisse.
* The Amsterdam Impressionists in the Netherlands, including George Hendrik Breitner, Isaac Israëls, Willem Bastiaan Tholen, Willem de Zwart, Willem Witsen and Jan Toorop.
* The California Impressionists, including William Wendt, Guy Rose, Alson Clark, Donna N. Schuster, and Sam Hyde Harris.
* Anna Boch, Vincent van Gogh&#x27;s friend Eugène Boch, Georges Lemmen and Théo van Rysselberghe, Impressionist painters from Belgium.
* The Slovenian Impressionists, Ivan Grohar, Rihard Jakopič, Matija Jama, and Matej Sternen. Their beginning was in the school of Anton Ažbe in Munich and they were influenced by Jurij Šubic and Ivana Kobilca, Slovenian painters working in Paris.
* Wynford Dewhurst, Walter Richard Sickert, and Philip Wilson Steer were well known Impressionist painters from the United Kingdom. Pierre Adolphe Valette, who was born in France but who worked in Manchester, was the tutor of L. S. Lowry.
* The German Impressionists, including Max Liebermann, Lovis Corinth, Ernst Oppler, Max Slevogt and August von Brandis.
* László Mednyánszky and Pál Szinyei-Merse in Hungary
* Theodor von Ehrmanns and Hugo Charlemont who were rare Impressionists among the more dominant Vienna Secessionist painters in Austria.
* William John Leech, Roderic O&#x27;Conor, and Walter Osborne in Ireland
* Konstantin Korovin and Valentin Serov in Russia
* Francisco Oller y Cestero, a native of Puerto Rico and a friend of Pissarro and Cézanne
* James Nairn in New Zealand
* William McTaggart in Scotland
* Maurice Cullen, Laura Muntz Lyall and Helen McNicoll, Canadian artists
* Władysław Podkowiński, a Polish Impressionist and symbolist
* Nicolae Grigorescu in Romania
* Nazmi Ziya Güran, who brought Impressionism to Turkey
* Chafik Charobim in Egypt
* Eliseu Visconti in Brazil
* Joaquín Sorolla and Fermín Arango in Spain
* Faustino Brughetti, Fernando Fader, Candido Lopez, Martín Malharro, Walter de Navazio, Ramón Silva in Argentina
* Skagen Painters a group of Scandinavian artists who painted in a small Danish fishing village
* Nadežda Petrović, Milo Milunović, Kosta Miličević, Milan Milovanovi and Mališa Glišić in Serbia
* Ásgrímur Jónsson in Iceland
* Fujishima Takeji in Japan
* Frits Thaulow in Norway and later France

== Impressionism in other media ==

=== Sculpture ===

While Edgar Degas was primarily known as a painter in his lifetime, he began to pursue the medium of sculpture later in his artistic career in the 1880s. He created as many as 150 sculptures during his lifetime. Degas preferred the medium of wax for his sculptures because it allowed him to make changes, start over, and further explore the modelling process. Only one of Degas&#x27;s sculptures, &quot;Little Dancer of Fourteen Years&quot;, was exhibited in his lifetime, which was exhibited at the Sixth Impressionist Exhibition in 1881. &quot;Little Dancer&quot; proved to be controversial with critics. Some considered Degas to have overthrown sculptural traditions in the same way that Impressionism had overthrown the traditions of painting. Others found it to be ugly. Following the Degas&#x27;s death in 1917, his heirs authorized bronze castings from 73 of the artist&#x27;s sculptures.

The sculptor Auguste Rodin is sometimes called an Impressionist for the way he used roughly modeled surfaces to suggest transient light effects. The sculptor Medardo Rosso has also been called an Impressionist.

Some Russian artists created Impressionistic sculptures of animals in order to break away from old world concepts. Their works have been described as endowing birds and beasts with new spiritual characteristics.

=== Photography and film ===

While his photographs are less known than his paintings or his sculptures, Edgar Degas also pursued photography later in his life. His photographs were never exhibited during his lifetime, and not much attention was given to them following his death. It was not until the late 20th century that scholars started to take interest in Degas&#x27;s photographs.

Pictorialist photographers, whose work is characterized by soft focus and atmospheric effects, have also been called Impressionists. These Impressionist photographers used various techniques such as photographing subjects out of focus, using soft focus lenses or pinhole lenses, and manipulating the gum bichromate process to create images that resembled Impressionist paintings.

French Impressionist Cinema is a term applied to a loosely defined group of films and filmmakers in France from 1919 to 1929, although these years are debatable. French Impressionist filmmakers include Abel Gance, Jean Epstein, Germaine Dulac, Marcel L&#x27;Herbier, Louis Delluc, and Dmitry Kirsanoff.

=== Music ===


Musical Impressionism is the name given to a movement in European classical music that arose in the late 19th century and continued into the middle of the 20th century. Originating in France, musical Impressionism is characterized by suggestion and atmosphere, and eschews the emotional excesses of the Romantic era. Impressionist composers favoured short forms such as the nocturne, arabesque, and prelude, and often explored uncommon scales such as the whole tone scale. Perhaps the most notable innovations of Impressionist composers were the introduction of major 7th chords and the extension of chord structures in 3rds to five- and six-part harmonies.

The influence of visual Impressionism on its musical counterpart is debatable. Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel are generally considered the greatest Impressionist composers, but Debussy disavowed the term, calling it the invention of critics. Erik Satie was also considered in this category, though his approach was regarded as less serious, more musical novelty in nature. 

Paul Dukas is another French composer sometimes considered an Impressionist, but his style is perhaps more closely aligned to the late Romanticists. Musical Impressionism beyond France includes the work of such composers as Ottorino Respighi (Italy), Ralph Vaughan Williams, Cyril Scott, and John Ireland (England), Manuel De Falla and Isaac Albeniz (Spain), and Charles Griffes (America).

American Impressionist music differs from European Impressionist music, and these differences are mainly reflected in Charles Griffith&#x27;s poetry of flute and orchestral music. He is also the most prolific Impressionist composer in the United States.

=== Literature ===
The term Impressionism has also been used to describe works of literature in which a few select details suffice to convey the sensory impressions of an incident or scene. Impressionist literature is closely related to Symbolism, with its major exemplars being Baudelaire, Mallarmé, Rimbaud, and Verlaine. Authors such as Virginia Woolf, D.H. Lawrence, Henry James, and Joseph Conrad have written works that are Impressionistic in the way that they describe, rather than interpret, the impressions, sensations and emotions that constitute a character&#x27;s mental life. Some literary scholars, such as John G. Peters, believe literary Impressionism is better defined by its philosophical stance than by any supposed relationship with Impressionist painting.

== Post-Impressionism ==

During the 1880s several artists began to develop different precepts for the use of colour, pattern, form, and line, derived from the Impressionist example: Vincent van Gogh, Paul Gauguin, Georges Seurat, and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. These artists were slightly younger than the Impressionists, and their work is known as post-Impressionism. Post-Impressionist artists reacted against the Impressionists&#x27; concern with realistically reproducing the optical sensations of light and colour; they turned instead toward symbolic content and the expression of emotion. 

Post-Impressionism prefigured the characteristics of Futurism and Cubism, reflecting the change of attitude towards art in European society. Some of the original Impressionist artists also ventured into this new territory; Camille Pissarro briefly painted in a pointillist manner, and even Monet abandoned strict &quot;plein air&quot; painting. Paul Cézanne, who participated in the first and third Impressionist exhibitions, developed a highly individual vision emphasising pictorial structure, and he is more often called a post-Impressionist. Although these cases illustrate the difficulty of assigning labels, the work of the original Impressionist painters may, by definition, be categorised as Impressionism.

== See also ==
* Expressionism, a reaction to Impressionism
* Luminism (Impressionism)
* Cantonese school of painting, influenced by Impressionism
* Les XX

General:
* Art periods
* History of Painting
* Western Painting

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Contemporary Impressionism in Photography
* Hecht Museum
* Museumsportal Schleswig-Holstein
* &quot;Impressionism : A Centenary Exhibition, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, December 12, 1974 – February 10, 1975&quot;, fully digitized text from The Metropolitan Museum of Art libraries
* Suburban Pastoral &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 24 February 2007
* &quot;Impressionism: Paintings collected by European Museums&quot; (1999) was an art exhibition co-organized by the High Museum of Art, Atlanta, the Seattle Art Museum, and the Denver Art Museum, touring from May through December 1999. Online guided tour
* &quot;Monet&#x27;s Years at Giverny: Beyond Impressionism&quot;, 1978 exhibition catalogue fully online as PDF from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which discusses Monet&#x27;s role in this movement
* &quot;Degas: The Artist&#x27;s Mind&quot;, 1976 exhibition catalogue fully online as PDF from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which discusses Degas&#x27;s role in this movement
* Definition of impressionism on the Tate Art Glossary
* Paris 1874 Inventing impressionism Exhibition at the Musée d’Orsay, from March 26th to July 14th, 2024.
* Paris 1874: The Impressionist Moment Exhibition at the National Gallery of Art from September 8, 2024 to January 19, 2025.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="0" end="13" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="33" end="45" title="art movement" label="art movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q462437" start="119" end="130" title="Composition (visual arts)" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="427" end="432" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="614" end="620" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="672" end="684" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q328523" start="736" end="755" title="Impression, Sunrise" label="Impression, Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q50659" start="790" end="801" title="Louis Leroy" label="Louis Leroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="824" end="833" title="Satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872904" start="853" end="883" title="First Impressionist Exhibition" label="First Impressionist Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809792" start="926" end="938" title="Le Charivari" label="Le Charivari"/>
<link wikidata="Q837182" start="1072" end="1091" title="Impressionist music" label="Impressionist music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475680" start="1096" end="1120" title="Impressionism (literature)" label="Impressionist literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="1376" end="1392" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="1397" end="1412" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="1611" end="1624" title="landscape art" label="landscape art"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="1626" end="1636" title="still life" label="still life"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="1640" end="1648" title="portrait" label="portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="1813" end="1825" title="en plein air" label="en plein air"/>
<link wikidata="Q574985" start="2197" end="2208" title="Macchiaioli" label="Macchiaioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q344838" start="2214" end="2227" title="Winslow Homer" label="Winslow Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="2276" end="2285" title="En plein air" label="plein-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="2621" end="2638" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Stéphane Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="3287" end="3305" title="Post-Impressionism" label="Post-Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="3307" end="3314" title="Fauvism" label="Fauvism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="3320" end="3326" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="3466" end="3478" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117470" start="3479" end="3492" title="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s renovation of Paris" label="rebuilt Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="4034" end="4041" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q262478" start="4093" end="4107" title="Salon de Paris" label="Salon de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q212499" start="4333" end="4349" title="Jean-Léon Gérôme" label="Jean-Léon Gérôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q310437" start="4354" end="4371" title="Alexandre Cabanel" label="Alexandre Cabanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4464" end="4475" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="4484" end="4502" title="linear perspective" label="linear perspective"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4533" end="4552" title="Ancient_Greek_art#Classical" label="Classical Greek art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642826" start="4666" end="4673" title="Realism (art movement)" label="Realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="4682" end="4697" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="4877" end="4889" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="4891" end="4912" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q175130" start="4914" end="4927" title="Alfred Sisley" label="Alfred Sisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207298" start="4933" end="4949" title="Frédéric Bazille" label="Frédéric Bazille"/>
<link wikidata="Q452119" start="4995" end="5009" title="Marc-Charles-Gabriel Gleyre" label="Charles Gleyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="5212" end="5226" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642826" start="5780" end="5787" title="Realism (art movement)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q143357" start="5807" end="5822" title="Barbizon school" label="Barbizon school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025611" start="5874" end="5887" title="Café Guerbois" label="Café Guerbois"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="5958" end="5971" title="Édouard Manet" label="Édouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="6040" end="6056" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="6058" end="6070" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q436844" start="6076" end="6093" title="Armand Guillaumin" label="Armand Guillaumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137688" start="6913" end="6930" title="Salon des Refusés" label="Salon des Refusés"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="7258" end="7263" title="Claude Monet" label="Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="7265" end="7271" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="7273" end="7281" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q175130" start="7283" end="7289" title="Alfred Sisley" label="Sisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="7291" end="7298" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320" start="7300" end="7314" title="Berthe Morisot" label="Berthe Morisot"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="7316" end="7327" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q212600" start="7613" end="7626" title="Eugène Boudin" label="Eugène Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q704585" start="7784" end="7798" title="Johan Jongkind" label="Johan Jongkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q40116" start="7965" end="7970" title="Nadar (photographer)" label="Nadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50659" start="8075" end="8086" title="Louis Leroy" label="Louis Leroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q328523" start="8223" end="8242" title="Impression, Sunrise" label="Impression, Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="10054" end="10073" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q173223" start="10444" end="10456" title="Mary Cassatt" label="Mary Cassatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q658862" start="10539" end="10562" title="Jean-François Raffaëlli" label="Jean-François Raffaëlli"/>
<link wikidata="Q606489" start="10564" end="10577" title="Ludovic-Napoléon Lepic" label="Ludovic Lepic"/>
<link wikidata="Q295144" start="10920" end="10939" title="Gustave Caillebotte" label="Gustave Caillebotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="10941" end="10953" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q436844" start="10955" end="10972" title="Armand Guillaumin" label="Armand Guillaumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="10974" end="10986" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320" start="10988" end="11002" title="Berthe Morisot" label="Berthe Morisot"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="11004" end="11020" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="11022" end="11043" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q175130" start="11045" end="11058" title="Alfred Sisley" label="Alfred Sisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660419" start="11064" end="11077" title="Victor Vignon" label="Victor Vignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="11132" end="11143" title="Paul Signac" label="Paul Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q34013" start="11148" end="11162" title="Georges Seurat" label="Georges Seurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q649052" start="11488" end="11499" title="Paul Durand-Ruel" label="Durand-Ruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="12006" end="12014" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="12025" end="12041" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="12071" end="12086" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q310025" start="12132" end="12149" title="Théodore Rousseau" label="Théodore Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q704585" start="12200" end="12223" title="Johan Barthold Jongkind" label="Johan Barthold Jongkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="12225" end="12252" title="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot" label="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q212600" start="12257" end="12270" title="Eugène Boudin" label="Eugène Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167654" start="12642" end="12652" title="Frans Hals" label="Frans Hals"/>
<link wikidata="Q297" start="12654" end="12669" title="Diego Velázquez" label="Diego Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="12671" end="12688" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="12690" end="12704" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="12710" end="12725" title="Joseph Mallord William Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545200" start="12968" end="12975" title="impasto" label="impasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q166253" start="13090" end="13111" title="simultaneous contrast" label="simultaneous contrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q373984" start="13210" end="13230" title="complementary colour" label="complementary colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856046" start="13285" end="13319" title="Wet-on-wet" label="Wet paint is placed into wet paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834769" start="13684" end="13690" title="Ground (art)" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347413" start="13937" end="13951" title="effets de soir" label="effets de soir"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="14028" end="14040" title="en plein air" label="en plein air"/>
<link wikidata="Q425278" start="14822" end="14833" title="cobalt blue" label="cobalt blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163776" start="14835" end="14843" title="viridian" label="viridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478619" start="14845" end="14859" title="cadmium yellow" label="cadmium yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q219660" start="14875" end="14891" title="ultramarine blue" label="ultramarine blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q313120" start="15065" end="15078" title="cerulean blue" label="cerulean blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117470" start="16007" end="16028" title="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s renovation of Paris" label="newly widened avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452762" start="16251" end="16274" title="Paris Street; Rainy Day" label="Paris Street; Rainy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352880" start="16787" end="16814" title="Dutch Golden Age painting" label="17th-century Dutch painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q205863" start="16818" end="16827" title="Jan Steen" label="Jan Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q462437" start="16882" end="16893" title="composition (visual arts)" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="17009" end="17024" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="17049" end="17061" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="17796" end="17805" title="Landscape art" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="18861" end="18868" title="ukiyo-e" label="ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q751880" start="18881" end="18889" title="Japonism" label="Japonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="19241" end="19252" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734209" start="19646" end="19677" title="Little Dancer of Fourteen Years" label="Little Dancer of Fourteen Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q173223" start="20861" end="20873" title="Mary Cassatt" label="Mary Cassatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q464300" start="20875" end="20887" title="Eva Gonzalès" label="Eva Gonzalès"/>
<link wikidata="Q273552" start="20889" end="20906" title="Marie Bracquemond" label="Marie Bracquemond"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320" start="20912" end="20926" title="Berthe Morisot" label="Berthe Morisot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16348636" start="24231" end="24254" title="Androniqi Zengo Antoniu" label="Androniqi Zengo Antoniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207298" start="24451" end="24467" title="Frédéric Bazille" label="Frédéric Bazille"/>
<link wikidata="Q295144" start="24551" end="24570" title="Gustave Caillebotte" label="Gustave Caillebotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q173223" start="24657" end="24669" title="Mary Cassatt" label="Mary Cassatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="24770" end="24782" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="24851" end="24862" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q436844" start="24926" end="24943" title="Armand Guillaumin" label="Armand Guillaumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="24958" end="24971" title="Édouard Manet" label="Édouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="25051" end="25063" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320" start="25175" end="25189" title="Berthe Morisot" label="Berthe Morisot"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="25269" end="25285" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="25380" end="25401" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q175130" start="25492" end="25505" title="Alfred Sisley" label="Alfred Sisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660419" start="25671" end="25684" title="Victor Vignon" label="Victor Vignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="25959" end="25964" title="Corot" label="Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="25989" end="26005" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="26118" end="26134" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q719614" start="26257" end="26274" title="Jean-Louis Forain" label="Jean-Louis Forain"/>
<link wikidata="Q607495" start="26356" end="26374" title="Giuseppe De Nittis" label="Giuseppe De Nittis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355820" start="26545" end="26566" title="Federico Zandomeneghi" label="Federico Zandomeneghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q464300" start="26639" end="26651" title="Eva Gonzalès" label="Eva Gonzalès"/>
<link wikidata="Q203643" start="26714" end="26743" title="James Abbott McNeill Whistler" label="James Abbott McNeill Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q703369" start="26873" end="26887" title="Walter Sickert" label="Walter Sickert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040148" start="27063" end="27079" title="Wynford Dewhurst" label="Wynford Dewhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q461907" start="27417" end="27428" title="Jean Béraud" label="Jean Béraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q956102" start="27433" end="27445" title="Henri Gervex" label="Henri Gervex"/>
<link wikidata="Q508780" start="27798" end="27814" title="Jesekiel David Kirszenbaum" label="J.D. Kirszenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477787" start="28098" end="28121" title="American Impressionism" label="American Impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q173223" start="28133" end="28145" title="Mary Cassatt" label="Mary Cassatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q265820" start="28147" end="28168" title="William Merritt Chase" label="William Merritt Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q537002" start="28170" end="28193" title="Frederick Carl Frieseke" label="Frederick Carl Frieseke"/>
<link wikidata="Q737635" start="28195" end="28208" title="Childe Hassam" label="Childe Hassam"/>
<link wikidata="Q736843" start="28210" end="28225" title="Willard Metcalf" label="Willard Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q431705" start="28227" end="28244" title="Lilla Cabot Perry" label="Lilla Cabot Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384543" start="28246" end="28263" title="Theodore Robinson" label="Theodore Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460318" start="28265" end="28287" title="Edmund C. Tarbell" label="Edmund Charles Tarbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342683" start="28289" end="28309" title="John Henry Twachtman" label="John Henry Twachtman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052974" start="28311" end="28326" title="Catherine Wiley" label="Catherine Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284220" start="28331" end="28344" title="J. Alden Weir" label="J. Alden Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032335" start="28352" end="28377" title="Australian Impressionism" label="Australian Impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291901" start="28389" end="28400" title="Tom Roberts" label="Tom Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q709280" start="28402" end="28417" title="Arthur Streeton" label="Arthur Streeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966442" start="28419" end="28433" title="Walter Withers" label="Walter Withers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284465" start="28435" end="28449" title="Charles Conder" label="Charles Conder"/>
<link wikidata="Q965809" start="28451" end="28469" title="Frederick McCubbin" label="Frederick McCubbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379882" start="28474" end="28489" title="E. Phillips Fox" label="E. Phillips Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032335" start="28525" end="28542" title="Heidelberg School" label="Heidelberg School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365633" start="28549" end="28561" title="John Russell (Australian artist)" label="John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q478717" start="28617" end="28641" title="Amsterdam Impressionism" label="Amsterdam Impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="28649" end="28660" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q289441" start="28672" end="28695" title="George Hendrik Breitner" label="George Hendrik Breitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q979534" start="28697" end="28710" title="Isaac Israëls" label="Isaac Israëls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557203" start="28712" end="28734" title="Willem Bastiaan Tholen" label="Willem Bastiaan Tholen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809999" start="28736" end="28751" title="Willem de Zwart" label="Willem de Zwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614892" start="28753" end="28766" title="Willem Witsen" label="Willem Witsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q369416" start="28771" end="28781" title="Jan Toorop" label="Jan Toorop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020754" start="28789" end="28814" title="California Impressionism" label="California Impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020186" start="28826" end="28839" title="William Wendt" label="William Wendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366671" start="28841" end="28849" title="Guy Rose" label="Guy Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735826" start="28851" end="28862" title="Alson Clark" label="Alson Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936734" start="28864" end="28881" title="Donna N. Schuster" label="Donna N. Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q43131271" start="28887" end="28902" title="Sam Hyde Harris" label="Sam Hyde Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q466668" start="28906" end="28915" title="Anna Boch" label="Anna Boch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="28917" end="28933" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373445" start="28948" end="28959" title="Eugène Boch" label="Eugène Boch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963612" start="28961" end="28975" title="Georges Lemmen" label="Georges Lemmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q671883" start="28980" end="29001" title="Théo van Rysselberghe" label="Théo van Rysselberghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="29031" end="29038" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29046" end="29070" title="Slovenian Impressionism" label="Slovenian Impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339347" start="29072" end="29083" title="Ivan Grohar" label="Ivan Grohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497776" start="29085" end="29099" title="Rihard Jakopič" label="Rihard Jakopič"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787462" start="29101" end="29112" title="Matija Jama" label="Matija Jama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442392" start="29118" end="29131" title="Matej Sternen" label="Matej Sternen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588124" start="29170" end="29180" title="Anton Ažbe" label="Anton Ažbe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29219" end="29230" title="Jurij Šubic" label="Jurij Šubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236878" start="29235" end="29248" title="Ivana Kobilca" label="Ivana Kobilca"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040148" start="29289" end="29305" title="Wynford Dewhurst" label="Wynford Dewhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q703369" start="29307" end="29329" title="Walter Richard Sickert" label="Walter Richard Sickert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076179" start="29335" end="29354" title="Philip Wilson Steer" label="Philip Wilson Steer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237916" start="29419" end="29441" title="Pierre Adolphe Valette" label="Pierre Adolphe Valette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354277" start="29513" end="29524" title="L. S. Lowry" label="L. S. Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29532" end="29553" title="German Impressionists" label="German Impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q158062" start="29565" end="29579" title="Max Liebermann" label="Max Liebermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q157610" start="29581" end="29594" title="Lovis Corinth" label="Lovis Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359654" start="29596" end="29608" title="Ernst Oppler" label="Ernst Oppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q703356" start="29610" end="29621" title="Max Slevogt" label="Max Slevogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q764966" start="29626" end="29644" title="August von Brandis" label="August von Brandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q652975" start="29648" end="29666" title="László Mednyánszky" label="László Mednyánszky"/>
<link wikidata="Q742322" start="29671" end="29688" title="Pál Szinyei Merse" label="Pál Szinyei-Merse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29702" end="29722" title="Theodor von Ehrmanns" label="Theodor von Ehrmanns"/>
<link wikidata="Q175980" start="29727" end="29742" title="Hugo Charlemont" label="Hugo Charlemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q208208" start="29796" end="29815" title="Vienna Secessionist" label="Vienna Secessionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013641" start="29839" end="29857" title="William John Leech" label="William John Leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356577" start="29859" end="29879" title="Roderic O&amp;#x27;Conor" label="Roderic O&amp;#x27;Conor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965751" start="29885" end="29899" title="Walter Osborne" label="Walter Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q437792" start="29913" end="29931" title="Konstantin Korovin" label="Konstantin Korovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217128" start="29936" end="29950" title="Valentin Serov" label="Valentin Serov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681959" start="29963" end="29988" title="Francisco Oller" label="Francisco Oller y Cestero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="30002" end="30013" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140272" start="30053" end="30064" title="James Nairn" label="James Nairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015513" start="30082" end="30099" title="William McTaggart" label="William McTaggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q346483" start="30114" end="30128" title="Maurice Cullen (artist)" label="Maurice Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q527191" start="30130" end="30147" title="Laura Muntz Lyall" label="Laura Muntz Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q276123" start="30152" end="30166" title="Helen McNicoll" label="Helen McNicoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065760" start="30187" end="30208" title="Władysław Podkowiński" label="Władysław Podkowiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="30237" end="30246" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q454321" start="30249" end="30267" title="Nicolae Grigorescu" label="Nicolae Grigorescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810524" start="30281" end="30297" title="Nazmi Ziya Güran" label="Nazmi Ziya Güran"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="30328" end="30334" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066810" start="30337" end="30352" title="Chafik Charobim" label="Chafik Charobim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340277" start="30364" end="30379" title="Eliseu Visconti" label="Eliseu Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q351746" start="30392" end="30407" title="Joaquín Sorolla" label="Joaquín Sorolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18116510" start="30412" end="30425" title="Fermín Arango" label="Fermín Arango"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879180" start="30457" end="30471" title="Fernando Fader" label="Fernando Fader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533231" start="30473" end="30486" title="Candido Lopez" label="Candido Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777801" start="30488" end="30503" title="Martín Malharro" label="Martín Malharro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290559" start="30524" end="30535" title="Ramón Silva" label="Ramón Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q726483" start="30551" end="30566" title="Skagen Painters" label="Skagen Painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q264453" start="30647" end="30663" title="Nadežda Petrović" label="Nadežda Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283140" start="30665" end="30679" title="Milo Milunović" label="Milo Milunović"/>
<link wikidata="Q12754107" start="30681" end="30696" title="Kosta Miličević" label="Kosta Miličević"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755311" start="30698" end="30714" title="Milan Milovanović (painter)" label="Milan Milovanovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16098557" start="30719" end="30732" title="Mališa Glišić" label="Mališa Glišić"/>
<link wikidata="Q252549" start="30745" end="30761" title="Ásgrímur Jónsson" label="Ásgrímur Jónsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q347220" start="30775" end="30791" title="Fujishima Takeji" label="Fujishima Takeji"/>
<link wikidata="Q445891" start="30803" end="30816" title="Frits Thaulow" label="Frits Thaulow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734209" start="31303" end="31334" title="Little Dancer of Fourteen Years" label="Little Dancer of Fourteen Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q30755" start="31810" end="31823" title="Auguste Rodin" label="Auguste Rodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q678193" start="31955" end="31968" title="Medardo Rosso" label="Medardo Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q851869" start="32611" end="32623" title="Pictorialism" label="Pictorialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251660" start="32833" end="32845" title="out of focus" label="out of focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074440" start="32853" end="32870" title="Soft focus" label="soft focus lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q313742" start="32874" end="32886" title="pinhole lens" label="pinhole lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q172998" start="32911" end="32933" title="Gum printing" label="gum bichromate process"/>
<link wikidata="Q727553" start="32992" end="33019" title="French Impressionist Cinema" label="French Impressionist Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q313572" start="33194" end="33204" title="Abel Gance" label="Abel Gance"/>
<link wikidata="Q456968" start="33206" end="33218" title="Jean Epstein" label="Jean Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q275597" start="33220" end="33234" title="Germaine Dulac" label="Germaine Dulac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091635" start="33259" end="33271" title="Louis Delluc" label="Louis Delluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="33369" end="33393" title="European classical music" label="European classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q194172" start="33686" end="33694" title="nocturne" label="nocturne"/>
<link wikidata="Q623823" start="33696" end="33705" title="Arabesque (classical music)" label="arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q212148" start="33711" end="33718" title="Prelude (music)" label="prelude"/>
<link wikidata="Q844877" start="33767" end="33783" title="whole tone scale" label="whole tone scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="34050" end="34064" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="34069" end="34082" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="34215" end="34225" title="Erik Satie" label="Erik Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q215556" start="34348" end="34358" title="Paul Dukas" label="Paul Dukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q243837" start="34572" end="34589" title="Ottorino Respighi" label="Ottorino Respighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="34599" end="34621" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q367717" start="34623" end="34634" title="Cyril Scott" label="Cyril Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q505910" start="34640" end="34652" title="John Ireland (composer)" label="John Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193283" start="34664" end="34679" title="Manuel De Falla" label="Manuel De Falla"/>
<link wikidata="Q185812" start="34684" end="34697" title="Isaac Albeniz" label="Isaac Albeniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q477571" start="34711" end="34726" title="Charles Griffes" label="Charles Griffes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="35231" end="35240" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="Symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="35273" end="35283" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="35285" end="35293" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="35295" end="35302" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="35308" end="35316" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="35334" end="35348" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="35350" end="35363" title="D.H. Lawrence" label="D.H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="35365" end="35376" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="35382" end="35395" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="35955" end="35971" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="35973" end="35985" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34013" start="35987" end="36001" title="Georges Seurat" label="Georges Seurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q82445" start="36007" end="36032" title="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec" label="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="36423" end="36431" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="36436" end="36442" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="36593" end="36609" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="36631" end="36642" title="Pointillism" label="pointillist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="36715" end="36727" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="37103" end="37116" title="Expressionism" label="Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159870" start="37148" end="37172" title="Luminism (Impressionism)" label="Luminism (Impressionism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11050078" start="37175" end="37203" title="Cantonese school of painting" label="Cantonese school of painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q463283" start="37235" end="37241" title="Les XX" label="Les XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774292" start="37254" end="37265" title="Art periods" label="Art periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772393" start="37268" end="37287" title="History of Painting" label="History of Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756540" start="37290" end="37306" title="Western Painting" label="Western Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23402" start="38517" end="38530" title="Musée d’Orsay" label="Musée d’Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="38625" end="38648" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15172" wikidata="Q43747" url="?curid=15172" title="Internet slang">
<text>Internet slang (also called Internet shorthand, cyber-slang, netspeak, digispeak or chatspeak) is a non-standard or unofficial form of language used by people on the Internet to communicate to one another. A popular example of Internet slang is &quot;lol&quot; meaning &quot;laugh out loud&quot;. Since Internet slang is constantly changing, it is difficult to provide a standardized definition. However, it can be understood to be any type of slang that Internet users have popularized, and in many cases, have coined. Such terms often originate with the purpose of saving keystrokes or to compensate for character limit restrictions. Many people use the same abbreviations in texting, instant messaging, and social networking websites. Acronyms, keyboard symbols, and abbreviations are common types of Internet slang. New dialects of slang, such as leet or Lolspeak, develop as ingroup Internet memes rather than time savers. Many people also use Internet slang in face-to-face, real life communication.

==Creation and evolution==

===Origins===
Internet slang originated in the early days of the Internet with some terms predating the Internet. The earliest forms of Internet slang assumed people&#x27;s knowledge of programming and commands in a specific language. Internet slang is used in chat rooms, social networking services, online games, video games and in the online community. Since 1979, users of communications networks like Usenet created their own shorthand.

===Motivations===
The primary motivation for using a slang unique to the Internet is to ease communication. However, while Internet slang shortcuts save time for the writer, they take two times as long for the reader to understand, according to a study by the University of Tasmania. On the other hand, similar to the use of slang in traditional face-to-face speech or written language, slang on the Internet is often a way of indicating group membership.

Internet slang provides a channel which facilitates and constrains the ability to communicate in ways that are fundamentally different from those found in other semiotic situations. Many of the expectations and practices which we associate with spoken and written language are no longer applicable. The Internet itself is ideal for new slang to emerge because of the richness of the medium and the availability of information. Slang is also thus motivated for the &quot;creation and sustenance of online communities&quot;. These communities, in turn, play a role in solidarity or identification or an exclusive or common cause.

David Crystal distinguishes among five areas of the Internet where slang is used — The Web itself, email, asynchronous chat (for example, mailing lists), synchronous chat (for example, Internet Relay Chat), and virtual worlds. The electronic character of the channel has a fundamental influence on the language of the medium. Options for communication are constrained by the nature of the hardware needed in order to gain Internet access. Thus, productive linguistic capacity (the type of information that can be sent) is determined by the preassigned characters on a keyboard, and receptive linguistic capacity (the type of information that can be seen) is determined by the size and configuration of the screen. Additionally, both sender and receiver are constrained linguistically by the properties of the internet software, computer hardware, and networking hardware linking them. Electronic discourse refers to writing that is &quot;very often reads as if it were being spoken – that is, as if the sender were writing talking&quot;.

==Types of slang==

Internet slang does not constitute a homogeneous language variety; rather, it differs according to the user and type of Internet situation. Audience design occurs in online platforms, and therefore online communities can develop their own sociolects, or shared linguistic norms.

Within the language of Internet slang, there is still an element of prescriptivism, as seen in style guides, for example &quot;Wired Style&quot;, which are specifically aimed at usage on the Internet. Even so, few users consciously heed these prescriptive recommendations on CMC (Computer-mediated communication), but rather adapt their styles based on what they encounter online. Although it is difficult to produce a clear definition of Internet slang, the following types of slang may be observed. This list is not exhaustive.

==Views==

Many debates about how the use of slang on the Internet influences language outside of the digital sphere go on. Even though the direct causal relationship between the Internet and language has yet to be proven by any scientific research, Internet slang has invited split views on its influence on the standard of language use in non-computer-mediated communications.

Prescriptivists tend to have the widespread belief that the Internet has a negative influence on the future of language, and that it could lead to a degradation of standard. Some would even attribute any decline of standard formal English to the increase in usage of electronic communication. It has also been suggested that the linguistic differences between Standard English and CMC can have implications for literacy education. This is illustrated by the widely reported example of a school essay submitted by a Scottish teenager, which contained many abbreviations and acronyms likened to SMS language. There was great condemnation of this style by the mass media as well as educationists, who expressed that this showed diminishing literacy or linguistic abilities.

On the other hand, descriptivists have counter-argued that the Internet allows better expressions of a language. Rather than established linguistic conventions, linguistic choices sometimes reflect personal taste. It has also been suggested that as opposed to intentionally flouting language conventions, Internet slang is a result of a lack of motivation to monitor speech online. Hale and Scanlon describe language in emails as being derived from &quot;writing the way people talk&quot;, and that there is no need to insist on &#x27;Standard&#x27; English. English users, in particular, have an extensive tradition of etiquette guides, instead of traditional prescriptive treatises, that offer pointers on linguistic appropriateness. Using and spreading Internet slang also adds onto the cultural currency of a language. It is important to the speakers of the language due to the foundation it provides for identifying within a group, and also for defining a person&#x27;s individual linguistic and communicative competence. The result is a specialized subculture based on its use of slang.

In scholarly research, attention has, for example, been drawn to the effect of the use of Internet slang in ethnography, and more importantly to how conversational relationships online change structurally because slang is used.

In German, there is already considerable controversy regarding the use of anglicisms outside of CMC. This situation is even more problematic within CMC, since the jargon of the medium is dominated by English terms. An extreme example of an anti-anglicisms perspective can be observed from the chatroom rules of a Christian site, which bans all anglicisms (&quot;&quot; [Using anglicisms is strictly prohibited!]), and also translates even fundamental terms into German equivalents.

===Journalism===
In April 2014, &quot;Gawker&quot;″s editor-in-chief Max Read instituted new writing style guidelines banning internet slang for his writing staff. Internet slang has gained attraction, however in other publications ranging from BuzzFeed to The Washington Post, gaining attention from younger viewers. Clickbait headlines have particularly sparked attention, originating from the rise of BuzzFeed in the journalistic sphere which ultimately lead to an online landscape populated with social media references and a shift in language use. 

==Use beyond computer-mediated communication==
Internet slang has crossed from being mediated by the computer into other non-physical domains. Here, these domains are taken to refer to any domain of interaction where interlocutors need not be geographically proximate to one another, and where the Internet is not primarily used. Internet slang is now prevalent in telephony, mainly through short messages (SMS) communication. Abbreviations and interjections, especially, have been popularized in this medium, perhaps due to the limited character space for writing messages on mobile phones. Another possible reason for this spread is the convenience of transferring the existing mappings between expression and meaning into a similar space of interaction.

At the same time, Internet slang has also taken a place as part of everyday offline language, among those with digital access. The nature and content of online conversation is brought forward to direct offline communication through the telephone and direct talking, as well as through written language, such as in writing notes or letters. In the case of interjections, such as numerically based and abbreviated Internet slang, are not pronounced as they are written physically or replaced by any actual action. Rather, they become lexicalized and spoken like non-slang words in a &quot;stage direction&quot; like fashion, where the actual action is not carried out but substituted with a verbal signal. The notions of flaming and trolling have also extended outside the computer, and are used in the same circumstances of deliberate or unintentional implicatures.

The expansion of Internet slang has been furthered through codification and the promotion of digital literacy. The subsequently existing and growing popularity of such references among those online as well as offline has thus advanced Internet slang literacy and globalized it. Awareness and proficiency in manipulating Internet slang in both online and offline communication indicates digital literacy and teaching materials have even been developed to further this knowledge. A South Korean publisher, for example, has published a textbook that details the meaning and context of use for common Internet slang instances and is targeted at young children who will soon be using the Internet. Similarly, Internet slang has been recommended as language teaching material in second language classrooms in order to raise communicative competence by imparting some of the cultural value attached to a language that is available only in slang.

Meanwhile, well-known dictionaries such as the ODE and Merriam-Webster have been updated with a significant and growing body of slang jargon. Besides common examples, lesser known slang and slang with a non-English etymology have also found a place in standardized linguistic references. Along with these instances, literature in user-contributed dictionaries such as Urban Dictionary has also been added to. Codification seems to be qualified through frequency of use, and novel creations are often not accepted by other users of slang.

===Present===
Although Internet slang began as a means of &quot;opposition&quot; to mainstream language, its popularity with today&#x27;s globalized digitally literate population has shifted it into a part of everyday language, where it also leaves a profound impact.

Frequently used slang also have become conventionalised into memetic &quot;unit[s] of cultural information&quot;. These memes in turn are further spread through their use on the Internet, prominently through websites. The Internet as an &quot;information superhighway&quot; is also catalysed through slang. The evolution of slang has also created a &#x27;slang union&#x27; as part of a unique, specialised subculture. Such impacts are, however, limited and requires further discussion especially from the non-English world. This is because Internet slang is prevalent in languages more actively used on the Internet, like English, which is the Internet&#x27;s lingua franca.

==Around the world==
In Japanese, the term moe has come into common use among slang users to mean something &quot;preciously cute&quot; and appealing.

Aside from the more frequent abbreviations, acronyms, and emoticons, Internet slang also uses archaic words or the lesser-known meanings of mainstream terms. Regular words can also be altered into something with a similar pronunciation but altogether different meaning, or attributed new meanings altogether. Phonetic transcriptions are the transformation of words to how it sounds in a certain language, and are used as internet slang. In places where logographic languages are used, such as China, a visual Internet slang exists, giving characters dual meanings, one direct and one implied.

The Internet has helped people from all over the world to become connected to one another, enabling &quot;global&quot; relationships to be formed. As such, it is important for the various types of slang used online to be recognizable for everyone. It is also important to do so because of how other languages are quickly catching up with English on the Internet, following the increase in Internet usage in predominantly non-English speaking countries. In fact, as of January 2020, only approximately 25.9% of the online population is made up of English speakers.

Different cultures tend to have different motivations behind their choice of slang, on top of the difference in language used. For example, in China, because of the tough Internet regulations imposed, users tend to use certain slang to talk about issues deemed as sensitive to the government. These include using symbols to separate the characters of a word to avoid detection from manual or automated text pattern scanning and consequential censorship. An outstanding example is the use of the term river crab to denote censorship. River crab (hexie) is pronounced the same as &quot;harmony&quot;—the official term used to justify political discipline and censorship. As such Chinese netizens reappropriate the official terms in a sarcastic way.

Abbreviations are popular across different cultures, including countries like Japan, China, France, Portugal, etc., and are used according to the particular language the Internet users speak. Significantly, this same style of slang creation is also found in non-alphabetical languages as, for example, a form of &quot;e gao&quot; or alternative political discourse.

The difference in language often results in miscommunication, as seen in an onomatopoeic example, &quot;555&quot;, which sounds like &quot;crying&quot; in Chinese, and &quot;laughing&quot; in Thai. A similar example is between the English &quot;haha&quot; and the Spanish &quot;jaja&quot;, where both are onomatopoeic expressions of laughter, but the difference in language also meant a different consonant for the same sound to be produced. For more examples of how other languages express &quot;laughing out loud&quot;, see also: LOL

In terms of culture, in Chinese, the numerically based onomatopoeia &quot;770880&quot; (), which means to &#x27;kiss and hug you&#x27;, is used. This is comparable to &quot;XOXO&quot;, which many Internet users use. In French, &quot;pk&quot; or &quot;pq&quot; is used in the place of pourquoi, which means &#x27;why&#x27;. This is an example of a combination of onomatopoeia and shortening of the original word for convenience when writing online.

In conclusion, every different country has their own language background and cultural differences and hence, they tend to have their own rules and motivations for their own Internet slang. However, at present, there is still a lack of studies done by researchers on some differences between the countries.

On the whole, the popular use of Internet slang has resulted in a unique online and offline community as well as a couple sub-categories of &quot;special internet slang which is different from other slang spread on the whole internet... similar to jargon... usually decided by the sharing community&quot;. It has also led to virtual communities marked by the specific slang they use and led to a more homogenized yet diverse online culture.

== Internet slang in advertisements ==

Internet slang can make advertisements more effective. Through two empirical studies, it was proven that Internet slang could help promote or capture the crowd&#x27;s attention through advertisement, but did not increase the sales of the product. However, using Internet slang in advertisement may attract a certain demographic, and might not be the best to use depending on the product or goods. Furthermore, an overuse of Internet slang also negatively effects the brand due to quality of the advertisement, but using an appropriate amount would be sufficient in providing more attention to the ad. According to the experiment, Internet slang helped capture the attention of the consumers of necessity items. However, the demographic of luxury goods differ, and using Internet slang would potentially have the brand lose credibility due to the appropriateness of Internet slang.

== See also ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Roman and medieval abbreviations used to save space on manuscripts and epigraphs:
** 
* 

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Alt URL
* 

==External links==
* Dictionaries of slang and abbreviations:

** All Acronyms
** FOLDOC, computing
** InternetSlang.com
** SlangInternet.com
** Internet Slangs
** Slang Dictionary
** SlangLang.net
** Slang.net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="0" end="14" title="Internet slang" label="Internet slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="28" end="46" title="Internet slang" label="Internet shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="48" end="59" title="Internet slang" label="cyber-slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="61" end="69" title="Internet slang" label="netspeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="71" end="80" title="Internet slang" label="digispeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="84" end="93" title="Internet slang" label="chatspeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="166" end="174" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134" start="251" end="254" title="lol" label="lol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215756" start="574" end="583" title="Typing" label="keystroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="661" end="673" title="abbreviation" label="abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="678" end="685" title="text messaging" label="texting"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="687" end="704" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="710" end="736" title="social networking websites" label="social networking websites"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="738" end="745" title="Acronym" label="Acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="748" end="764" title="Computer keyboard" label="keyboard symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337" start="851" end="855" title="leet" label="leet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56" start="859" end="867" title="Lolcat" label="Lolspeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="880" end="887" title="ingroup" label="ingroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="888" end="901" title="Internet meme" label="Internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058876" start="981" end="990" title="real life" label="real life"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="1296" end="1305" title="chat room" label="chat room"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="1308" end="1333" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="1336" end="1347" title="online game" label="online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="1350" end="1360" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576792" start="1373" end="1389" title="online community" label="online community"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="1441" end="1447" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="1466" end="1475" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="1571" end="1584" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q962011" start="1738" end="1760" title="University of Tasmania" label="University of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q874405" start="1916" end="1932" title="social group" label="group membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="2647" end="2661" title="World Wide Web" label="The Web itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="2663" end="2668" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q752739" start="2670" end="2687" title="asynchronous communication" label="asynchronous chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q714827" start="2702" end="2714" title="mailing list" label="mailing list"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375695" start="2718" end="2734" title="synchronous communication" label="synchronous chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="2749" end="2768" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="Internet Relay Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q444835" start="2775" end="2788" title="virtual world" label="virtual world"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="2795" end="2805" title="computer" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="3132" end="3140" title="Computer keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="3382" end="3390" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="3392" end="3409" title="computer hardware" label="computer hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546066" start="3415" end="3434" title="networking hardware" label="networking hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819767" start="3763" end="3778" title="Audience design" label="Audience design"/>
<link wikidata="Q207101" start="3862" end="3872" title="sociolects" label="sociolects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="3971" end="3985" title="linguistic prescriptivism" label="prescriptivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q198614" start="3998" end="4010" title="style guides" label="style guides"/>
<link wikidata="Q796573" start="4183" end="4214" title="Computer-mediated communication" label="Computer-mediated communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q796573" start="4779" end="4810" title="computer-mediated communication" label="computer-mediated communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="4814" end="4829" title="Linguistic prescription" label="Prescriptivists"/>
<link wikidata="Q796573" start="5195" end="5198" title="Computer-mediated communication" label="CMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090785" start="5407" end="5419" title="SMS language" label="SMS language"/>
<link wikidata="Q777864" start="5605" end="5619" title="Linguistic description" label="descriptivists"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="6788" end="6799" title="ethnography" label="ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="6912" end="6918" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q161273" start="6983" end="6993" title="anglicisms" label="anglicisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="7072" end="7078" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759027" start="7430" end="7436" title="Gawker" label="Gawker"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="7445" end="7460" title="editor-in-chief" label="editor-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003490" start="7637" end="7645" title="BuzzFeed" label="BuzzFeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="8003" end="8008" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="8354" end="8357" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="8392" end="8404" title="interjection" label="interjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928179" start="8781" end="8788" title="offline" label="offline"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928179" start="8858" end="8864" title="online" label="online"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="8941" end="8950" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="8990" end="9006" title="Orthography" label="written language"/>
<link wikidata="Q687185" start="9237" end="9248" title="Lexicalisation" label="lexicalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11281" start="9436" end="9444" title="troll (Internet)" label="trolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q242069" start="9821" end="9829" title="Digital literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115311" start="10558" end="10561" title="Oxford Dictionary of English" label="ODE"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="10566" end="10581" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q310004" start="10879" end="10895" title="Urban Dictionary" label="Urban Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="11926" end="11934" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="11941" end="11948" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="11979" end="11992" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q497942" start="12038" end="12041" title="moe (slang)" label="moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="12205" end="12213" title="emoticon" label="emoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="12600" end="12609" title="logograph" label="logograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q99495581" start="13449" end="13454" title="Chinese Internet slang" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="13748" end="13758" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012568" start="13806" end="13816" title="river crab (Internet slang)" label="river crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="14054" end="14067" title="Abbreviations" label="Abbreviations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="14132" end="14137" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14139" end="14144" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14146" end="14152" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="14154" end="14162" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14372" end="14377" title="Kuso#Compared to e&amp;#x27;gao" label="e gao"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="14497" end="14509" title="Onomatopoeia" label="onomatopoeic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134" start="14953" end="14956" title="LOL" label="LOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="16220" end="16234" title="Advertising" label="advertisements"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15174" wikidata="Q2531549" url="?curid=15174" title="Impi">
<text> is a Nguni word meaning war or combat and by association any body of men gathered for war, for example is a term denoting an army. were formed from regiments () from large militarised homesteads (). In English is often used to refer to a Zulu regiment, which is called an in Zulu, or the army of the Zulu Kingdom.

Its beginnings lie far back in historic local warfare customs, when groups of armed men called battled. They were systematised radically by the Zulu king Shaka, who was then only the exiled illegitimate son of king Senzangakhona kaJama, but already showing much prowess as a general in the army () of Mthethwa king Dingiswayo in the Ndwandwe–Zulu War of 1817–1819.

==Genesis==

The Zulu impi is popularly identified with the ascent of Shaka, ruler of the relatively small Zulu tribe before its explosion across the landscape of southern Africa, but its earliest shape as an instrument of statecraft lies in the innovations of the Mthethwa chieftain Dingiswayo, according to some historians (Morris 1965). These innovations in turn drew upon existing tribal customs, such as the &quot;iNtanga&quot;. This was an age grade tradition common among many of the Bantu peoples of the continent&#x27;s southern region. Young men were organised into age groups, with each cohort responsible for certain duties and tribal ceremonies. Periodically, the older age grades were summoned to the kraals of sub-chieftains, or &quot;inDunas&quot;, for consultations, assignments, and an induction ceremony that marked their transition from boys to full-fledged adults and warriors, the &quot;ukuButwa&quot;. Kraal or settlement elders generally handled local disputes and issues. Above them were the inDunas, and above the inDunas stood the chief of a particular clan lineage or tribe. The inDunas handled administrative matters for their chiefs – ranging from settlement of disputes, to the collection of taxes. In time of war, the inDunas supervised the fighting men in their areas, forming leadership of the military forces deployed for combat. The age grade &quot;iNtangas&quot;, under the guidance of the inDunas, formed the basis for the systematic regimental organisation that would become known worldwide as the impi.

===Limited nature of early tribal warfare===
Warfare was of low intensity among the KwaZulu Natal tribes prior to the rise of Shaka, though it occurred frequently. Objectives were typically limited to such matters as cattle raiding, avenging some personal insult, or resolving disputes over segments of grazing land. Generally a loose mob, called an &quot;impi&quot; participated in these melees. There were no campaigns of extermination against the defeated. They simply moved on to other open spaces on the veldt, and equilibrium was restored. 

The bow and arrow were known but seldom used. Warfare, like the hunt, depended on skilled spearmen and trackers. The primary weapon was a thin throwing spear, the &quot;assegai&quot;; several were carried into combat. Defensive equipment included a small cowhide shield, which was later improved by King Shaka. Many battles were prearranged, with the clan warriors meeting at an agreed place and time while women and children of the clan watched from some distance away. Ritualized taunts, single combats and tentative charges were the typical pattern. If the affair did not dissipate before, one side might find enough courage to mount a sustained attack and drive their enemies. Casualties were usually light. The defeated clan might pay in lands or cattle and have captives to be ransomed but extermination and mass casualties were rare. Tactics were rudimentary. 

Outside the ritual battles, the quick raid was the most frequent combat action, marked by burning kraals, seizure of captives, and the driving off of cattle. Pastoral herders and light agriculturalists, the Bantu did not usually build permanent fortifications to fend off enemies. A clan under threat simply packed their meagre material possessions, rounded up their cattle and fled until the marauders were gone. If the marauders did not stay to permanently dispossess them of grazing areas, the fleeing clan might return to rebuild in a day or two. The genesis of the Zulu impi thus lies in tribal structures existing long before the coming of Europeans or the Shaka era.

===Rise of Dingiswayo===

In the early 19th century, a combination of factors began to change the customary pattern. These included rising populations, the growth of white settlement and slaving that dispossessed native peoples both at the Cape and in Portuguese Mozambique, and the rise of ambitious &quot;new men.&quot; One such man, a warrior called Dingiswayo (&quot;the Troubled One&quot;) of the Mthethwa rose to prominence. Historians such as Donald Morris hold that his political genius laid the basis for a relatively light hegemony. This was established through a combination of diplomacy and conquest, using not extermination or slavery, but strategic reconciliation and judicious force of arms. This hegemony reduced the frequent feuding and fighting among the small clans in the Mthethwa&#x27;s orbit, transferring their energies to more centralised forces. Under Dingiswayo the age grades came to be regarded as military drafts, deployed more frequently to maintain the new order. It was from these small clans, including among them the eLangeni and the Zulu, that Shaka sprung.

==Ascent and innovations of Shaka==
Shaka proved himself to be one of Dingiswayo&#x27;s most able warriors after the military call up of his age grade to serve in the Mthethwa forces. He fought with his iziCwe regiment wherever he was assigned during this early period, but from the beginning, Shaka&#x27;s approach to battle did not fit the traditional mould. He began to implement his own individual methods and style, designing the famous short stabbing spear the &quot;iKlwa&quot;, a larger, stronger shield, and discarding the oxhide sandals that he felt slowed him down. These methods proved effective on a small scale, but Shaka himself was restrained by his overlord. His conception of warfare was far more extreme than the reconcilitory methods of Dingiswayo. He sought to bring combat to a swift and bloody decision, as opposed to duels of individual champions, scattered raids, or limited skirmishes where casualties were comparatively light. While his mentor and overlord Dingiswayo lived, Shaka&#x27;s methods were reined in, but the removal of this check gave the Zulu chieftain much broader scope. It was under his rule that a much more rigorous mode of tribal warfare came into being. This newer, brutal focus demanded changes in weapons, organisation and tactics.

===Weapons and shields===
Shaka is credited with introducing a new variant of the traditional weapon, demoting the long, spindly throwing spear in favour of a heavy-bladed, short-shafted stabbing spear. He is also said to have introduced a larger, heavier cowhide shield (&quot;isihlangu&quot;), and trained his forces to thus close with the enemy in more effective hand-to-hand combat. The throwing spear was not discarded, but standardised like the stabbing implement and carried as a missile weapon, typically discharged at the foe, before close contact. These weapons changes integrated with and facilitated an aggressive mobility and tactical organisation.

As weapons, the Zulu warrior carried the &quot;iklwa&quot; stabbing spear (losing one could result in execution) and a club or cudgel fashioned from dense hardwood known in Zulu as the &quot;iwisa&quot;, usually called the knobkerrie or knobkerry in English and knopkierie in Afrikaans, for beating an enemy in the manner of a mace. Zulu officers often carried the half-moon-shaped Zulu ax (&quot;isizenze&quot;), but this weapon was more of a symbol to show their rank. The iklwa – so named because of the sucking sound it made when withdrawn from a human body – with its long and broad blade was an invention of Shaka that superseded the older thrown &quot;ipapa&quot; (so named because of the &quot;pa-pa&quot; sound it made as it flew through the air). The &quot;iklwa&quot; could theoretically be used both in melee and as a thrown weapon, but warriors were forbidden in Shaka&#x27;s day from throwing it, which would disarm them and give their opponents something to throw back. Moreover, Shaka felt it discouraged warriors from closing into hand-to-hand combat.

Shaka&#x27;s brother, and successor, Dingane kaSenzangakhona reintroduced greater use of the throwing spear, perhaps as a counter to Boer firearms.

As early as Shaka&#x27;s reign small numbers of firearms, often obsolete muskets and rifles, were obtained by the Zulus from Europeans by trade. In the aftermath of the defeat of the British at the Battle of Isandlwana in 1879, many Martini–Henry rifles were captured by the Zulus together with considerable amounts of ammunition. The advantage of this capture is debatable due to the alleged tendency of Zulu warriors to close their eyes when firing such weapons. The possession of firearms did little to change Zulu tactics, which continued to rely on a swift approach to the enemy to bring him into close combat.

All warriors carried a shield made of oxhide, which retained the hair, with a central stiffening shaft of wood, the &quot;mgobo&quot;. Shields were the property of the king; they were stored in specialised structures raised off the ground for protection from vermin when not issued to the relevant regiment. The large &quot;isihlangu&quot; shield of Shaka&#x27;s day was about five feet in length and was later partially replaced by the smaller &quot;umbumbuluzo&quot;, a shield of identical manufacture but around three and a half feet in length. Close combat relied on co-ordinated use of the &quot;iklwa&quot; and shield. The warrior sought to get the edge of his shield behind the edge of his enemy&#x27;s, so that he could pull the enemy&#x27;s shield to the side, thus opening him to a thrust with the &quot;iklwa&quot; deep into the abdomen or chest.

===Logistics===
The fast-moving host, like all military formations, needed supplies. These were provided by young boys, who were attached to a force and carried rations, cooking pots, sleeping mats, extra weapons and other material. Cattle were sometimes driven on the hoof as a movable larder. Again, such arrangements in the local context were probably nothing unusual. What was different was the systematisation and organisation, a pattern yielding major benefits when the Zulu were dispatched on raiding missions.

===Age-grade regimental system===
Age-grade groupings of various sorts were common in the Bantu tribal culture of the day, and indeed are still important in much of Africa. Age grades were responsible for a variety of activities, from guarding the camp, to cattle herding, to certain rituals and ceremonies. It was customary in Zulu culture for young men to provide limited service to their local chiefs until they were married and recognised as official householders. Shaka manipulated this system, transferring the customary service period from the regional clan leaders to himself, strengthening his personal hegemony. Such groupings on the basis of age, did not constitute a permanent, paid military in the modern Western sense, nevertheless they did provide a stable basis for sustained armed mobilisation, much more so than ad hoc tribal levies or war parties.

Shaka organised the various age grades into regiments, and quartered them in special military kraals, with each regiment having its own distinctive names and insignia. Some historians argue that the large military establishment was a drain on the Zulu economy and necessitated continual raiding and expansion. This may be true since large numbers of the society&#x27;s men were isolated from normal occupations, but whatever the resource impact, the regimental system clearly built on existing tribal cultural elements that could be adapted and shaped to fit an expansionist agenda.

After their 20th birthdays, young men would be sorted into formal &quot;ibutho&quot; (plural &quot;amabutho&quot;) or regiments. They would build their &quot;i=handa&quot; (often referred to as a &#x27;homestead&#x27;, as it was basically a stockade group of huts surrounding a corral for cattle), their gathering place when summoned for active service. Active service continued until a man married, a privilege only the king bestowed. The amabutho were recruited on the basis of age rather than regional or tribal origin. The reason for this was to enhance the centralised power of the Zulu king at the expense of clan and tribal leaders. They swore loyalty to the king of the Zulu nation.

===Mobility, training and insignia===

Shaka discarded sandals to enable his warriors to run faster. Initially the move was unpopular, but those who objected were simply killed, a practice that quickly concentrated the minds of remaining personnel. Zulu tradition indicates that Shaka hardened the feet of his troops by having them stamp thorny tree and bush branches flat. Shaka drilled his troops frequently, implementing forced marches covering more than fifty miles a day. He also drilled the troops to carry out encirclement tactics (see below). Such mobility gave the Zulu a significant impact in their local region and beyond. Upkeep of the regimental system and training seems to have continued after Shaka&#x27;s death, although Zulu defeats by the Boers, and growing encroachment by British colonists, sharply curtailed raiding operations prior to the War of 1879. Morris (1965, 1982) records one such mission under King Mpande to give green warriors of the uThulwana regiment experience: a raid into Swaziland, dubbed &quot;Fund&#x27; uThulwana&quot; by the Zulu, or &quot;Teach the uThulwana&quot;.

Impi warriors were trained as early as age six, joining the army as &quot;udibi&quot; porters at first, being enrolled into same-age groups (&quot;intanga&quot;). Until they were &quot;buta&quot;&#x27;d, Zulu boys accompanied their fathers and brothers on campaign as servants. Eventually, they would go to the nearest &quot;ikhanda&quot; to &quot;kleza&quot; (literally, &quot;to drink directly from the udder&quot;), at which time the boys would become &quot;inkwebane&quot;, cadets. They would spend their time training until they were formally enlisted by the king. They would challenge each other to stick fights, which had to be accepted on pain of dishonor.

In Shaka&#x27;s day, warriors often wore elaborate plumes and cow tail regalia in battle, but by the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879, many warriors wore only a loin cloth and a minimal form of headdress. The later period Zulu soldier went into battle relatively simply dressed, painting his upper body and face with chalk and red ochre, despite the popular conception of elaborately panoplied warriors. Each &quot;ibutho&quot; had a singular arrangement of headdress and other adornments, so that the Zulu army could be said to have had regimental uniforms; latterly the &#x27;full-dress&#x27; was only worn on festive occasions. The men of senior regiments would wear, in addition to their other headdress, the head-ring (&quot;isicoco&quot;) denoting their married state. A gradation of shield colour was found, junior regiments having largely dark shields the more senior ones having shields with more light colouring; Shaka&#x27;s personal regiment &quot;Fasimba&quot; (The Haze) having white shields with only a small patch of darker colour. This shield uniformity was facilitated by the custom of separating the king&#x27;s cattle into herds based on their coat colours.

Certain adornments were awarded to individual warriors for conspicuous courage in action; these included a type of heavy brass arm-ring (&quot;ingxotha&quot;) and an intricate necklace composed of interlocking wooden pegs (&quot;iziqu&quot;).

===Tactics===
The Zulu typically took the offensive, deploying in the well known &quot;buffalo horns&quot; formation. The attack layout was composed of four elements, each of which represented a grouping of Zulu regiments:

# Left horn or flank
# Right horn or flank
#: The &quot;horns&quot; or flanking elements were used to encircle and pin the enemy. Generally the &quot;horns&quot; were made up of younger greener troops and could be maneuvered separately as needed in an operation.
# The &quot;Chest&quot; or central main force which delivered the coup de grâce. The prime fighters made up the composition of the main force.
# The &quot;Loins&quot; or reserves used to exploit success or reinforce elsewhere. Often these were older veterans, sometimes positioned with their backs to the battle so as not to get unduly excited.

Encirclement tactics were not unique in the region and attempts to surround an enemy were not unknown even in the ritualised battles. The use of separate manoeuvre elements to support a stronger central group was also known in pre-mechanised tribal warfare, as is the use of reserve echelons farther back. What was unique about the Zulu was the degree of organisation, consistency with which they used these tactics, and the speed at which they executed them. Developments and refinements may have taken place after Shaka&#x27;s death, as witnessed by the use of larger groupings of regiments by the Zulu against the British in 1879. Missions, available manpower and enemies varied, but whether facing native spear, or European bullet, the impis generally fought in and adhered to the classical buffalo horns pattern.

===Organisation of the Zulu forces===

Organization. The Zulu forces were generally grouped into 3 levels: regiments, corps of several regiments, and &quot;armies&quot; or bigger formations, although the Zulu did not use these terms in the modern sense. Size distinctions were taken account of, any grouping of men on a mission could collectively be called an impi, whether a raiding party of 100 or horde of 10,000. Numbers were not uniform, but dependent on a variety of factors including assignments by the king, or the manpower mustered by various clan chiefs or localities. A regiment might be 400 or 4000 men. These were grouped into Corps that took their name from the military kraals where they were mustered, or sometimes the dominant regiment of that locality. While the modest Zulu population could not turn out the hundreds of thousand available to major world or continental powers like France, Britain, or Russia, the Zulu &quot;nation in arms&quot; approach could mobilize substantial forces in local context for short campaigns, and maneuver them in the Western equivalent of divisional strength. The victory won by Zulu king Cetshwayo at Ndondakusuka, for example, two decades before the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879, involved a battlefield deployment of 30,000 troops.

Higher command and unit leadership. An inDuna guided each regiment, and he in turn answered to senior izinduna who controlled the corps grouping. Overall guidance of the host was furnished by elder izinduna usually with many years of experience. One or more of these elder chiefs might accompany a big force on an important mission. Coordination of tactical movements was supplied by the indunas who used hand signals and messengers. Generally before deploying for battle, the regiments were made to squat in a semicircle while these commanders made final assignments and adjustments. Lower level regimental izinduna, like the NCOs of today&#x27;s armies, and yesterday&#x27;s Roman centurions, were extremely important to morale and discipline. Prior to the clash at Isandhlwana for example, they imposed order on the frenzied rush of warriors eager to get at the British, and steadied those faltering under withering enemy fire during the battle. The widely spaced maneuvers of an impi sometimes could make control problematic once an attack was unleashed. Indeed, the Zulu attacks on the British strongpoints at Rorke&#x27;s Drift and at Kambula, (both bloody defeats) seemed to have been carried out by over-enthusiastic leaders and warriors despite contrary orders of the Zulu King, Cetshwayo. Such over-confidence or disobedience by thrusting leaders or forces is not unusual in warfare. At the Battle of Trebia for example, the over-confident Roman commander Sempronius was provoked into a hasty attack, that resulted in a defeat for Roman arms. Likewise, General George Custer disobeyed the orders of his superior, General Terry, and rashly launched a disastrous charge against Indian forces at the Battle of the Little Bighorn, resulting in the total destruction of his command. Popular film re-enactments display a grizzled &quot;izinduna&quot; directing the Zulu host from a promontory with elegant sweeps of the hand, and the reserves still lay within top commanders&#x27; overall control. Coordination after an army was set in motion however relied more on the initial pre-positioning and assignments of the regiments before the advance, and the deep understanding by Zulu officers of the general attack plan. These sub-commanders could thus slow down or speed up their approach runs to maintain the general &quot;buffalo horns&quot; alignment to match terrain and situation.

===Summary of the Shaka reforms===

As noted above, Shaka was neither the originator of the impi, or the age grade structure, nor the concept of a bigger grouping than the small clan system. His major innovations were to blend these traditional elements in a new way, to systematise the approach to battle, and to standardise organization, methods and weapons, particularly in his adoption of the &quot;ilkwa&quot; – the Zulu thrusting spear, unique long-term regimental units, and the &quot;buffalo horns&quot; formation. Dingswayo&#x27;s approach was of a loose federation of allies under his hegemony, combining to fight, each with their own contingents, under their own leaders. Shaka dispensed with this, insisting instead on a standardised organisation and weapons package that swept away and replaced old clan allegiances with loyalty to himself. This uniform approach also encouraged the loyalty and identification of warriors with their own distinctive military regiments. In time, these warriors, from many conquered tribes and clans came to regard themselves as one nation- the Zulu. The so-called Marian reforms of Rome in the military sphere are referenced by some writers as similar. While other ancient powers such as the Carthaginians maintained a patchwork of force types, and the legions retained such phalanx-style holdovers like the &quot;triarii&quot;, later writers would attribute to Marius the implementation of one consistent standardised approach for all the infantry that likely actually took place gradually across many years. This enabled more disciplined formations and efficient execution of tactics over time against a variety of enemies. As one military historian notes: 
:&quot;Combined with Shaka&#x27;s &quot;buffalo horns&quot; attack formation for surrounding and annihilating enemy forces, the Zulu combination of iklwa and shield—similar to the Roman legionaries&#x27; use of gladius and scutum—was devastating. By the time of Shaka&#x27;s assassination in 1828, it had made the Zulu kingdom the greatest power in southern Africa and a force to be reckoned with, even against Britain&#x27;s modern army in 1879.&quot;

==In battle==
To understand the full scope of the impi&#x27;s performance in battle, military historians of the Zulu typically look to its early operations against internal African enemies, not merely the British interlude. In terms of numbers, the operations of the impi would change—from the Western equivalent of small company and battalion size forces, to manoeuvres in multi-divisional strength of between 10,000 and 40,000 men. The victory won by Zulu king Cetswayo at Ndondakusuka, for example, two decades before the Anglo-Zulu War, involved a deployment of 30,000 troops. These were sizeable formations in regional context but represented the bulk of prime Zulu fighting strength. Few impi-style formations were to routinely achieve this level of mobilisation for a single battle. By comparison, at Cannae, the Romans deployed 80,000 men, and generally could put tens of thousands more into smaller combat actions. The popular notion of countless attacking black spearmen is a distorted one. Manpower supplies on the continent were often limited. In the words of one historian: &quot;The savage hordes of popular lore seldom materialized on African battlefields.&quot; This limited resource base would hurt the Zulu when they confronted technologically advanced world powers such as Britain. The advent of new weapons like firearms would also have a profound impact on the African battlefield, but as will be seen, the impi-style forces largely eschewed firearms, or used them in a minor way. Whether facing native spear or European bullet, impis largely fought as they had since the days of Shaka, from Zululand to Zimbabwe, and from Mozambique to Tanzania.

The Zulu had greater numbers than their opponents, but greater numbers massed together in compact arrays simply presented easy targets in the age of modern firearms and artillery. African tribes that fought in smaller guerrilla detachments typically held out against European invaders for a much longer time, as witnessed by the 7-year resistance of the Lobi against the French in West Africa, or the operations of the Berbers in Algeria against the French.

When the Zulu did acquire firearms, most notably captured stocks after the great victory at Isandhlwana, they lacked training and used them ineffectively, consistently firing high to give the bullets &quot;strength.&quot; Southern Africa, including the areas near Natal, was teeming with bands like the Griquas who had learned to use guns. Indeed, one such group not only mastered the way of the gun, but became proficient horsemen as well, skills that helped build the Basotho tribe, in what is now the nation of Lesotho. In addition, numerous European renegades or adventurers (both Boer and non-Boer) skilled in firearms were known to the Zulu. Some had even led detachments for the Zulu kings on military missions.

Throughout the 19th century they persisted in &quot;human wave&quot; attacks against well defended European positions where massed firepower devastated their ranks. The ministrations of an &quot;isAngoma&quot; (plural: &quot;izAngoma&quot;) Zulu diviner or &quot;witch doctor&quot;, and the bravery of individual regiments were ultimately of little use against the volleys of modern rifles, Gatling guns and artillery at the Ineyzane River, Rorke&#x27;s Drift, Kambula, Gingingdlovu and finally Ulindi.

==In popular culture==

The term &quot;impi&quot; has become synonymous with the Zulu nation in international popular culture; it appears in various video games such as &quot;Civilization III&quot;, &quot;Civilization IV: Warlords&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Civilization V: Brave New World&quot;, and &quot;Civilization VI&quot;, where the Impi is the unique unit for the Zulu faction with Shaka as their leader. &#x27;Impi&#x27; is also the title of a very famous South African song by Johnny Clegg and his band Juluka, which has become something of an unofficial national anthem, especially at major international sports events and especially when the opponent is England.

Lyrics:

:&quot;Impi! O nans&#x27;impi iyeza (Impi! Oh here comes impi)&quot;
:&quot;Uban&#x27;obengathint&#x27;amabhubesi? (Who would have touched the lions?)&quot;

Before stage seven of the 2013 Tour de France, the Orica–GreenEDGE cycling team played &#x27;Impi&#x27; on their team bus in honor of teammate Daryl Impey, the first South African Tour de France leader.

==See also==
* African military systems to 1800
* African military systems after 1900
* Military history of Africa
* Ashanti Empire
* Military of the Ashanti Empire
* Military history of Africa
* Mali Empire
* Military history of the Mali Empire
* Kingdom of Ndongo
* Kingdom of Matamba
* Kingdom of Kongo
* Nzinga of Ndongo and Matamba
* Battle of Mbwila
* Battle of Zama
* Battle of Isandlwana

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Knight, Ian. &quot;Brave Men&#x27;s Blood&quot;, London, 1990. .
* Knight, Ian. &quot;The Zulus&quot;.
* Knight, Ian. &quot;Anatomy of the Zulu Army&quot;.

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Whybra, Julian. &quot;England&#x27;s Sons&quot;, Billericay, (7th ed.), 2010.

== External links ==
*Article about origin and weapons use of Zulu Impi</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2531549" start="0" end="0" title="Impi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q961559" start="6" end="11" title="Nguni languages" label="Nguni"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="239" end="243" title="Zulu people" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q729768" start="301" end="313" title="Zulu Kingdom" label="Zulu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27695" start="470" end="475" title="Shaka" label="Shaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918639" start="531" end="551" title="Senzangakhona kaJama" label="Senzangakhona kaJama"/>
<link wikidata="Q600562" start="617" end="630" title="Mthethwa Paramountcy" label="Mthethwa king"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161906" start="631" end="641" title="Dingiswayo" label="Dingiswayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294875" start="649" end="666" title="Ndwandwe–Zulu War" label="Ndwandwe–Zulu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q27695" start="752" end="757" title="Shaka Zulu" label="Shaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q600562" start="947" end="955" title="Mthethwa Paramountcy" label="Mthethwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161906" start="966" end="976" title="Dingiswayo" label="Dingiswayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661898" start="2443" end="2457" title="cattle raiding" label="cattle raiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293039" start="2615" end="2620" title="melee" label="melee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433901" start="2735" end="2739" title="veld" label="veld"/>
<link wikidata="Q740127" start="2943" end="2950" title="assegai" label="assegai"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="4036" end="4045" title="Looting" label="marauders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5369" end="5377" title="eLangeni" label="eLangeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315466" start="6950" end="6964" title="Nguni shield" label="cowhide shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q740127" start="7404" end="7409" title="iklwa" label="iklwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="7476" end="7480" title="Club (weapon)" label="club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777250" start="7580" end="7590" title="knobkerrie" label="knobkerrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="7633" end="7642" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q272990" start="7684" end="7688" title="mace (bludgeon)" label="mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q740127" start="8010" end="8027" title="assegai" label="&amp;quot;ipapa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q470145" start="8464" end="8487" title="Dingane kaSenzangakhona" label="Dingane kaSenzangakhona"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="8759" end="8766" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q747589" start="8774" end="8794" title="Battle of Isandlwana" label="Battle of Isandlwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905626" start="8809" end="8822" title="Martini–Henry" label="Martini–Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691864" start="10744" end="10753" title="Age grade" label="Age grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348299" start="11483" end="11492" title="List of Zulu Regiments" label="regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691934" start="13951" end="13966" title="age set" label="same-age groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q228911" start="14594" end="14608" title="Anglo-Zulu War" label="Anglo-Zulu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569578" start="16739" end="16751" title="Encirclement" label="Encirclement"/>
<link wikidata="Q228911" start="17344" end="17363" title="Anglo-Zulu War" label="against the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q380403" start="18700" end="18709" title="Cetshwayo" label="Cetshwayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9173320" start="18713" end="18725" title="Battle of Ndondakusuka" label="Ndondakusuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q228911" start="18763" end="18777" title="Anglo-Zulu War" label="Anglo-Zulu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149592" start="18879" end="18885" title="inDuna" label="inDuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540134" start="19340" end="19345" title="Squatting position" label="squat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128962" start="22339" end="22353" title="Marian reforms" label="Marian reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q179591" start="24197" end="24203" title="Battle of Cannae" label="Cannae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="24209" end="24215" title="Roman Republic" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q961201" start="25412" end="25416" title="Lobi people" label="Lobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="25488" end="25495" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547060" start="25820" end="25827" title="Griqua people" label="Griquas"/>
<link wikidata="Q577576" start="25987" end="25994" title="Basotho" label="Basotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="26031" end="26038" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="26102" end="26106" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272975" start="26628" end="26639" title="Gatling gun" label="Gatling gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374" start="26916" end="26932" title="Civilization III" label="Civilization III"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26946" end="26971" title="Civilization IV: Warlords" label="Civilization IV: Warlords"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26999" end="27030" title="Civilization V: Brave New World" label="Civilization V: Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q24050047" start="27048" end="27063" title="Civilization VI" label="Civilization VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q561596" start="27228" end="27240" title="Johnny Clegg" label="Johnny Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495679" start="27254" end="27260" title="Juluka" label="Juluka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="27615" end="27629" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q266770" start="27635" end="27650" title="Orica–GreenEDGE" label="Orica–GreenEDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q375272" start="27727" end="27738" title="Daryl Impey" label="Daryl Impey"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="27764" end="27778" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690033" start="27803" end="27835" title="African military systems to 1800" label="African military systems to 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690032" start="27838" end="27873" title="African military systems after 1900" label="African military systems after 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857541" start="27876" end="27902" title="Military history of Africa" label="Military history of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="27905" end="27919" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104553848" start="27922" end="27952" title="Military of the Ashanti Empire" label="Military of the Ashanti Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857541" start="27955" end="27981" title="Military history of Africa" label="Military history of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="27984" end="27995" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857655" start="27998" end="28033" title="Military history of the Mali Empire" label="Military history of the Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796232" start="28036" end="28053" title="Kingdom of Ndongo" label="Kingdom of Ndongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q973988" start="28056" end="28074" title="Kingdom of Matamba" label="Kingdom of Matamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="28077" end="28093" title="Kingdom of Kongo" label="Kingdom of Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q467650" start="28096" end="28124" title="Nzinga of Ndongo and Matamba" label="Nzinga of Ndongo and Matamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752752" start="28127" end="28143" title="Battle of Mbwila" label="Battle of Mbwila"/>
<link wikidata="Q200056" start="28146" end="28160" title="Battle of Zama" label="Battle of Zama"/>
<link wikidata="Q747589" start="28163" end="28183" title="Battle of Isandlwana" label="Battle of Isandlwana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15175" wikidata="Q1471505" url="?curid=15175" title="Irish mythology">
<text>Irish mythology is the body of myths indigenous to the island of Ireland. It was originally passed down orally in the prehistoric era. In the early medieval era, myths were written down by Christian scribes, who Christianized them to some extent. Irish mythology is the best-preserved branch of Celtic mythology.

The myths are conventionally grouped into &#x27;cycles&#x27;. The Mythological Cycle consists of tales and poems about the god-like Tuatha Dé Danann, who are based on Ireland&#x27;s pagan deities, and other mythical races like the Fomorians. Important works in the cycle are the &quot;Lebor Gabála Érenn&quot; (&quot;Book of Invasions&quot;), a legendary history of Ireland, the &quot;Cath Maige Tuired&quot; (&quot;Battle of Moytura&quot;), and the &quot;Aided Chlainne Lir&quot; (&quot;Children of Lir&quot;). The Ulster Cycle consists of heroic legends relating to the Ulaid, the most important of which is the epic &quot;Táin Bó Cúailnge&quot; (&quot;Cattle Raid of Cooley&quot;). The Fenian Cycle focuses on the exploits of the mythical hero Finn and his warrior band the Fianna, including the lengthy &quot;Acallam na Senórach&quot; (&quot;Tales of the Elders&quot;). The Cycles of the Kings comprises legends about historical and semi-historical kings of Ireland (such as &quot;Buile Shuibhne&quot;, &quot;The Madness of King Sweeny&quot;), and tales about the origins of dynasties and peoples.

There are also mythological texts that do not fit into any of the cycles; these include the &quot;echtrai&quot; tales of journeys to the Otherworld (such as &quot;The Voyage of Bran&quot;), and the &quot;Dindsenchas&quot; (&quot;lore of places&quot;). Some written materials have not survived, and many more myths were likely never written down.

== Figures ==

=== Tuatha Dé Danann ===
The main supernatural beings in Irish mythology are the Tuatha Dé Danann (&quot;the folk of the goddess Danu&quot;), also known by the earlier name Tuath Dé (&quot;god folk&quot; or &quot;tribe of the gods&quot;). Early medieval Irish writers also called them the &quot;fir dé&quot; (god-men) and &quot;cenéla dé&quot; (god-kindreds), possibly to avoid calling them simply &#x27;gods&#x27;. They are often depicted as kings, queens, bards, warriors, heroes, healers and craftsmen who have supernatural powers and are immortal. Prominent members include The Dagda (&quot;the great god&quot;); The Morrígan (&quot;the great queen&quot; or &quot;phantom queen&quot;); Lugh; Nuada; Aengus; Brigid; Manannán; Dian Cécht the healer; and Goibniu the smith. They are also said to control the fertility of the land; the tale &quot;De Gabáil in t-Sída&quot; says the first Gaels had to establish friendship with the Tuath Dé before they could raise crops and herds.

They dwell in the Otherworld but interact with humans and the human world. Many are associated with specific places in the landscape, especially the &quot;sídhe&quot;: prominent ancient burial mounds such as Brú na Bóinne, which are entrances to Otherworld realms. The Tuath Dé can hide themselves with a &quot;féth fíada&quot; (&#x27;magic mist&#x27;). They are said to have travelled from the north of the world, but then were forced to live underground in the &quot;sídhe&quot; after the coming of the Irish.

In some tales, such as &quot;Baile in Scáil&quot;, kings receive affirmation of their legitimacy from one of the Tuath Dé, or a king&#x27;s right to rule is affirmed by an encounter with an otherworldly woman (see sovereignty goddess). The Tuath Dé can also bring doom to unrightful kings.

The medieval writers who wrote about the Tuath Dé were Christians. Sometimes they explained the Tuath Dé as fallen angels; neutral angels who sided neither with God nor Lucifer and were punished by being forced to dwell on the Earth; or ancient humans who had become highly skilled in magic. However, several writers acknowledged that at least some of them had been gods.

There is strong evidence that many of the Tuath Dé represent the gods of Irish paganism. The name itself means &quot;tribe of gods&quot;, and the ninth-century &quot;Scél Tuain meic Cairill&quot; (Tale of Tuan mac Cairill) speaks of the &quot;Tuath Dé ocus Andé&quot;, &quot;tribe of gods and un-gods&quot;. Goibniu, Credne and Luchta are called the &quot;trí dé dáno&quot;, &quot;three gods of craft&quot;. In &quot;Sanas Cormaic&quot; (Cormac&#x27;s Glossary), Anu is called &quot;mother of the Irish gods&quot;, Nét a &quot;god of war&quot;, and Brigid a &quot;goddess of poets&quot;. Writing in the seventh century, Tírechán explained the &quot;sídh&quot; folk as &quot;earthly gods&quot; (Latin &quot;dei terreni&quot;), while &quot;Fiacc&#x27;s Hymn&quot; says the Irish adored the &quot;sídh&quot; before the coming of Saint Patrick. Several of the Tuath Dé are cognate with ancient Celtic deities: Lugh with Lugus, Brigid with Brigantia, Nuada with Nodons, and Ogma with Ogmios.

Nevertheless, John Carey notes that it is not wholly accurate to describe all of them as gods in the medieval literature itself. He argues that the literary Tuath Dé are &quot;sui generis&quot;, and suggests &quot;immortals&quot; might be a more neutral term.

Many of the Tuath Dé are not defined by singular qualities, but are more of the nature of well-rounded humans, who have areas of special interests or skills like the druidic arts they learned before traveling to Ireland. In this way, they do not correspond directly to other pantheons such as those of the Greeks or Romans.

Irish goddesses or Otherworldly women are usually connected to the land, the waters, and sovereignty, and are often seen as the oldest ancestors of the people in the region or nation. They are maternal figures caring for the earth itself as well as their descendants, but also fierce defenders, teachers and warriors. The goddess Brigid is linked with poetry, healing, and smithing. Another is the Cailleach, said to have lived many lives that begin and end with her in stone formation. She is still celebrated at Ballycrovane Ogham Stone with offerings and the retelling of her life&#x27;s stories. The tales of the Cailleach connect her to both land and sea. Several Otherworldly women are associated with sacred sites where seasonal festivals are held. They include Macha of Eamhain Mhacha, Carman, and Tailtiu, among others.

Warrior goddesses are often depicted as a triad and connected with sovereignty and sacred animals. They guard the battlefield and those who do battle, and according to the stories in the &quot;Táin Bó Cúailnge&quot;, some of them may instigate and direct war themselves. The main goddesses of battle are The Morrígan, Macha, and Badb. Other warrior women are seen in the role of training warriors in the Fianna bands, such as Liath Luachra, one of the women who trained the hero Fionn mac Cumhaill. Zoomorphism is an important feature. Badb Catha, for instance, is &quot;the Raven of Battle&quot;, and in the &quot;Táin Bó Cúailnge&quot;, The Morrígan shapeshifts into an eel, a wolf, and a cow.

Irish gods are divided into four main groups. Group one encompasses the older gods of Gaul and Britain. The second group is the main focus of much of the mythology and surrounds the native Irish gods with their homes in burial mounds. The third group are the gods that dwell in the sea and the fourth group includes stories of the Otherworld. The gods that appear most often are the Dagda and Lugh. Some scholars have argued that the stories of these gods align with Greek stories and gods.

=== Fomorians ===

The Fomorians or Fomori () are a supernatural race, who are often portrayed as hostile and monstrous beings. Originally, they were said to come from under the sea or the earth. Later, they were portrayed as sea raiders, which was probably influenced by the Viking raids on Ireland around that time. Later still they were portrayed as giants. They are enemies of Ireland&#x27;s first settlers and opponents of the Tuatha Dé Danann, although some members of the two races have offspring. The Fomorians were viewed as the alter-egos to the Tuath Dé The Tuath Dé defeat the Fomorians in the &quot;Battle of Mag Tuired&quot;. This has been likened to other Indo-European myths of a war between gods, such as the Æsir and Vanir in Norse mythology and the Olympians and Titans in Greek mythology.

=== Heroes ===
Heroes in Irish mythology can be found in two distinct groups. There is the lawful hero who exists within the boundaries of the community, protecting their people from outsiders. Within the kin-group or &quot;tuath&quot;, heroes are human and gods are not.

The Fianna warrior bands are seen as outsiders, connected with the wilderness, youth, and liminal states. Their leader was called Fionn mac Cumhaill, and the first stories of him are told in fourth century. They are considered aristocrats and outsiders who protect the community from other outsiders; though they may winter with a settled community, they spend the summers living wild, training adolescents and providing a space for war-damaged veterans. The time of vagrancy for these youths is designated as a transition in life post puberty but pre-manhood. Manhood being identified as owning or inheriting property. They live under the authority of their own leaders, or may be somewhat anarchic, and may follow other deities or spirits than the settled communities.

The church refused to recognize this group as an institution and referred to them as &quot;sons of death&quot;.

=== Legendary creatures ===
The Oilliphéist is a sea-serpent-like monster in Irish mythology and folklore. These monsters were believed to inhabit many lakes and rivers in Ireland and there are legends of saints, especially St. Patrick, and heroes fighting them.

==Sources==

The three main manuscript sources for Irish mythology are the late 11th/early 12th century (Book of the Dun Cow), which is in the library of the Royal Irish Academy, and is the oldest surviving manuscript written entirely in the Irish language; the early 12th-century &quot;Book of Leinster&quot;, which is in the Library of Trinity College Dublin; and Bodleian Library, MS Rawlinson B 502 (&quot;Rawl.&quot;), which is in the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford. Despite the dates of these sources, most of the material they contain predates their composition.

Other important sources include a group of manuscripts that originated in the West of Ireland in the late 14th century or the early 15th century: &quot;The Yellow Book of Lecan&quot;, &quot;The Great Book of Lecan&quot; and &quot;The Book of Ballymote&quot;. The first of these is in the Library of Trinity College and the others are in the Royal Irish Academy. The Yellow Book of Lecan is composed of sixteen parts and includes the legends of Fionn Mac Cumhail, selections of legends of Irish Saints, and the earliest known version of the &quot;Táin Bó Cúailnge&quot; (&quot;The Cattle Raid of Cooley&quot;). This is one of Europe&#x27;s oldest epics written in a vernacular language. Other 15th-century manuscripts, such as &quot;The Book of Fermoy&quot;, also contain interesting materials, as do such later syncretic works such as Geoffrey Keating&#x27;s &quot;Foras Feasa ar Éirinn&quot; (&quot;The History of Ireland&quot;) (). These later compilers and writers may well have had access to manuscript sources that have since disappeared.

Most of these manuscripts were created by Christian monks, who may well have been torn between a desire to record their native culture and hostility to pagan beliefs, resulting in some of the gods being . Many of the later sources may also have formed parts of a propaganda effort designed to create a history for the people of Ireland that could bear comparison with the mythological descent of their British invaders from the founders of Rome, as promulgated by Geoffrey of Monmouth and others. There was also a tendency to rework Irish genealogies to fit them into the schemas of Greek or biblical genealogy.

Whether medieval Irish literature provides reliable evidence of oral tradition remains a matter for debate. Kenneth Jackson described the Ulster Cycle as a &quot;window on the Iron Age&quot;, and Garret Olmsted has attempted to draw parallels between &quot;Táin Bó Cuailnge&quot;, the Ulster Cycle epic and the iconography of the Gundestrup Cauldron. However, these &quot;nativist&quot; claims have been challenged by &quot;revisionist&quot; scholars who believe that much of the literature was created, rather than merely recorded, in Christian times, more or less in imitation of the epics of classical literature that came with Latin learning. The revisionists point to passages apparently influenced by the Iliad in &quot;Táin Bó Cuailnge&quot;, and to the &quot;Togail Troí&quot;, an Irish adaptation of Dares Phrygius&#x27; &quot;De excidio Troiae historia&quot;, found in the Book of Leinster. They also argue that the material culture depicted in the stories is generally closer to that of the time of their composition than to that of the distant past.

==Mythological Cycle==
The Mythological Cycle, comprising stories of the former gods and origins of the Irish, is the least well preserved of the four cycles. It is about the principal people who invaded and inhabited the island. The people include Cessair and her followers, the Formorians, the Partholinians, the Nemedians, the Firbolgs, the Tuatha Dé Danann, and the Milesians. The most important sources are the &quot;Metrical Dindshenchas&quot; or &quot;Lore of Places&quot; and the &quot;Lebor Gabála Érenn&quot; or &quot;Book of Invasions&quot;. Other manuscripts preserve such mythological tales as &quot;The Dream of Aengus&quot;, &quot;the Wooing of Étain&quot; and &quot;Cath Maige Tuireadh&quot;, &quot;the (second) Battle of Magh Tuireadh&quot;. One of the best known of all Irish stories, &quot;Oidheadh Clainne Lir&quot;, or &quot;The Tragedy of the Children of Lir&quot;, is also part of this cycle.

&quot;Lebor Gabála Érenn&quot; is a pseudo-history of Ireland, tracing the ancestry of the Irish back to before Noah. It tells of a series of invasions or &quot;takings&quot; of Ireland by a succession of peoples, the fifth of whom was the people known as the Tuatha Dé Danann (&quot;Peoples of the Goddess Danu&quot;), who were believed to have inhabited the island before the arrival of the Gaels, or Milesians. They faced opposition from their enemies, the Fomorians, led by Balor of the Evil Eye. Balor was eventually slain by Lugh Lámfada (Lugh of the Long Arm) at the second battle of Magh Tuireadh. With the arrival of the Gaels, the Tuatha Dé Danann retired underground to become the fairy people of later myth and legend.

The &quot;Metrical Dindshenchas&quot; is the great onomastics work of early Ireland, giving the naming legends of significant places in a sequence of poems. It includes a lot of important information on Mythological Cycle figures and stories, including the Battle of Tailtiu, in which the Tuatha Dé Danann were defeated by the Milesians.

By the Middle Ages, the Tuatha Dé Danann were not viewed so much as gods as the shape-shifting magician population of an earlier Golden Age Ireland. Texts such as &quot;Lebor Gabála Érenn&quot; and &quot;Cath Maige Tuireadh&quot; present them as kings and heroes of the distant past, complete with death-tales. However, there is considerable evidence, both in the texts and from the wider Celtic world, that they were once considered deities.

Even after they are displaced as the rulers of Ireland, characters such as Lugh, the Mórrígan, Aengus and Manannán Mac Lir appear in stories set centuries later, betraying their immortality. A poem in the Book of Leinster lists many of the Tuatha Dé, but ends &quot;Although [the author] enumerates them, he does not worship them&quot;. Goibniu, Creidhne and Luchta are referred to as &quot;Trí Dé Dána&quot; (&quot;three gods of craftsmanship&quot;), and the Dagda&#x27;s name is interpreted in medieval texts as &quot;the good god&quot;. Nuada is cognate with the British god Nodens; Lugh is a reflex of the pan-Celtic deity Lugus, the name of whom may indicate &quot;Light&quot;; Tuireann may be related to the Gaulish Taranis; Ogma to Ogmios; the Badb to Catubodua.

==Ulster Cycle==
The Ulster Cycle is traditionally set around the first century AD, and most of the action takes place in the provinces of Ulster and Connacht. It consists of a group of heroic tales dealing with the lives of Conchobar mac Nessa, king of Ulster, the great hero Cú Chulainn, who was the son of Lug (Lugh), and of their friends, lovers, and enemies. These are the Ulaid, or people of the North-Eastern corner of Ireland and the action of the stories centres round the royal court at Emain Macha (known in English as Navan Fort), close to the modern town of Armagh. The Ulaid had close links with the Irish colony in Scotland, and part of Cú Chulainn&#x27;s training takes place in that colony.

The cycle consists of stories of the births, early lives and training, wooing, battles, feastings, and deaths of the heroes. It also reflects a warrior society in which warfare consists mainly of single combats and wealth is measured mainly in cattle. These stories are written mainly in prose. The centerpiece of the Ulster Cycle is the &quot;Táin Bó Cúailnge&quot;. Other important Ulster Cycle tales include &quot;The Tragic Death of Aife&#x27;s only Son&quot;, &quot;Bricriu&#x27;s Feast&quot;, and &quot;The Destruction of Da Derga&#x27;s Hostel&quot;. &quot;The Exile of the Sons of Usnach&quot;, better known as the tragedy of Deirdre and the source of plays by John Millington Synge, William Butler Yeats, and Vincent Woods, is also part of this cycle.

This cycle is, in some respects, close to the mythological cycle. Some of the characters from the latter reappear, and the same sort of shape-shifting magic is much in evidence, side by side with a grim, almost callous realism. While we may suspect a few characters, such as Medb or Cú Roí, of once being deities, and Cú Chulainn in particular displays superhuman prowess, the characters are mortal and associated with a specific time and place. If the Mythological Cycle represents a Golden Age, the Ulster Cycle is Ireland&#x27;s Heroic Age.

==Fianna Cycle==
Like the Ulster Cycle, the Fianna Cycle or Fenian Cycle, also referred to as the Ossianic Cycle, is concerned with the deeds of Irish heroes. The stories of the Cycle appear to be set around the 3rd century and mainly in the provinces of Leinster and Munster. They differ from the other cycles in the strength of their links with the Gaelic-speaking community in Scotland and there are many extant texts from that country. They also differ from the Ulster Cycle in that the stories are told mainly in verse and that in tone they are nearer to the tradition of romance than the tradition of epic. The stories concern the doings of Fionn mac Cumhaill and his band of soldiers, the Fianna.

The single most important source for the Fianna Cycle is the &quot;Acallam na Senórach&quot; (&quot;Colloquy of the Old Men&quot;), which is found in two 15th century manuscripts, the &quot;Book of Lismore&quot; and Laud 610, as well as a 17th century manuscript from Killiney, County Dublin. The text is dated from linguistic evidence to the 12th century. The text records conversations between Caílte mac Rónáin and Oisín, the last surviving members of the Fianna, and Saint Patrick, and consists of about 8,000 lines. The late dates of the manuscripts may reflect a longer oral tradition for the Fenian stories.

The Fianna of the story are divided into the Clann Baiscne, led by Fionn mac Cumhaill (often rendered as &quot;Finn MacCool&quot;, Finn Son of Cumhall), and the Clann Morna, led by his enemy, Goll mac Morna. Goll killed Fionn&#x27;s father, Cumhal, in battle and the boy Fionn was brought up in secrecy. As a youth, while being trained in the art of poetry, he accidentally burned his thumb while cooking the Salmon of Knowledge, which allowed him to suck or bite his thumb to receive bursts of stupendous wisdom. He took his place as the leader of his band and numerous tales are told of their adventures. Two of the greatest of the Irish tales, &quot;Tóraigheacht Dhiarmada agus Ghráinne&quot; (&quot;The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Gráinne)&quot; and &quot;Oisín in Tír na nÓg&quot; form part of the cycle. The Diarmuid and Grainne story, which is one of the cycle&#x27;s few prose tales, is a probable source of &quot;Tristan and Iseult&quot;.

The world of the Fianna Cycle is one in which professional warriors spend their time hunting, fighting, and engaging in adventures in the spirit world. New entrants into the band are expected to be knowledgeable in poetry as well as undergo a number of physical tests or ordeals. Most of the poems are attributed to being composed by Oisín&quot;.&quot; This cycle creates a bridge between pre-Christian and Christian times.

==Kings&#x27; Cycle==

It was part of the duty of the medieval Irish bards, or court poets, to record the history of the family and the genealogy of the king they served. This they did in poems that blended the mythological and the historical to a greater or lesser degree. The resulting stories from what has come to be known as the Cycle of the Kings, or more correctly Cycles, as there are a number of independent groupings. This term is a more recent addition to the cycles, with it being coined in 1946 by Irish literary critic Myles Dillon.

The kings that are included range from the almost entirely mythological Labraid Loingsech, who allegedly became High King of Ireland around 431 BC, to the entirely historical Brian Boru. However, the greatest glory of the Kings&#x27; Cycle is the &quot;Buile Shuibhne&quot; (&quot;The Frenzy of Sweeney&quot;), a 12th century tale told in verse and prose. Suibhne, king of Dál nAraidi, was cursed by St. Ronan and became a kind of half-man, half bird, condemned to live out his life in the woods, fleeing from his human companions. The story has captured the imaginations of contemporary Irish poets and has been translated by Trevor Joyce and Seamus Heaney.

==Other tales==
===&quot;Eachtraí&quot;===
The adventures, or &quot;echtrae&quot;, are a group of stories of visits to the Irish Other World (which may be westward across the sea, underground, or simply invisible to mortals). The most famous, &quot;Oisin in Tir na nÓg&quot; belongs to the Fenian Cycle, but several free-standing adventures survive, including &quot;The Adventure of Conle&quot;, &quot;The Voyage of Bran mac Ferbail&quot;, and &quot;The Adventure of Lóegaire&quot;.

===&quot;Immrama&quot;===
The voyages, or &quot;immrama&quot;, are tales of sea journeys and the wonders seen on them that may have resulted from the combination of the experiences of fishermen combined and the Other World elements that inform the adventures. Of the seven &quot;immrama&quot; mentioned in the manuscripts, only three have survived: &quot;The Voyage of Máel Dúin&quot;, the &quot;Voyage of the Uí Chorra&quot;, and the &quot;Voyage of Snedgus and Mac Riagla&quot;. &quot;The Voyage of Mael Duin&quot; is the forerunner of the later &quot;Voyage of St. Brendan&quot;. While not as ancient, later 8th century AD works, that influenced European literature, include &quot;The Vision of Adamnán&quot;.

===Folk tales===

Although there are no written sources of Irish mythology, many stories are passed down orally through traditional storytelling. Some of these stories have been lost, but some Celtic regions continue to tell folktales to the modern-day. Folktales and stories were primarily preserved by monastic scribes from the bards of nobility. Once the noble houses started to decline, this tradition was put to an abrupt end. The bards passed the stories to their families, and the families would take on the oral tradition of storytelling.

During the first few years of the 20th century, Herminie Templeton Kavanagh wrote down many Irish folk tales, which she published in magazines and in two books. Twenty-six years after her death, the tales from her two books, &quot;Darby O&#x27;Gill and the Good People&quot; and &quot;Ashes of Old Wishes,&quot; were made into the film &quot;Darby O&#x27;Gill and the Little People&quot;. Noted Irish playwright Lady Gregory also collected folk stories to preserve Irish history. The Irish Folklore Commission gathered folk tales from the general Irish populace from 1935 onward.

== References ==

=== Citations ===

=== Sources ===

Primary sources in English translation

* Cross, Tom Peete and Clark Harris Slover. &quot;Ancient Irish Tales&quot;. Barnes and Noble Books, Totowa, New Jersey, 1936 repr. 1988. .
* Dillon, Myles. &quot;The Cycles of the Kings&quot;. Oxford University Press, 1946; reprinted Four Courts Press: Dublin and Portland, OR, 1994. .
* Dillon, Myles. &quot;Early Irish Literature&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948; reprinted : Four Courts Press, Dublin and Portland, OR, 1994. .
* Joseph Dunn: &quot;The Ancient Irish Epic Tale Táin Bó Cúailnge&quot; (1914)
* Winifred Faraday: &quot;The Cattle-Raid of Cualng&quot;. London, 1904. This is a partial translation of the text in the Yellow Book of Lecan, partially censored by Faraday.
* Gantz, Jeffrey. &quot;Early Irish Myths and Sagas&quot;. London: Penguin Books, 1981. .
* Gregory, Lady Augusta. &quot;Cuchulain of Muirtheme&quot;. First Published 1902.
* Kinsella, Thomas. &quot;The Tain&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970. .
* MacKillop, James. &quot;Dictionary of Celtic Mythology&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1990.
* Price, Bill. &quot;Celtic Myths&quot;, Oldcastle Books, 2011.

 Primary sources in Medieval Irish
* &quot;Cath Maige Tuired: The Second Battle of Mag Tuired&quot;. Elizabeth A. Gray, Ed. Dublin: Irish Texts Society, 1982. Series: Irish Texts Society (Series); v. 52. Irish text, English translation and philological notes.
* &quot;Táin Bo Cuailnge from the Book of Leinster&quot;. Cecile O&#x27;Rahilly, Ed. Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies, 1984.
* &quot;Táin Bo Cuailnge Recension I&quot;. Cecile O&#x27;Rahilly, Ed. Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies 1976. Irish text, English translation and philological notes.

Secondary sources
* Coghlan, Ronan &quot;Pocket Dictionary of Irish Myth and Legend&quot;. Belfast: Appletree, 1985.
* Mallory, J. P. Ed. &quot;Aspects of the Tain&quot;. Belfast: December Publications, 1992. .
* O hOgain, Daithi &quot;Myth, Legend and Romance: An Encyclopedia of the Irish Folk Tradition&quot; Prentice Hall Press, (1991) : (the only dictionary/encyclopedia with source references for every entry)
* O&#x27;Rahilly, T. F. &quot;Early Irish History and Mythology&quot; (1946)
* Rees, Brinley and Alwyn Rees. &quot;Celtic Heritage: Ancient Tradition in Ireland and Wales&quot;. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1961; repr. 1989. .
* Sjoestedt, M. L. &quot;Gods and Heroes of the Celts&quot;. 1949; translated by Myles Dillon. repr. Berkeley, CA: Turtle Press, 1990. .
* Williams, J. F. Caerwyn. &quot;Irish Literary History&quot;. Trans. Patrick K. Ford. University of Wales Press, Cardiff, Wales, and Ford and Bailie, Belmont, Massachusetts. Welsh edition 1958, English translation 1992. .

==Further reading==
*Clark, Rosalind (1991) &quot;The Great Queens: Irish Goddesses from the Morrigan to Cathleen ni Houlihan&quot;. Savage, MD, Barnes and Noble Books. 
*Danaher, Kevin (1972) &quot;The Year in Ireland&quot;. Dublin, Mercier. 
*Patterson, Nerys Thomas (1994) &quot;Cattle Lords and Clansmen: The Social Structure of Early Ireland&quot;. Notre Dame, IN, University of Notre Dame Press (2nd edition) 
*Power, Patrick C. (1976) &quot;Sex and Marriage in Ancient Ireland&quot;. Dublin, Mercier
*Smyth, Daragh (1988, 1996) &quot;A Guide to Irish Mythology&quot;. Dublin, Irish Academic Press

===Adaptions, collections, and retellings===
* James Bonwick, &quot;Irish Druids and Old Irish Religions&quot; (1894)
* Gregory Frost: &quot;Tain&quot; (1986), and &quot;Remscela&quot; (1988)
* Lady Augusta Gregory: &quot;Cuchulain of Muirthemne&quot; (1902), and &quot;Gods and Fighting Men&quot; (1904)
* Lenihan, Eddie and Carolyn Eve Green. &quot;Meeting the Other Crowd: The Fairy Stories of Hidden Ireland&quot;. New York. Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin. 2004. 
* Morgan Llywelyn: &quot;Red Branch&quot; (1989), &quot;Finn MacCool&quot; (1994), and &quot;&quot; (1984)
* Juliet Marillier: &quot;Daughter of the Forest&quot;, &quot;Son of the Shadows&quot;, and &quot;Child of the Prophecy&quot; (Sevenwaters trilogy, 1999–2001).
* James Stephens: &quot;Irish Fairy Tales&quot; (1920)
* Lady Francesca Speranza Wilde, &quot;Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland&quot; (1887)

==External links==

* Department of Irish Folklore, Dublin. Includes the National Folklore Archives
* The Celtic Literature Collection 
* Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts
* YouTube Channel Imaginaire Celtique : &quot;Irish Goddesses&quot;, with Noemie Beck, Associate Professor, University of Savoie-Mont Blanc.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="0" end="15" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="31" end="35" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="92" end="110" title="Oral tradition" label="passed down orally"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164217" start="118" end="133" title="Prehistoric Ireland" label="prehistoric era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449126" start="142" end="160" title="History of Ireland (795–1169)" label="early medieval era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326673" start="173" end="185" title="Early Irish literature" label="written down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="189" end="198" title="Celtic Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="295" end="311" title="Celtic mythology" label="Celtic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q867335" start="362" end="368" title="List of literary cycles" label="cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301005" start="380" end="398" title="Mythological Cycle" label="Mythological Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q654205" start="446" end="462" title="Tuatha Dé Danann" label="Tuatha Dé Danann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160687" start="545" end="554" title="Fomorians" label="Fomorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q374129" start="599" end="617" title="Lebor Gabála Érenn" label="Lebor Gabála Érenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="659" end="665" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q922685" start="699" end="716" title="Cath Maige Tuired" label="Cath Maige Tuired"/>
<link wikidata="Q977133" start="802" end="817" title="Children of Lir" label="Children of Lir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134199" start="830" end="842" title="Ulster Cycle" label="Ulster Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991460" start="886" end="891" title="Ulaid" label="Ulaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q399113" start="939" end="955" title="Táin Bó Cúailnge" label="Táin Bó Cúailnge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382460" start="1003" end="1015" title="Fenian Cycle" label="Fenian Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q382610" start="1061" end="1065" title="Fionn mac Cumhaill" label="Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q96386505" start="1074" end="1086" title="Kóryos" label="warrior band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001099" start="1091" end="1097" title="Fianna" label="Fianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q337619" start="1127" end="1146" title="Acallam na Senórach" label="Acallam na Senórach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577451" start="1192" end="1211" title="Cycles of the Kings" label="Cycles of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003037" start="1299" end="1313" title="Buile Shuibhne" label="Buile Shuibhne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383890" start="1515" end="1521" title="echtra" label="echtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q115007" start="1550" end="1564" title="Celtic Otherworld" label="the Otherworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q955059" start="1580" end="1598" title="The Voyage of Bran" label="The Voyage of Bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q258598" start="1621" end="1632" title="Dindsenchas" label="Dindsenchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q436436" start="2357" end="2366" title="The Dagda" label="The Dagda"/>
<link wikidata="Q828550" start="2396" end="2408" title="The Morrígan" label="The Morrígan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215683" start="2469" end="2473" title="Lugh" label="Lugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075322" start="2475" end="2480" title="Nuada Airgetlám" label="Nuada"/>
<link wikidata="Q544389" start="2482" end="2488" title="Aengus" label="Aengus"/>
<link wikidata="Q255459" start="2490" end="2496" title="Brigid" label="Brigid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888724" start="2498" end="2506" title="Manannán mac Lir" label="Manannán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194924" start="2508" end="2518" title="Dian Cécht" label="Dian Cécht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534409" start="2535" end="2542" title="Goibniu" label="Goibniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q115007" start="2779" end="2789" title="Celtic Otherworld" label="Otherworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="2947" end="2959" title="burial mound" label="burial mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q339489" start="2969" end="2982" title="Brú na Bóinne" label="Brú na Bóinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479599" start="3072" end="3082" title="féth fíada" label="féth fíada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126147" start="3303" end="3317" title="Baile in Scáil" label="Baile in Scáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417192" start="3488" end="3507" title="sovereignty goddess" label="sovereignty goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q581450" start="3673" end="3685" title="fallen angel" label="fallen angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q185498" start="3734" end="3741" title="Lucifer" label="Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="4017" end="4025" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q960423" start="4143" end="4159" title="Tuan mac Cairill" label="Tuan mac Cairill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139438" start="4255" end="4261" title="Credne" label="Credne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873226" start="4266" end="4272" title="Luchta" label="Luchta"/>
<link wikidata="Q928400" start="4355" end="4368" title="Sanas Cormaic" label="Sanas Cormaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143975" start="4376" end="4389" title="Cormac mac Cuilennáin" label="Cormac&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q612156" start="4401" end="4404" title="Anu (Irish goddess)" label="Anu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483114" start="4453" end="4456" title="Nét" label="Nét"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001296" start="4558" end="4566" title="Tírechán" label="Tírechán"/>
<link wikidata="Q165479" start="4764" end="4777" title="Saint Patrick" label="Saint Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="4807" end="4814" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q263031" start="4820" end="4834" title="Ancient Celtic religion" label="ancient Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821380" start="4854" end="4859" title="Lugus" label="Lugus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399058" start="4873" end="4882" title="Brigantia (goddess)" label="Brigantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187294" start="4895" end="4901" title="Nodons" label="Nodons"/>
<link wikidata="Q279872" start="4907" end="4911" title="Ogma" label="Ogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399542" start="4917" end="4923" title="Ogmios" label="Ogmios"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225121" start="4940" end="4950" title="John Carey (Celticist)" label="John Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311290" start="5102" end="5113" title="sui generis" label="sui generis"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="5493" end="5499" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5503" end="5509" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q255459" start="5842" end="5848" title="Brigid" label="Brigid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025867" start="5910" end="5919" title="Cailleach" label="Cailleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q805400" start="6026" end="6050" title="Ballycrovane Ogham Stone" label="Ballycrovane Ogham Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072038" start="6281" end="6286" title="Macha" label="Macha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274963" start="6290" end="6304" title="Eamhain Mhacha" label="Eamhain Mhacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855504" start="6306" end="6312" title="Carman" label="Carman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783814" start="6318" end="6325" title="Tailtiu" label="Tailtiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q399113" start="6535" end="6551" title="Táin Bó Cúailnge" label="Táin Bó Cúailnge"/>
<link wikidata="Q798840" start="6671" end="6675" title="Badb" label="Badb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540295" start="6768" end="6781" title="Liath Luachra" label="Liath Luachra"/>
<link wikidata="Q382610" start="6821" end="6839" title="Fionn mac Cumhaill" label="Fionn mac Cumhaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q220304" start="6841" end="6852" title="Zoomorphism" label="Zoomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="7125" end="7129" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160687" start="7554" end="7563" title="Fomorians" label="Fomorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449126" start="7807" end="7830" title="History of Ireland (800–1169)" label="Viking raids on Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q374129" start="7927" end="7941" title="Lebor Gabála Érenn" label="first settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q922685" start="8143" end="8163" title="Cath Maige Tuired" label="Battle of Mag Tuired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401124" start="8202" end="8221" title="Proto-Indo-European mythology" label="Indo-European myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193026" start="8257" end="8271" title="Æsir–Vanir War" label="Æsir and Vanir"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="8275" end="8290" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q220878" start="8299" end="8319" title="Titanomachy" label="Olympians and Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="8323" end="8338" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463598" start="8565" end="8570" title="tuath" label="tuath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001099" start="8618" end="8624" title="Fianna" label="Fianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081489" start="9531" end="9542" title="Oilliphéist" label="Oilliphéist"/>
<link wikidata="Q110587" start="9921" end="9940" title="Royal Irish Academy" label="Royal Irish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q892989" start="10050" end="10066" title="Book of Leinster" label="Book of Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q856559" start="10090" end="10097" title="Trinity College Library, Dublin" label="Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="10101" end="10123" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936651" start="10129" end="10165" title="Bodleian Library, MS Rawlinson B 502" label="Bodleian Library, MS Rawlinson B 502"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="10203" end="10219" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="10227" end="10247" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567740" start="10504" end="10524" title="Yellow Book of Lecan" label="Yellow Book of Lecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584419" start="10542" end="10561" title="Great Book of Lecan" label="Great Book of Lecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q892979" start="10582" end="10599" title="Book of Ballymote" label="Book of Ballymote"/>
<link wikidata="Q399113" start="10894" end="10910" title="Táin Bó Cúailnge" label="Táin Bó Cúailnge"/>
<link wikidata="Q733922" start="11183" end="11199" title="Geoffrey Keating" label="Geoffrey Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="11445" end="11449" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="11857" end="11877" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="12070" end="12084" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058259" start="12114" end="12129" title="Kenneth H. Jackson" label="Kenneth Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q399113" start="12263" end="12279" title="Táin Bó Cuailnge" label="Táin Bó Cuailnge"/>
<link wikidata="Q721657" start="12336" end="12355" title="Gundestrup Cauldron" label="Gundestrup Cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="12592" end="12596" title="Epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="12601" end="12621" title="classical literature" label="classical literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12637" end="12642" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="12717" end="12722" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="12815" end="12829" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares Phrygius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301005" start="13096" end="13114" title="Mythological Cycle" label="Mythological Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q654205" start="13413" end="13429" title="Tuatha Dé Danann" label="Tuatha Dé Danann"/>
<link wikidata="Q258598" start="13491" end="13512" title="Metrical Dindshenchas" label="Metrical Dindshenchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q374129" start="13563" end="13581" title="Lebor Gabála Érenn" label="Lebor Gabála Érenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q638299" start="13682" end="13701" title="Bodb Derg" label="The Dream of Aengus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13715" end="13734" title="the Wooing of Étain" label="the Wooing of Étain"/>
<link wikidata="Q922685" start="13751" end="13770" title="Cath Maige Tuireadh" label="Cath Maige Tuireadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q977133" start="13915" end="13949" title="Children of Lir" label="The Tragedy of the Children of Lir"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="14098" end="14102" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q654205" start="14246" end="14262" title="Tuatha Dé Danann" label="Tuatha Dé Danann"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="14379" end="14384" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q779354" start="14389" end="14398" title="Milesians (Irish)" label="Milesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160687" start="14446" end="14455" title="Fomorians" label="Fomorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q805514" start="14464" end="14469" title="Balor" label="Balor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215683" start="14517" end="14529" title="Lugh" label="Lugh Lámfada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="14678" end="14683" title="fairy" label="fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q175156" start="14769" end="14778" title="onomastic" label="onomastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="15186" end="15196" title="Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="15491" end="15498" title="deity" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q215683" start="15576" end="15580" title="Lugh" label="Lugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q828550" start="15586" end="15594" title="Mórrígan" label="Mórrígan"/>
<link wikidata="Q544389" start="15596" end="15602" title="Aengus" label="Aengus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888724" start="15607" end="15623" title="Manannán mac Lir" label="Manannán Mac Lir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534409" start="15838" end="15845" title="Goibniu" label="Goibniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139438" start="15847" end="15855" title="Creidhne" label="Creidhne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873226" start="15860" end="15866" title="Luchta" label="Luchta"/>
<link wikidata="Q436436" start="15961" end="15966" title="Dagda" label="Dagda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="15997" end="16005" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075322" start="16041" end="16046" title="Nuada" label="Nuada"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="16050" end="16057" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q435405" start="16067" end="16074" title="Prehistoric Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187294" start="16079" end="16085" title="Nodens" label="Nodens"/>
<link wikidata="Q215683" start="16087" end="16091" title="Lugh" label="Lugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="16115" end="16119" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821380" start="16128" end="16133" title="Lugus" label="Lugus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297836" start="16184" end="16192" title="Tuireann" label="Tuireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q29977" start="16215" end="16222" title="Gaulish" label="Gaulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q250060" start="16223" end="16230" title="Taranis" label="Taranis"/>
<link wikidata="Q279872" start="16232" end="16236" title="Ogma" label="Ogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399542" start="16240" end="16246" title="Ogmios" label="Ogmios"/>
<link wikidata="Q798840" start="16252" end="16256" title="Badb" label="Badb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051136" start="16260" end="16269" title="Catubodua" label="Catubodua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134199" start="16293" end="16305" title="Ulster Cycle" label="Ulster Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="16411" end="16417" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="16422" end="16430" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124002" start="16497" end="16516" title="Conchobar mac Nessa" label="Conchobar mac Nessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q211955" start="16549" end="16560" title="Cú Chulainn" label="Cú Chulainn"/>
<link wikidata="Q215683" start="16586" end="16590" title="Lugh" label="Lugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991460" start="16650" end="16655" title="Ulaid" label="Ulaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274963" start="16769" end="16780" title="Emain Macha" label="Emain Macha"/>
<link wikidata="Q193452" start="16843" end="16849" title="Armagh" label="Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q399113" start="17325" end="17341" title="Táin Bó Cúailnge" label="Táin Bó Cúailnge"/>
<link wikidata="Q403966" start="17398" end="17438" title="Aided Óenfhir Aífe" label="The Tragic Death of Aife&amp;#x27;s only Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427673" start="17452" end="17472" title="Bricriu&amp;#x27;s Feast" label="Bricriu&amp;#x27;s Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532429" start="17490" end="17531" title="The Destruction of Da Derga&amp;#x27;s Hostel" label="The Destruction of Da Derga&amp;#x27;s Hostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183379" start="17615" end="17622" title="Deirdre" label="Deirdre"/>
<link wikidata="Q213447" start="17650" end="17671" title="John Millington Synge" label="John Millington Synge"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="17673" end="17693" title="William Butler Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932115" start="17699" end="17712" title="Vincent Woods" label="Vincent Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141828" start="18018" end="18022" title="Medb" label="Medb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151065" start="18026" end="18032" title="Cú Roí" label="Cú Roí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282614" start="18275" end="18285" title="Heroic Age (literary theory)" label="Heroic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="18543" end="18551" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438" start="18556" end="18563" title="Munster" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="18806" end="18811" title="Meter (poetry)" label="verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q382610" start="18935" end="18953" title="Fionn mac Cumhaill" label="Fionn mac Cumhaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001099" start="18984" end="18990" title="Fianna" label="Fianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q337619" start="19060" end="19079" title="Acallam na Senórach" label="Acallam na Senórach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371647" start="19183" end="19198" title="Book of Lismore" label="Book of Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435120" start="19261" end="19269" title="Killiney" label="Killiney"/>
<link wikidata="Q173500" start="19271" end="19284" title="County Dublin" label="County Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q139050" start="19389" end="19406" title="Caílte mac Rónáin" label="Caílte mac Rónáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016937" start="19411" end="19416" title="Oisín" label="Oisín"/>
<link wikidata="Q165479" start="19464" end="19477" title="Saint Patrick" label="Saint Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536572" start="19801" end="19815" title="Goll mac Morna" label="Goll mac Morna"/>
<link wikidata="Q958405" start="19850" end="19856" title="Cumhal" label="Cumhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209165" start="20262" end="20298" title="The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Gráinne" label="Tóraigheacht Dhiarmada agus Ghráinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209165" start="20327" end="20335" title="The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Gráinne" label="Diarmuid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551263" start="20340" end="20347" title="Gráinne" label="Gráinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463952" start="20374" end="20384" title="Tír na nÓg" label="Tír na nÓg"/>
<link wikidata="Q335367" start="20527" end="20545" title="Tristan and Iseult" label="Tristan and Iseult"/>
<link wikidata="Q580340" start="21064" end="21069" title="Irish poetry" label="poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404138" start="21512" end="21524" title="Myles Dillon" label="Myles Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272001" start="21599" end="21616" title="Labraid Loingsech" label="Labraid Loingsech"/>
<link wikidata="Q272498" start="21702" end="21712" title="Brian Boru" label="Brian Boru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003037" start="21780" end="21794" title="Buile Shuibhne" label="Buile Shuibhne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526751" start="21900" end="21911" title="Dál nAraidi" label="Dál nAraidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967566" start="22154" end="22166" title="Trevor Joyce" label="Trevor Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="22171" end="22184" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383890" start="22255" end="22262" title="echtrae" label="echtrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q115007" start="22310" end="22327" title="Celtic Otherworld" label="Irish Other World"/>
<link wikidata="Q955059" start="22589" end="22619" title="The Voyage of Bran" label="The Voyage of Bran mac Ferbail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711308" start="22654" end="22662" title="Lóegaire" label="Lóegaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624727" start="22719" end="22726" title="immrama" label="immrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163136" start="23026" end="23049" title="The Voyage of Máel Dúin" label="The Voyage of Máel Dúin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773127" start="23067" end="23090" title="Voyage of the Uí Chorra" label="Voyage of the Uí Chorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878485" start="23112" end="23144" title="Voyage of Snedgus and Mac Riagla" label="Voyage of Snedgus and Mac Riagla"/>
<link wikidata="Q208961" start="23225" end="23246" title="Brendan the Navigator" label="Voyage of St. Brendan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021697" start="23355" end="23376" title="The Vision of Adamnán" label="The Vision of Adamnán"/>
<link wikidata="Q215144" start="23715" end="23719" title="bard" label="bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15522437" start="23981" end="24008" title="Herminie Templeton Kavanagh" label="Herminie Templeton Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168073" start="24275" end="24314" title="Darby O&amp;#x27;Gill and the Little People" label="Darby O&amp;#x27;Gill and the Little People"/>
<link wikidata="Q239540" start="24345" end="24357" title="Lady Gregory" label="Lady Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154460" start="24417" end="24442" title="Irish Folklore Commission" label="Irish Folklore Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056389" start="26044" end="26065" title="Cecile O&amp;#x27;Rahilly" label="Cecile O&amp;#x27;Rahilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151953" start="26071" end="26108" title="Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies" label="Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678158" start="26706" end="26727" title="T. F. O&amp;#x27;Rahilly" label="O&amp;#x27;Rahilly, T. F."/>
<link wikidata="Q13126247" start="26783" end="26796" title="Brinley Rees" label="Rees, Brinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13125473" start="26801" end="26811" title="Alwyn Rees" label="Alwyn Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195688" start="27463" end="27477" title="Kevin Danaher" label="Danaher, Kevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129997" start="27944" end="27957" title="James Bonwick" label="James Bonwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116368" start="28017" end="28030" title="Gregory Frost" label="Gregory Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q239540" start="28091" end="28111" title="Lady Gregory" label="Lady Augusta Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862976" start="28362" end="28377" title="Morgan Llywelyn" label="Morgan Llywelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303786" start="28385" end="28395" title="Red Branch (novel)" label="Red Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823983" start="28416" end="28428" title="Finn Mac Cool (novel)" label="Finn MacCool"/>
<link wikidata="Q460187" start="28469" end="28485" title="Juliet Marillier" label="Juliet Marillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235157" start="28493" end="28515" title="Daughter of the Forest" label="Daughter of the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q10339147" start="28529" end="28547" title="Son of the Shadows" label="Son of the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097899" start="28565" end="28586" title="Child of the Prophecy" label="Child of the Prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q508101" start="28629" end="28643" title="James Stephens (author)" label="James Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070722" start="28651" end="28668" title="Irish Fairy Tales" label="Irish Fairy Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q272303" start="28684" end="28713" title="Jane Wilde" label="Lady Francesca Speranza Wilde"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15176" wikidata="Q43183" url="?curid=15176" title="Insurance">
<text>Insurance is a means of protection from financial loss in which, in exchange for a fee, a party agrees to compensate another party in the event of a certain loss, damage, or injury. It is a form of risk management, primarily used to protect against the risk of a contingent or uncertain loss.

An entity which provides insurance is known as an insurer, insurance company, insurance carrier, or underwriter. A person or entity who buys insurance is known as a policyholder, while a person or entity covered under the policy is called an insured. The insurance transaction involves the policyholder assuming a guaranteed, known, and relatively small loss in the form of a payment to the insurer (a premium) in exchange for the insurer&#x27;s promise to compensate the insured in the event of a covered loss. The loss may or may not be financial, but it must be reducible to financial terms. Furthermore, it usually involves something in which the insured has an insurable interest established by ownership, possession, or pre-existing relationship.

The insured receives a contract, called the insurance policy, which details the conditions and circumstances under which the insurer will compensate the insured, or their designated beneficiary or assignee. The amount of money charged by the insurer to the policyholder for the coverage set forth in the insurance policy is called the premium. If the insured experiences a loss which is potentially covered by the insurance policy, the insured submits a claim to the insurer for processing by a claims adjuster. A mandatory out-of-pocket expense required by an insurance policy before an insurer will pay a claim is called a deductible (or if required by a health insurance policy, a copayment). The insurer may hedge its own risk by taking out reinsurance, whereby another insurance company agrees to carry some of the risks, especially if the primary insurer deems the risk too large for it to carry.

==History==
===Early methods===

Methods for transferring or distributing risk were practiced by Chinese and Indian traders as long ago as the 3rd and 2nd millennia BC, respectively. Chinese merchants travelling treacherous river rapids would redistribute their wares across many vessels to limit the loss due to any single vessel capsizing.

&quot;Codex Hammurabi&quot; Law 238 (c. 1755–1750 BC) stipulated that a sea captain, ship-manager, or ship charterer that saved a ship from total loss was only required to pay one-half the value of the ship to the ship-owner. In the &quot;Digesta seu Pandectae&quot; (533), the second volume of the codification of laws ordered by Justinian I (527–565), a legal opinion written by the Roman jurist Paulus in 235 AD was included about the &quot;Lex Rhodia&quot; (&quot;Rhodian law&quot;). It articulates the general average principle of marine insurance established on the island of Rhodes in approximately 1000 to 800 BC, plausibly by the Phoenicians during the proposed Dorian invasion and emergence of the purported Sea Peoples during the Greek Dark Ages (c. 1100–c. 750).

The law of general average is the fundamental principle that underlies all insurance. In 1816, an archeological excavation in Minya, Egypt produced a Nerva–Antonine dynasty-era tablet from the ruins of the Temple of Antinous in Antinoöpolis, Aegyptus. The tablet prescribed the rules and membership dues of a burial society collegium established in Lanuvium, Italia in approximately 133 AD during the reign of Hadrian (117–138) of the Roman Empire. In 1851 AD, future U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Joseph P. Bradley (1870–1892 AD), once employed as an actuary for the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, submitted an article to the &quot;Journal of the Institute of Actuaries&quot;. His article detailed an historical account of a Severan dynasty-era life table compiled by the Roman jurist Ulpian in approximately 220 AD that was also included in the &quot;Digesta&quot;.

Concepts of insurance has been also found in 3rd century BC Hindu scriptures such as Dharmasastra, Arthashastra and Manusmriti. The ancient Greeks had marine loans. Money was advanced on a ship or cargo, to be repaid with large interest if the voyage prospers. However, the money would not be repaid at all if the ship were lost, thus making the rate of interest high enough to pay for not only for the use of the capital but also for the risk of losing it (fully described by Demosthenes). Loans of this character have ever since been common in maritime lands under the name of bottomry and respondentia bonds.

The direct insurance of sea-risks for a premium paid independently of loans began in Belgium about 1300 AD.

Separate insurance contracts (i.e., insurance policies not bundled with loans or other kinds of contracts) were invented in Genoa in the 14th century, as were insurance pools backed by pledges of landed estates. The first known insurance contract dates from Genoa in 1347. In the next century, maritime insurance developed widely, and premiums were varied with risks. These new insurance contracts allowed insurance to be separated from investment, a separation of roles that first proved useful in marine insurance.

The earliest known policy of life insurance was made in the Royal Exchange, London, on 18 June 1583, for £383, 6s. 8d. for twelve months on the life of William Gibbons.

===Modern methods===
Insurance became far more sophisticated in Enlightenment-era Europe, where specialized varieties developed.

Property insurance as we know it today can be traced to the Great Fire of London, which in 1666 devoured more than 13,000 houses. The devastating effects of the fire converted the development of insurance &quot;from a matter of convenience into one of urgency, a change of opinion reflected in Sir Christopher Wren&#x27;s inclusion of a site for &quot;the Insurance Office&quot; in his new plan for London in 1667.&quot; A number of attempted fire insurance schemes came to nothing, but in 1681, economist Nicholas Barbon and eleven associates established the first fire insurance company, the &quot;Insurance Office for Houses&quot;, at the back of the Royal Exchange to insure brick and frame homes. Initially, 5,000 homes were insured by his Insurance Office.

At the same time, the first insurance schemes for the underwriting of business ventures became available. By the end of the seventeenth century, London&#x27;s growth as a centre for trade was increasing due to the demand for marine insurance. In the late 1680s, Edward Lloyd opened a coffee house, which became the meeting place for parties in the shipping industry wishing to insure cargoes and ships, including those willing to underwrite such ventures. These informal beginnings led to the establishment of the insurance market Lloyd&#x27;s of London and several related shipping and insurance businesses.

Life insurance policies were taken out in the early 18th century. The first company to offer life insurance was the Amicable Society for a Perpetual Assurance Office, founded in London in 1706 by William Talbot and Sir Thomas Allen. Upon the same principle, Edward Rowe Mores established the Society for Equitable Assurances on Lives and Survivorship in 1762.

It was the world&#x27;s first mutual insurer and it pioneered age based premiums based on mortality rate laying &quot;the framework for scientific insurance practice and development&quot; and &quot;the basis of modern life assurance upon which all life assurance schemes were subsequently based.&quot;

In the late 19th century &quot;accident insurance&quot; began to become available. The first company to offer accident insurance was the Railway Passengers Assurance Company, formed in 1848 in England to insure against the rising number of fatalities on the nascent railway system. 

The first international insurance rule was the York Antwerp Rules (YAR) for the distribution of costs between ship and cargo in the event of general average. In 1873 the &quot;Association for the Reform and Codification of the Law of Nations&quot;, the forerunner of the International Law Association (ILA), was founded in Brussels. It published the first YAR in 1890, before switching to the present title of the &quot;International Law Association&quot; in 1895.

By the late 19th century governments began to initiate national insurance programs against sickness and old age. Germany built on a tradition of welfare programs in Prussia and Saxony that began as early as in the 1840s. In the 1880s Chancellor Otto von Bismarck introduced old age pensions, accident insurance and medical care that formed the basis for Germany&#x27;s welfare state. In Britain more extensive legislation was introduced by the Liberal government in the National Insurance Act 1911. This gave the British working classes the first contributory system of insurance against illness and unemployment. This system was greatly expanded after the Second World War under the influence of the Beveridge Report, to form the first modern welfare state.

In 2008, the International Network of Insurance Associations (INIA), then an informal network, became active and it has been succeeded by the Global Federation of Insurance Associations (GFIA), which was formally founded in 2012 to aim to increase insurance industry effectiveness in providing input to international regulatory bodies and to contribute more effectively to the international dialogue on issues of common interest. It consists of its 40 member associations and 1 observer association in 67 countries, which companies account for around 89% of total insurance premiums worldwide.

==Principles==
Insurance involves pooling funds from &quot;many&quot; insured entities (known as exposures) to pay for the losses that only some insureds may incur. The insured entities are therefore protected from risk for a fee, with the fee being dependent upon the frequency and severity of the event occurring. In order to be an insurable risk, the risk insured against must meet certain characteristics. Insurance as a financial intermediary is a commercial enterprise and a major part of the financial services industry, but individual entities can also self-insure through saving money for possible future losses.

===Insurability===
Risk which can be insured by private companies typically share seven common characteristics:

# A large number of similar exposure units: Since insurance operates through pooling resources, the majority of insurance policies cover individual members of large classes, allowing insurers to benefit from the law of large numbers in which predicted losses are similar to the actual losses. Exceptions include Lloyd&#x27;s of London, which is famous for insuring the life or health of actors, sports figures, and other famous individuals. However, all exposures will have distinct differences, which may lead to different premium rates.
# Definite loss: This type of loss takes place at a known time and place from a known cause. The classic example involves the death of an insured person on a life insurance policy. Fire, automobile accidents, and worker injuries may all easily meet this criterion. Other types of losses may only be definite in theory. Occupational disease, for instance, may involve prolonged exposure to injurious conditions where no specific time, place, or cause is identifiable. Ideally, the time, place, and cause of a loss should be clear enough that a reasonable person, with sufficient information, could objectively verify all three elements.
# Accidental loss: The event that constitutes the trigger of a claim should be fortuitous, or at least outside the control of the beneficiary of the insurance. The loss should be pure because it results from an event for which there is only the opportunity for cost. Events that contain speculative elements such as ordinary business risks or even purchasing a lottery ticket are generally not considered insurable.
# Large loss: The size of the loss must be meaningful from the perspective of the insured. Insurance premiums need to cover both the expected cost of losses, plus the cost of issuing and administering the policy, adjusting losses, and supplying the capital needed to reasonably assure that the insurer will be able to pay claims. For small losses, these latter costs may be several times the size of the expected cost of losses. There is hardly any point in paying such costs unless the protection offered has real value to a buyer.
# Affordable premium: If the likelihood of an insured event is so high, or the cost of the event so large, that the resulting premium is large relative to the amount of protection offered, then it is not likely that insurance will be purchased, even if on offer. Furthermore, as the accounting profession formally recognizes in financial accounting standards, the premium cannot be so large that there is not a reasonable chance of a significant loss to the insurer. Suppose there is no such chance of loss. In that case, the transaction may have the form of insurance, but not the substance (see the U.S. Financial Accounting Standards Board pronouncement number 113: &quot;Accounting and Reporting for Reinsurance of Short-Duration and Long-Duration Contracts&quot;).
# Calculable loss: There are two elements that must be at least estimable, if not formally calculable: the probability of loss and the attendant cost. Probability of loss is generally an empirical exercise, while cost has more to do with the ability of a reasonable person in possession of a copy of the insurance policy and a proof of loss associated with a claim presented under that policy to make a reasonably definite and objective evaluation of the amount of the loss recoverable as a result of the claim.
# Limited risk of catastrophically large losses: Insurable losses are ideally independent and non-catastrophic, meaning that the losses do not happen all at once and that individual losses are not severe enough to bankrupt the insurer; insurers may prefer to limit their exposure to a loss from a single event to some small portion of their capital base. Capital constrains insurers&#x27; ability to sell earthquake insurance as well as wind insurance in hurricane zones. In the United States, the federal government insures flood risk in specifically identified areas. In commercial fire insurance, it is possible to find single properties whose total exposed value is well in excess of any individual insurer&#x27;s capital constraint. Such properties are generally shared among several insurers or are insured by a single insurer which syndicates the risk into the reinsurance market.

===Legal===
When a company insures an individual entity, there are basic legal requirements and regulations. Several commonly cited legal principles of insurance include:
# Indemnity – the insurance company indemnifies or compensates the insured in the case of certain losses only up to the insured&#x27;s interest.
# Benefit insurance – as it is stated in the study books of The Chartered Insurance Institute, the insurance company does not have the right of recovery from the party who caused the injury and must compensate the Insured regardless of the fact that Insured had already sued the negligent party for the damages (for example, personal accident insurance)
# Insurable interest – the insured typically must directly suffer from the loss. Insurable interest must exist whether property insurance or insurance on a person is involved. The concept requires that the insured have a &quot;stake&quot; in the loss or damage to the life or property insured. What that &quot;stake&quot; is will be determined by the kind of insurance involved and the nature of the property ownership or relationship between the persons. The requirement of an insurable interest is what distinguishes insurance from gambling.
# Utmost good faith – (Uberrima fides) the insured and the insurer are bound by a good faith bond of honesty and fairness. Material facts must be disclosed.
# Contribution – insurers, which have similar obligations to the insured, contribute in the indemnification, according to some method.
# Subrogation – the insurance company acquires legal rights to pursue recoveries on behalf of the insured; for example, the insurer may sue those liable for the insured&#x27;s loss. The Insurers can waive their subrogation rights by using the special clauses.
# Causa proxima, or proximate cause – the cause of loss (the peril) must be covered under the insuring agreement of the policy, and the dominant cause must not be excluded
# Mitigation – In case of any loss or casualty, the asset owner must attempt to keep loss to a minimum, as if the asset was not insured.

===Indemnification===
To &quot;indemnify&quot; means to make whole again, or to be reinstated to the position that one was in, to the extent possible, prior to the happening of a specified event or peril. Accordingly, life insurance is generally not considered to be indemnity insurance, but rather &quot;contingent&quot; insurance (i.e., a claim arises on the occurrence of a specified event). There are generally three types of insurance contracts that seek to indemnify an insured:
# A &quot;reimbursement&quot; policy
# A &quot;pay on behalf&quot; or &quot;on behalf of policy&quot;
# An &quot;indemnification&quot; policy

From an insured&#x27;s standpoint, the result is usually the same: the insurer pays the loss and claims expenses.

If the Insured has a &quot;reimbursement&quot; policy, the insured can be required to pay for a loss and then be &quot;reimbursed&quot; by the insurance carrier for the loss and out of pocket costs including, with the permission of the insurer, claim expenses.

Under a &quot;pay on behalf&quot; policy, the insurance carrier would defend and pay a claim on behalf of the insured who would not be out of pocket for anything. Most modern liability insurance is written on the basis of &quot;pay on behalf&quot; language, which enables the insurance carrier to manage and control the claim.

Under an &quot;indemnification&quot; policy, the insurance carrier can generally either &quot;reimburse&quot; or &quot;pay on behalf of&quot;, whichever is more beneficial to it and the insured in the claim handling process.

An entity seeking to transfer risk (an individual, corporation, or association of any type, etc.) becomes the &quot;insured&quot; party once risk is assumed by an &quot;insurer&quot;, the insuring party, by means of a contract, called an insurance policy. Generally, an insurance contract includes, at a minimum, the following elements: identification of participating parties (the insurer, the insured, the beneficiaries), the premium, the period of coverage, the particular loss event covered, the amount of coverage (i.e., the amount to be paid to the insured or beneficiary in the event of a loss), and exclusions (events not covered). An insured is thus said to be &quot;indemnified&quot; against the loss covered in the policy.

When insured parties experience a loss for a specified peril, the coverage entitles the policyholder to make a claim against the insurer for the covered amount of loss as specified by the policy. The fee paid by the insured to the insurer for assuming the risk is called the premium. Insurance premiums from many insureds are used to fund accounts reserved for later payment of claims – in theory for a relatively few claimants – and for overhead costs. So long as an insurer maintains adequate funds set aside for anticipated losses (called reserves), the remaining margin is an insurer&#x27;s profit.

===Exclusions===
Policies typically include a number of exclusions, for example:
* Nuclear exclusion clause, excluding damage caused by nuclear and radiation accidents
* War exclusion clause, excluding damage from acts of war or terrorism.

Insurers may prohibit certain activities which are considered dangerous and therefore excluded from coverage. One system for classifying activities according to whether they are authorised by insurers refers to &quot;green light&quot; approved activities and events, &quot;yellow light&quot; activities and events which require insurer consultation and/or waivers of liability, and &quot;red light&quot; activities and events which are prohibited and outside the scope of insurance cover.

==Social effects==
Insurance can have various effects on society through the way that it changes who bears the cost of losses and damage. On one hand it can increase fraud; on the other it can help societies and individuals prepare for catastrophes and mitigate the effects of catastrophes on both households and societies.

Insurance can influence the probability of losses through moral hazard, insurance fraud, and preventive steps by the insurance company. Insurance scholars have typically used moral hazard to refer to the increased loss due to unintentional carelessness and insurance fraud to refer to increased risk due to intentional carelessness or indifference. Insurers attempt to address carelessness through inspections, policy provisions requiring certain types of maintenance, and possible discounts for loss mitigation efforts. While in theory insurers could encourage investment in loss reduction, some commentators have argued that in practice insurers had historically not aggressively pursued loss control measures—particularly to prevent disaster losses such as hurricanes—because of concerns over rate reductions and legal battles. However, since about 1996 insurers have begun to take a more active role in loss mitigation, such as through building codes.

===Methods of insurance===
According to the study books of The Chartered Insurance Institute, there are variant methods of insurance as follows:
# Co-insurance – risks shared between insurers (sometimes referred to as &quot;Retention&quot;)
# Dual insurance – having two or more policies with overlapping coverage of a risk (both the individual policies would not pay separately – under a concept named contribution, they would contribute together to make up the policyholder&#x27;s losses. However, in case of contingency insurances such as life insurance, dual payment is allowed) 
# Self-insurance – situations where risk is not transferred to insurance companies and solely retained by the entities or individuals themselves
# Reinsurance – situations when the insurer passes some part of or all risks to another Insurer, called the reinsurer

==Insurers&#x27; business model==
Insurers may use the subscription business model, collecting premium payments periodically in return for on-going and/or compounding benefits offered to policyholders.

===Underwriting and investing===
Insurers&#x27; business model aims to collect more in premium and investment income than is paid out in losses, and to also offer a competitive price which consumers will accept. Profit can be reduced to a simple equation:
:Profit = earned premium + investment income – incurred loss – underwriting expenses.

Insurers make money in two ways:
* Through underwriting, the process by which insurers select the risks to insure and decide how much in premiums to charge for accepting those risks, and taking the brunt of the risk should it come to fruition.
* By investing the premiums they collect from insured parties

The most complicated aspect of insuring is the actuarial science of ratemaking (price-setting) of policies, which uses statistics and probability to approximate the rate of future claims based on a given risk. After producing rates, the insurer will use discretion to reject or accept risks through the underwriting process.

At the most basic level, initial rate-making involves looking at the frequency and of insured perils and the expected average payout resulting from these perils. Thereafter an insurance company will collect historical loss-data, bring the loss data to present value, and compare these prior losses to the premium collected in order to assess rate adequacy. Loss ratios and expense loads are also used. Rating for different risk characteristics involves—at the most basic level—comparing the losses with &quot;loss relativities&quot;—a policy with twice as many losses would, therefore, be charged twice as much. More complex multivariate analyses are sometimes used when multiple characteristics are involved and a univariate analysis could produce confounded results. Other statistical methods may be used in assessing the probability of future losses.

Upon termination of a given policy, the amount of premium collected minus the amount paid out in claims is the insurer&#x27;s underwriting profit on that policy. Underwriting performance is measured by something called the &quot;combined ratio&quot;, which is the ratio of expenses/losses to premiums. A combined ratio of less than 100% indicates an underwriting profit, while anything over 100 indicates an underwriting loss. A company with a combined ratio over 100% may nevertheless remain profitable due to investment earnings.

Insurance companies earn investment profits on &quot;float&quot;. Float, or available reserve, is the amount of money on hand at any given moment that an insurer has collected in insurance premiums but has not paid out in claims. Insurers start investing insurance premiums as soon as they are collected and continue to earn interest or other income on them until claims are paid out. The Association of British Insurers (grouping together 400 insurance companies and 94% of UK insurance services) has almost 20% of the investments in the London Stock Exchange. In 2007, U.S. industry profits from float totaled $58 billion. In a 2009 letter to investors, Warren Buffett wrote, &quot;we were &quot;paid&quot; $2.8 billion to hold our float in 2008&quot;.

In the United States, the underwriting loss of property and casualty insurance companies was $142.3 billion in the five years ending 2003. But overall profit for the same period was $68.4 billion, as the result of float. Some insurance-industry insiders, most notably Hank Greenberg, do not believe that it is possible to sustain a profit from float forever without an underwriting profit as well, but this opinion is not universally held. Reliance on float for profit has led some industry experts to call insurance companies &quot;investment companies that raise the money for their investments by selling insurance&quot;.

Naturally, the float method is difficult to carry out in an economically depressed period. Bear markets do cause insurers to shift away from investments and to toughen up their underwriting standards, so a poor economy generally means high insurance-premiums. This tendency to swing between profitable and unprofitable periods over time is commonly known as the underwriting, or insurance, cycle.

===Claims===

Claims and loss handling is the materialized utility of insurance; it is the actual &quot;product&quot; paid for. Claims may be filed by insureds directly with the insurer or through brokers or agents. The insurer may require that the claim be filed on its own proprietary forms, or may accept claims on a standard industry form, such as those produced by ACORD.

Insurance company claims departments employ a large number of claims adjusters, supported by a staff of records management and data entry clerks. Incoming claims are classified based on severity and are assigned to adjusters, whose settlement authority varies with their knowledge and experience. An adjuster undertakes an investigation of each claim, usually in close cooperation with the insured, determines if coverage is available under the terms of the insurance contract (and if so, the reasonable monetary value of the claim), and authorizes payment.

Policyholders may hire their own public adjusters to negotiate settlements with the insurance company on their behalf. For policies that are complicated, where claims may be complex, the insured may take out a separate insurance policy add-on, called loss recovery insurance, which covers the cost of a public adjuster in the case of a claim.

Adjusting liability insurance claims is particularly difficult because they involve a third party, the plaintiff, who is under no contractual obligation to cooperate with the insurer and may in fact regard the insurer as a deep pocket. The adjuster must obtain legal counsel for the insured—either inside (&quot;house&quot;) counsel or outside (&quot;panel&quot;) counsel, monitor litigation that may take years to complete, and appear in person or over the telephone with settlement authority at a mandatory settlement conference when requested by a judge.

If a claims adjuster suspects underinsurance, the condition of average may come into play to limit the insurance company&#x27;s exposure.

In managing the claims-handling function, insurers seek to balance the elements of customer satisfaction, administrative handling expenses, and claims overpayment leakages. In addition to this balancing act, fraudulent insurance practices are a major business risk that insurers must manage and overcome. Disputes between insurers and insureds over the validity of claims or claims-handling practices occasionally escalate into litigation (see insurance bad faith).

===Marketing===
Insurers will often use insurance agents to initially market or underwrite their customers. Agents can be captive, meaning they write only for one company, or independent, meaning that they can issue policies from several companies. The existence and success of companies using insurance agents is likely due to the availability of improved and personalised services. Companies also use Broking firms, Banks and other corporate entities (like Self Help Groups, Microfinance Institutions, NGOs, etc.) to market their products.

==Types ==
Any risk that can be quantified can potentially be insured. Specific kinds of risk that may give rise to claims are known as perils. An insurance policy will set out in detail which perils are covered by the policy and which are not. Below are non-exhaustive lists of the many different types of insurance that exist. A single policy may cover risks in one or more of the categories set out below. For example, vehicle insurance would typically cover both the property risk (theft or damage to the vehicle) and the liability risk (legal claims arising from an accident). A home insurance policy in the United States typically includes coverage for damage to the home and the owner&#x27;s belongings, certain legal claims against the owner, and even a small amount of coverage for medical expenses of guests who are injured on the owner&#x27;s property.

Business insurance can take a number of different forms, such as the various kinds of professional liability insurance, also called professional indemnity (PI), which are discussed below under that name; and the business owner&#x27;s policy (BOP), which packages into one policy many of the kinds of coverage that a business owner needs, in a way analogous to how homeowners&#x27; insurance packages the coverages that a homeowner needs.

===Vehicle insurance===
Vehicle insurance protects the policyholder against financial loss in the event of an incident involving a vehicle they own, such as in a traffic collision.

Coverage typically includes:
* Property coverage, for damage to or theft of the car
* Liability coverage, for the legal responsibility to others for bodily injury or property damage
* Medical coverage, for the cost of treating injuries, rehabilitation and sometimes lost wages and funeral expenses

==== Gap insurance ====
GAP (Guaranteed Asset Protection) insurance covers the excess amount on an auto loan in an instance where the policyholder&#x27;s insurance company does not cover the entire loan. Depending on the company&#x27;s specific policies it might or might not cover the deductible as well. This coverage is marketed for those who put low down payments, have high interest rates on their loans, and those with 60-month or longer terms. Gap insurance is typically offered by a finance company when the vehicle owner purchases their vehicle, but many auto insurance companies offer this coverage to consumers as well.

===Health insurance===

Health insurance policies cover the cost of medical treatments. Dental insurance, like medical insurance, protects policyholders for dental costs. In most developed countries, all citizens receive some health coverage from their governments, paid through taxation. In most countries, health insurance is often part of an employer&#x27;s benefits.

===Income protection insurance===

* Disability insurance policies provide financial support in the event of the policyholder becoming unable to work because of disabling illness or injury. It provides monthly support to help pay such obligations as mortgage loans and credit cards. Short-term and long-term disability policies are available to individuals, but considering the expense, long-term policies are generally obtained only by those with at least six-figure incomes, such as doctors, lawyers, etc. Short-term disability insurance covers a person for a period typically up to six months, paying a stipend each month to cover medical bills and other necessities.
* Long-term disability insurance covers an individual&#x27;s expenses for the long term, up until such time as they are considered permanently disabled and thereafter Insurance companies will often try to encourage the person back into employment in preference to and before declaring them unable to work at all and therefore totally disabled.
* Disability overhead insurance allows business owners to cover the overhead expenses of their business while they are unable to work.
* Total permanent disability insurance provides benefits when a person is permanently disabled and can no longer work in their profession, often taken as an adjunct to life insurance.
* Workers&#x27; compensation insurance replaces all or part of a worker&#x27;s wages lost and accompanying medical expenses incurred because of a job-related injury.

===Casualty insurance===

Casualty insurance insures against accidents, not necessarily tied to any specific property. It is a broad spectrum of insurance that a number of other types of insurance could be classified, such as auto, workers compensation, and some liability insurances.
* Crime insurance is a form of casualty insurance that covers the policyholder against losses arising from the criminal acts of third parties. For example, a company can obtain crime insurance to cover losses arising from theft or embezzlement.
* Terrorism insurance provides protection against any loss or damage caused by terrorist activities. In the United States in the wake of 9/11, the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act 2002 (TRIA) set up a federal program providing a transparent system of shared public and private compensation for insured losses resulting from acts of terrorism. The program was extended until the end of 2014 by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act 2007 (TRIPRA).
* Kidnap and ransom insurance is designed to protect individuals and corporations operating in high-risk areas around the world against the perils of kidnap, extortion, wrongful detention and hijacking.
* Political risk insurance is a form of casualty insurance that can be taken out by businesses with operations in countries in which there is a risk that revolution or other political conditions could result in a loss.

===Life insurance===
Life insurance provides a monetary benefit to a decedent&#x27;s family or other designated beneficiary, and may specifically provide for income to an insured person&#x27;s family, burial, funeral and other final expenses. Life insurance policies often allow the option of having the proceeds paid to the beneficiary either in a lump sum cash payment or an annuity. In most states, a person cannot purchase a policy on another person without their knowledge.

Annuities provide a stream of payments and are generally classified as insurance because they are issued by insurance companies, are regulated as insurance, and require the same kinds of actuarial and investment management expertise that life insurance requires. Annuities and pensions that pay a benefit for life are sometimes regarded as insurance against the possibility that a retiree will outlive his or her financial resources. In that sense, they are the complement of life insurance and, from an underwriting perspective, are the mirror image of life insurance.

Certain life insurance contracts accumulate cash values, which may be taken by the insured if the policy is surrendered or which may be borrowed against. Some policies, such as annuities and endowment policies, are financial instruments to accumulate or liquidate wealth when it is needed.

In many countries, such as the United States and the UK, the tax law provides that the interest on this cash value is not taxable under certain circumstances. This leads to widespread use of life insurance as a tax-efficient method of saving as well as protection in the event of early death.

In the United States, the tax on interest income on life insurance policies and annuities is generally deferred. However, in some cases the benefit derived from tax deferral may be offset by a low return. This depends upon the insuring company, the type of policy and other variables (mortality, market return, etc.). Moreover, other income tax saving vehicles (e.g., IRAs, 401(k) plans, Roth IRAs) may be better alternatives for value accumulation.

===Burial insurance===
Burial insurance is an old type of life insurance which is paid out upon death to cover final expenses, such as the cost of a funeral. The Greeks and Romans introduced burial insurance c. 600 CE when they organized guilds called &quot;benevolent societies&quot; which cared for the surviving families and paid funeral expenses of members upon death. Guilds in the Middle Ages served a similar purpose, as did friendly societies during Victorian times.

===Property===
Property insurance provides protection against risks to property, such as fire, theft or weather damage. This may include specialized forms of insurance such as fire insurance, flood insurance, earthquake insurance, home insurance, inland marine insurance or boiler insurance.
The term &quot;property insurance&quot; may, like casualty insurance, be used as a broad category of various subtypes of insurance, some of which are listed below:
* Aviation insurance protects aircraft hulls and spares, and associated liability risks, such as passenger and third-party liability. Airports may also appear under this subcategory, including air traffic control and refuelling operations for international airports through to smaller domestic exposures.
* Boiler insurance (also known as boiler and machinery insurance, or equipment breakdown insurance) insures against accidental physical damage to boilers, equipment or machinery.
* Builder&#x27;s risk insurance insures against the risk of physical loss or damage to property during construction. Builder&#x27;s risk insurance is typically written on an &quot;all risk&quot; basis covering damage arising from any cause (including the negligence of the insured) not otherwise expressly excluded. Builder&#x27;s risk insurance is coverage that protects a person&#x27;s or organization&#x27;s insurable interest in materials, fixtures or equipment being used in the construction or renovation of a building or structure should those items sustain physical loss or damage from an insured peril.
* Crop insurance may be purchased by farmers to reduce or manage various risks associated with growing crops. Such risks include crop loss or damage caused by weather, hail, drought, frost damage, pests (including especially insects), or disease—some of these being termed named perils. Index-based insurance uses models of how climate extremes affect crop production to define certain climate triggers that if surpassed have high probabilities of causing substantial crop loss. When harvest losses occur associated with exceeding the climate trigger threshold, the index-insured farmer is entitled to a compensation payment.
* Earthquake insurance is a form of property insurance that pays the policyholder in the event of an earthquake that causes damage to the property. Most ordinary home insurance policies do not cover earthquake damage. Earthquake insurance policies generally feature a high deductible. Rates depend on location and hence the likelihood of an earthquake, as well as the construction of the home.
* Fidelity bond is a form of casualty insurance that covers policyholders for losses incurred as a result of fraudulent acts by specified individuals. It usually insures a business for losses caused by the dishonest acts of its employees.
* Flood insurance protects against property loss due to flooding. Many U.S. insurers do not provide flood insurance in some parts of the country. In response to this, the federal government created the National Flood Insurance Program which serves as the insurer of last resort.
* Home insurance, also commonly called hazard insurance or homeowners insurance (often abbreviated in the real estate industry as HOI), provides coverage for damage or destruction of the policyholder&#x27;s home. In some geographical areas, the policy may exclude certain types of risks, such as flood or earthquake, that require additional coverage. Maintenance-related issues are typically the homeowner&#x27;s responsibility. The policy may include inventory, or this can be bought as a separate policy, especially for people who rent housing. In some countries, insurers offer a package which may include liability and legal responsibility for injuries and property damage caused by members of the household, including pets.
* Landlord insurance covers residential or commercial property that is rented to tenants. It also covers the landlord&#x27;s liability for the occupants at the property. Most homeowners&#x27; insurance, meanwhile, cover only owner-occupied homes and not liability or damages related to tenants.
* Marine insurance and marine cargo insurance cover the loss or damage of vessels at sea or on inland waterways, and of cargo in transit, regardless of the method of transit. When the owner of the cargo and the carrier are separate corporations, marine cargo insurance typically compensates the owner of cargo for losses sustained from fire, shipwreck, etc., but excludes losses that can be recovered from the carrier or the carrier&#x27;s insurance. Many marine insurance underwriters will include &quot;time element&quot; coverage in such policies, which extends the indemnity to cover loss of profit and other business expenses attributable to the delay caused by a covered loss.
* Renters&#x27; insurance, often called tenants&#x27; insurance, is an insurance policy that provides some of the benefits of homeowners&#x27; insurance, but does not include coverage for the dwelling, or structure, with the exception of small alterations that a tenant makes to the structure.
* Supplemental natural disaster insurance covers specified expenses after a natural disaster renders the policyholder&#x27;s home uninhabitable. Periodic payments are made directly to the insured until the home is rebuilt or a specified time period has elapsed.
* Surety bond insurance is a three-party insurance guaranteeing the performance of the principal.

* Volcano insurance is a specialized insurance protecting against damage arising specifically from volcanic eruptions.
* Windstorm insurance is an insurance covering the damage that can be caused by wind events such as hurricanes.

===Liability===

Liability insurance is a broad superset that covers legal claims against the insured. Many types of insurance include an aspect of liability coverage. For example, a homeowner&#x27;s insurance policy will normally include liability coverage which protects the insured in the event of a claim brought by someone who slips and falls on the property; automobile insurance also includes an aspect of liability insurance that indemnifies against the harm that a crashing car can cause to others&#x27; lives, health, or property. The protection offered by a liability insurance policy is twofold: a legal defense in the event of a lawsuit commenced against the policyholder and indemnification (payment on behalf of the insured) with respect to a settlement or court verdict. Liability policies typically cover only the negligence of the insured, and will not apply to results of wilful or intentional acts by the insured.
* Public liability insurance or general liability insurance covers a business or organization against claims should its operations injure a member of the public or damage their property in some way.
* Directors and officers liability insurance (D&amp;O) protects an organization (usually a corporation) from costs associated with litigation resulting from errors made by directors and officers for which they are liable.
* Environmental liability or environmental impairment insurance protects the insured from bodily injury, property damage and cleanup costs as a result of the dispersal, release or escape of pollutants.
* Errors and omissions insurance (E&amp;O) is business liability insurance for professionals such as insurance agents, real estate agents and brokers, architects, third-party administrators (TPAs) and other business professionals.
* Prize indemnity insurance protects the insured from giving away a large prize at a specific event. Examples would include offering prizes to contestants who can make a half-court shot at a basketball game, or a hole-in-one at a golf tournament.
* Professional liability insurance, also called professional indemnity insurance (PI), protects insured professionals such as architectural corporations and medical practitioners against potential negligence claims made by their patients/clients. Professional liability insurance may take on different names depending on the profession. For example, professional liability insurance in reference to the medical profession may be called medical malpractice insurance.
Often a commercial insured&#x27;s liability insurance program consists of several layers. The first layer of insurance generally consists of primary insurance, which provides first dollar indemnity for judgments and settlements up to the limits of liability of the primary policy. Generally, primary insurance is subject to a deductible and obligates the insurer to defend the insured against lawsuits, which is normally accomplished by assigning counsel to defend the insured. In many instances, a commercial insured may elect to self-insure. Above the primary insurance or self-insured retention, the insured may have one or more layers of excess insurance to provide coverage additional limits of indemnity protection. There are a variety of types of excess insurance, including &quot;stand-alone&quot; excess policies (policies that contain their own terms, conditions, and exclusions), &quot;follow form&quot; excess insurance (policies that follow the terms of the underlying policy except as specifically provided), and &quot;umbrella&quot; insurance policies (excess insurance that in some circumstances could provide coverage that is broader than the underlying insurance).

===Credit===

Credit insurance repays some or all of a loan when the borrower is insolvent.
* Mortgage insurance insures the lender against default by the borrower. Mortgage insurance is a form of credit insurance, although the name &quot;credit insurance&quot; more often is used to refer to policies that cover other kinds of debt.
* Many credit cards offer payment protection plans which are a form of credit insurance.
* Trade credit insurance is business insurance over the accounts receivable of the insured. The policy pays the policy holder for covered accounts receivable if the debtor defaults on payment.
* Collateral protection insurance (CPI) insures property (primarily vehicles) held as collateral for loans made by lending institutions.

=== Cyber attack insurance ===
Cyber-insurance is a business lines insurance product intended to provide coverage to corporations from Internet-based risks, and more generally from risks relating to information technology infrastructure, information privacy, information governance liability, and activities related thereto.

===Other types===
* All-risk insurance is an insurance that covers a wide range of incidents and perils, except those noted in the policy. All-risk insurance is different from peril-specific insurance that cover losses from only those perils listed in the policy. In car insurance, all-risk policy includes also the damages caused by the own driver.

* Bloodstock insurance covers individual horses or a number of horses under common ownership. Coverage is typically for mortality as a result of accident, illness or disease but may extend to include infertility, in-transit loss, veterinary fees, and prospective foal.
* Business interruption insurance covers the loss of income, and the expenses incurred, after a covered peril interrupts normal business operations.
* Defense Base Act (DBA) insurance provides coverage for civilian workers hired by the government to perform contracts outside the United States and Canada. DBA is required for all U.S. citizens, U.S. residents, U.S. Green Card holders, and all employees or subcontractors hired on overseas government contracts. Depending on the country, foreign nationals must also be covered under DBA. This coverage typically includes expenses related to medical treatment and loss of wages, as well as disability and death benefits.
* Expatriate insurance provides individuals and organizations operating outside of their home country with protection for automobiles, property, health, liability and business pursuits.
*Hired-in Plant Insurance covers liability where, under a contract of hire, the customer is liable to pay for the cost of hired-in equipment and for any rental charges due to a plant hire firm, such as construction plant and machinery.
* Legal expenses insurance covers policyholders for the potential costs of legal action against an institution or an individual. When something happens which triggers the need for legal action, it is known as &quot;the event&quot;. There are two main types of legal expenses insurance: before the event insurance and after the event insurance.
* Livestock insurance is a specialist policy provided to, for example, commercial or hobby farms, aquariums, fish farms or any other animal holding. Cover is available for mortality or economic slaughter as a result of accident, illness or disease but can extend to include destruction by government order.
* Media liability insurance is designed to cover professionals that engage in film and television production and print, against risks such as defamation.
* Nuclear incident insurance covers damages resulting from an incident involving radioactive materials and is generally arranged at the national level. (See the nuclear exclusion clause and, for the United States, the Price–Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act.)
* Over-redemption insurance is purchased by businesses to protect themselves financially in the event that a promotion ends up becoming more successful than was originally anticipated and/or budgeted for.
* Pet insurance insures pets against accidents and illnesses; some companies cover routine/wellness care and burial, as well.
* Pollution insurance usually takes the form of first-party coverage for contamination of insured property either by external or on-site sources. Coverage is also afforded for liability to third parties arising from contamination of air, water, or land due to the sudden and accidental release of hazardous materials from the insured site. The policy usually covers the costs of cleanup and may include coverage for releases from underground storage tanks. Intentional acts are specifically excluded.
* Purchase insurance is aimed at providing protection on the products people purchase. Purchase insurance can cover individual purchase protection, warranties, guarantees, care plans and even mobile phone insurance. Such insurance is normally limited in the scope of problems that are covered by the policy.
* Tax insurance is increasingly being used in corporate transactions to protect taxpayers in the event that a tax position it has taken is challenged by the IRS or a state, local, or foreign taxing authority
* Title insurance provides a guarantee that title to real property is vested in the purchaser or mortgagee, free and clear of liens or encumbrances. It is usually issued in conjunction with a search of the public records performed at the time of a real estate transaction.
* Travel insurance is an insurance cover taken by those who travel abroad, which covers certain losses such as medical expenses, loss of personal belongings, travel delay, and personal liabilities.
* Tuition insurance insures students against involuntary withdrawal from cost-intensive educational institutions
* Interest rate insurance protects the holder from adverse changes in interest rates, for instance for those with a variable rate loan or mortgage
* Divorce insurance is a form of contractual liability insurance that pays the insured a cash benefit if their marriage ends in divorce.

===Insurance financing vehicles===
* Fraternal insurance is provided on a cooperative basis by fraternal benefit societies or other social organizations.
* No-fault insurance is a type of insurance policy (typically automobile insurance) where insureds are indemnified by their own insurer regardless of fault in the incident.
* Protected self-insurance is an alternative risk financing mechanism in which an organization retains the mathematically calculated cost of risk within the organization and transfers the catastrophic risk with specific and aggregate limits to an insurer so the maximum total cost of the program is known. A properly designed and underwritten Protected Self-Insurance Program reduces and stabilizes the cost of insurance and provides valuable risk management information.
* Retrospectively rated insurance is a method of establishing a premium on large commercial accounts. The final premium is based on the insured&#x27;s actual loss experience during the policy term, sometimes subject to a minimum and maximum premium, with the final premium determined by a formula. Under this plan, the current year&#x27;s premium is based partially (or wholly) on the current year&#x27;s losses, although the premium adjustments may take months or years beyond the current year&#x27;s expiration date. The rating formula is guaranteed in the insurance contract. Formula: retrospective premium = converted loss + basic premium × tax multiplier. Numerous variations of this formula have been developed and are in use.
* Formal self-insurance (active risk retention) is the deliberate decision to pay for otherwise insurable losses out of one&#x27;s own money. This can be done on a formal basis by establishing a separate fund into which funds are deposited on a periodic basis, or by simply forgoing the purchase of available insurance and paying out-of-pocket. Self-insurance is usually used to pay for high-frequency, low-severity losses. Such losses, if covered by conventional insurance, mean having to pay a premium that includes loadings for the company&#x27;s general expenses, cost of putting the policy on the books, acquisition expenses, premium taxes, and contingencies. While this is true for all insurance, for small, frequent losses the transaction costs may exceed the benefit of volatility reduction that insurance otherwise affords.
* Reinsurance is a type of insurance purchased by insurance companies or self-insured employers to protect against unexpected losses. Financial reinsurance is a form of reinsurance that is primarily used for capital management rather than to transfer insurance risk.
* Social insurance can be many things to many people in many countries. But a summary of its essence is that it is a collection of insurance coverages (including components of life insurance, disability income insurance, unemployment insurance, health insurance, and others), plus retirement savings, that requires participation by all citizens. By forcing everyone in society to be a policyholder and pay premiums, it ensures that everyone can become a claimant when or if they need to. Along the way, this inevitably becomes related to other concepts such as the justice system and the welfare state. This is a large, complicated topic that engenders tremendous debate, which can be further studied in the following articles (and others):
**National Insurance
** Social safety net
** Social security
** Social Security debate (United States)
** Social Security (United States)
** Social welfare provision
* Stop-loss insurance provides protection against catastrophic or unpredictable losses. It is purchased by organizations who do not want to assume 100% of the liability for losses arising from the plans. Under a stop-loss policy, the insurance company becomes liable for losses that exceed certain limits called deductibles.

===Closed community and governmental self-insurance===
Some communities prefer to create virtual insurance among themselves by other means than contractual risk transfer, which assigns explicit numerical values to risk. A number of religious groups, including the Amish and some Muslim groups, depend on support provided by their communities when disasters strike. The risk presented by any given person is assumed collectively by the community who all bear the cost of rebuilding lost property and supporting people whose needs are suddenly greater after a loss of some kind. In supportive communities where others can be trusted to follow community leaders, this tacit form of insurance can work. In this manner the community can even out the extreme differences in insurability that exist among its members. Some further justification is also provided by invoking the moral hazard of explicit insurance contracts.

In the United Kingdom, The Crown (which, for practical purposes, meant the civil service) did not insure property such as government buildings. If a government building was damaged, the cost of repair would be met from public funds because, in the long run, this was cheaper than paying insurance premiums. Since many UK government buildings have been sold to property companies and rented back, this arrangement is now less common.

In the United States, the most prevalent form of self-insurance is governmental risk management pools. They are self-funded cooperatives, operating as carriers of coverage for the majority of governmental entities today, such as county governments, municipalities, and school districts. Rather than these entities independently self-insure and risk bankruptcy from a large judgment or catastrophic loss, such governmental entities form a risk pool. Such pools begin their operations by capitalization through member deposits or bond issuance. Coverage (such as general liability, auto liability, professional liability, workers compensation, and property) is offered by the pool to its members, similar to coverage offered by insurance companies. However, self-insured pools offer members lower rates (due to not needing insurance brokers), increased benefits (such as loss prevention services) and subject matter expertise. Of approximately 91,000 distinct governmental entities operating in the United States, 75,000 are members of self-insured pools in various lines of coverage, forming approximately 500 pools. Although a relatively small corner of the insurance market, the annual contributions (self-insured premiums) to such pools have been estimated up to 17 billion dollars annually.

==Insurance companies==
Insurance companies may provide any combination of insurance types, but are often classified into three groups:

* Life insurance companies, that provide life insurance, annuities and pensions products and bear similarities to asset management businesses
* Non-life or property/casualty insurance companies, which provides other types of insurance.
* Health insurance companies, which sometimes provide life insurance or employee benefits as well

General insurance companies can be further divided into these sub categories.
* Standard lines
* Excess lines

In most countries, life and non-life insurers are subject to different regulatory regimes and different tax and accounting rules. The main reason for the distinction between the two types of company is that life, annuity, and pension business is long-term in nature – coverage for life assurance or a pension can cover risks over many decades. By contrast, non-life insurance cover usually covers a shorter period, such as one year.

===Mutual versus proprietary===

Insurance companies are commonly classified as either mutual or proprietary companies. Mutual companies are owned by the policyholders, while shareholders (who may or may not own policies) own proprietary insurance companies.

Demutualization of mutual insurers to form stock companies, as well as the formation of a hybrid known as a mutual holding company, became common in some countries, such as the United States, in the late 20th century. However, not all states permit mutual holding companies.

===Reinsurance companies===

Reinsurance companies are insurance companies that provide policies to other insurance companies, allowing them to reduce their risks and protect themselves from substantial losses. The reinsurance market is dominated by a few large companies with huge reserves. A reinsurer may also be a direct writer of insurance risks as well.

===Captive insurance companies===
Captive insurance companies can be defined as limited-purpose insurance companies established with the specific objective of financing risks emanating from their parent group or groups. This definition can sometimes be extended to include some of the risks of the parent company&#x27;s customers. In short, it is an in-house self-insurance vehicle. Captives may take the form of a &quot;pure&quot; entity, which is a 100% subsidiary of the self-insured parent company; of a &quot;mutual&quot; captive, which insures the collective risks of members of an industry; and of an &quot;association&quot; captive, which self-insures individual risks of the members of a professional, commercial or industrial association. Captives represent commercial, economic and tax advantages to their sponsors because of the reductions in costs they help create and for the ease of insurance risk management and the flexibility for cash flows they generate. Additionally, they may provide coverage of risks which is neither available nor offered in the traditional insurance market at reasonable prices.

The types of risk that a captive can underwrite for their parents include property damage, public and product liability, professional indemnity, employee benefits, employers&#x27; liability, motor and medical aid expenses. The captive&#x27;s exposure to such risks may be limited by the use of reinsurance.

Captives are becoming an increasingly important component of the risk management and risk financing strategy of their parent. This can be understood against the following background:
* Heavy and increasing premium costs in almost every line of coverage
* Difficulties in insuring certain types of fortuitous risk
* Differential coverage standards in various parts of the world
* Rating structures which reflect market trends rather than individual loss experience
* Insufficient credit for deductibles or loss control efforts

===Other forms===
Other possible forms for an insurance company include reciprocals, in which policyholders reciprocate in sharing risks, and Lloyd&#x27;s organizations.

===Admitted versus non-admitted===
Admitted insurance companies are those in the United States that have been admitted or licensed by the state licensing agency. The insurance they provide is called admitted insurance. Non-admitted companies have not been approved by the state licensing agency, but are allowed to provide insurance under special circumstances when they meet an insurance need that admitted companies cannot or will not meet.

===Insurance consultants===

There are also companies known as &quot;insurance consultants&quot;. Like a mortgage broker, these companies are paid a fee by the customer to shop around for the best insurance policy among many companies. Similar to an insurance consultant, an &quot;insurance broker&quot; also shops around for the best insurance policy among many companies. However, with insurance brokers, the fee is usually paid in the form of commission from the insurer that is selected rather than directly from the client.

Neither insurance consultants nor insurance brokers are insurance companies and no risks are transferred to them in insurance transactions. Third party administrators are companies that perform underwriting and sometimes claims handling services for insurance companies. These companies often have special expertise that the insurance companies do not have.

===Financial stability and rating===

The financial stability and strength of an insurance company is a consideration when buying an insurance contract. An insurance premium paid currently provides coverage for losses that might arise many years in the future. For that reason, a more financially stable insurance carrier reduces the risk of the insurance company becoming insolvent, leaving their policyholders with no coverage (or coverage only from a government-backed insurance pool or other arrangements with less attractive payouts for losses). A number of independent rating agencies provide information and rate the financial viability of insurance companies.

Insurance companies are rated by various agencies such as AM Best. The ratings include the company&#x27;s financial strength, which measures its ability to pay claims. It also rates financial instruments issued by the insurance company, such as bonds, notes, and securitization products.

==Across the world==

Advanced economies account for the bulk of the global insurance industry. According to Swiss Re, the global insurance market wrote $6.782 trillion in direct premiums in 2022. (&quot;Direct premiums&quot; means premiums written directly by insurers before accounting for ceding of risk to reinsurers.) As usual, the United States was the country with the largest insurance market with $2.959 trillion (43.6%) of direct premiums written, with the People&#x27;s Republic of China coming in second at only $697 billion (10.3%), Japan coming in third at $337 billion (5.0%), and the United Kingdom coming in fourth at $363 billion (5.4%). However, the European Union&#x27;s single market is the actual second largest market, with 17 percent market share.

===Regulatory differences===

In the United States, insurance is regulated by the states under the McCarran–Ferguson Act, with &quot;periodic proposals for federal intervention&quot;, and a nonprofit coalition of state insurance agencies called the National Association of Insurance Commissioners works to harmonize the country&#x27;s different laws and regulations. The National Conference of Insurance Legislators (NCOIL) also works to harmonize the different state laws. 1988 California Proposition 103 is claimed to reduce home insurance rates, while it is blamed by some for reduced availability of home insurance in wildfire-distressed neighborhoods.

In the European Union, the Third Non-Life Directive and the Third Life Directive, both passed in 1992 and effective 1994, created a single insurance market in Europe and allowed insurance companies to offer insurance anywhere in the EU (subject to permission from authority in the head office) and allowed insurance consumers to purchase insurance from any insurer in the EU. As far as insurance in the United Kingdom, the Financial Services Authority took over insurance regulation from the General Insurance Standards Council in 2005; laws passed include the Insurance Companies Act 1973 and another in 1982, and reforms to warranty and other aspects under discussion .

The insurance industry in China was nationalized in 1949 and thereafter offered by only a single state-owned company, the People&#x27;s Insurance Company of China, which was eventually suspended as demand declined in a communist environment. In 1978, market reforms led to an increase in the market and by 1995 a comprehensive Insurance Law of the People&#x27;s Republic of China was passed, followed in 1998 by the formation of China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC), which has broad regulatory authority over the insurance market of China.

In India IRDA is insurance regulatory authority. As per the section 4 of IRDA Act 1999, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA), which was constituted by an act of parliament. National Insurance Academy, Pune is apex insurance capacity builder institute promoted with support from Ministry of Finance and by LIC, Life &amp; General Insurance companies.

In 2017, within the framework of the joint project of the Bank of Russia and Yandex, a special check mark (a green circle with a tick and &#x27;Реестр ЦБ РФ&#x27; (Unified state register of insurance entities) text box) appeared in the search for Yandex system, informing the consumer that the company&#x27;s financial services are offered on the marked website, which has the status of an insurance company, a broker or a mutual insurance association.

==Insurance practices and controversies==
===Does not reduce the risk===
Insurance is just a risk transfer mechanism wherein the financial burden which may arise due to some fortuitous event is transferred to a bigger entity (i.e., an insurance company) by way of paying premiums. This only reduces the financial burden and not the actual chances of happening of an event. Insurance is a risk for both the insurance company and the insured. The insurance company understands the risk involved and will perform a risk assessment when writing the policy. 

As a result, the premiums may go up if they determine that the policyholder will file a claim. However, premiums might reduce if the policyholder commits to a risk management program as recommended by the insurer. It is therefore important that insurers view risk management as a joint initiative between policyholder and insurer since a robust risk management plan minimizes the possibility of a large claim for the insurer while stabilizing or reducing premiums for the policyholder. University of Tennessee research published in 2014 found that all company staff in the businesses they surveyed recognised the importance of insurance but largely they were too distant within their organization from the provision or cost of insurance to be able to relate to company insurance needs.

If a person is financially stable and plans for life&#x27;s unexpected events, they may be able to go without insurance. However, they must have enough to cover a total and complete loss of employment and of their possessions. Some states will accept a surety bond, a government bond, or even making a cash deposit with the state.

===Moral hazard===
An insurance company may inadvertently find that its insureds may not be as risk-averse as they might otherwise be (since, by definition, the insured has transferred the risk to the insurer), a concept known as moral hazard. This &#x27;insulates&#x27; many from the true costs of living with risk, negating measures that can mitigate or adapt to risk and leading some to describe insurance schemes as potentially maladaptive.

===Complexity of insurance policy contracts===

Insurance policies can be complex and some policyholders may not understand all the fees and coverages included in a policy. As a result, people may buy policies on unfavorable terms. In response to these issues, many countries have enacted detailed statutory and regulatory regimes governing every aspect of the insurance business, including minimum standards for policies and the ways in which they may be advertised and sold.

For example, most insurance policies in the English language today have been carefully drafted in plain English; the industry learned the hard way that many courts will not enforce policies against insureds when the judges themselves cannot understand what the policies are saying. Typically, courts construe ambiguities in insurance policies against the insurance company and in favor of coverage under the policy.

Many institutional insurance purchasers buy insurance through an insurance broker. While on the surface it appears the broker represents the buyer (not the insurance company), and typically counsels the buyer on appropriate coverage and policy limitations, in the vast majority of cases a broker&#x27;s compensation comes in the form of a commission as a percentage of the insurance premium, creating a conflict of interest in that the broker&#x27;s financial interest is tilted toward encouraging an insured to purchase more insurance than might be necessary at a higher price. A broker generally holds contracts with many insurers, thereby allowing the broker to &quot;shop&quot; the market for the best rates and coverage possible.

Insurance may also be purchased through an agent. A tied agent, working exclusively with one insurer, represents the insurance company from whom the policyholder buys (while a free agent sells policies of various insurance companies). Just as there is a potential conflict of interest with a broker, an agent has a different type of conflict. Because agents work directly for the insurance company, if there is a claim the agent may advise the client to the benefit of the insurance company. Agents generally cannot offer as broad a range of selection compared to an insurance broker.

An independent insurance consultant advises insureds on a fee-for-service retainer, similar to an attorney, and thus offers completely independent advice, free of the financial conflict of interest of brokers or agents. However, such a consultant must still work through brokers or agents in order to secure coverage for their clients.

===Limited consumer benefits===
In the United States, economists and consumer advocates generally consider insurance to be worthwhile for low-probability, catastrophic losses, but not for high-probability, small losses. Because of this, consumers are advised to select high deductibles and to not insure losses which would not cause a disruption in their life. However, consumers have shown a tendency to prefer low deductibles and to prefer to insure relatively high-probability, small losses over low-probability, perhaps due to not understanding or ignoring the low-probability risk. This is associated with reduced purchasing of insurance against low-probability losses, and may result in increased inefficiencies from moral hazard.

===Redlining===
Redlining is the practice of denying insurance coverage in specific geographic areas, supposedly because of a high likelihood of loss, while the alleged motivation is unlawful discrimination. Racial profiling or redlining has a long history in the property insurance industry in the United States. From a review of industry underwriting and marketing materials, court documents, and research by government agencies, industry and community groups, and academics, it is clear that race has long affected and continues to affect the policies and practices of the insurance industry.

In July 2007, the US Federal Trade Commission (FTC) released a report presenting the results of a study concerning credit-based insurance scores in automobile insurance. The study found that these scores are effective predictors of risk. It also showed that African-Americans and Hispanics are substantially overrepresented in the lowest credit scores, and substantially underrepresented in the highest, while Caucasians and Asians are more evenly spread across the scores. The credit scores were also found to predict risk within each of the ethnic groups, leading the FTC to conclude that the scoring models are not solely proxies for redlining. The FTC indicated little data was available to evaluate benefit of insurance scores to consumers. The report was disputed by representatives of the Consumer Federation of America, the National Fair Housing Alliance, the National Consumer Law Center, and the Center for Economic Justice, for relying on data provided by the insurance industry.

All states have provisions in their rate regulation laws or in their fair trade practice acts that prohibit unfair discrimination, often called redlining, in setting rates and making insurance available.

In determining premiums and premium rate structures, insurers consider quantifiable factors, including location, credit scores, gender, occupation, marital status, and education level. However, the use of such factors is often considered to be unfair or unlawfully discriminatory, and the reaction against this practice has in some instances led to political disputes about the ways in which insurers determine premiums and regulatory intervention to limit the factors used.

An insurance underwriter&#x27;s job is to evaluate a given risk as to the likelihood that a loss will occur. Any factor that causes a greater likelihood of loss should theoretically be charged a higher rate. This basic principle of insurance must be followed if insurance companies are to remain solvent. Thus, &quot;discrimination&quot; against (i.e., negative differential treatment of) potential insureds in the risk evaluation and premium-setting process is a necessary by-product of the fundamentals of insurance underwriting. For instance, insurers charge older people significantly higher premiums than they charge younger people for term life insurance. Older people are thus treated differently from younger people (i.e., a distinction is made, discrimination occurs). The rationale for the differential treatment goes to the heart of the risk a life insurer takes: older people are likely to die sooner than young people, so the risk of loss (the insured&#x27;s death) is greater in any given period of time and therefore the risk premium must be higher to cover the greater risk. However, treating insureds differently when there is no actuarially sound reason for doing so is unlawful discrimination.

===Insurance patents===
New assurance products can now be protected from copying with a business method patent in the United States.

A recent example of a new insurance product that is patented is Usage Based auto insurance. Early versions were independently invented and patented by a major US auto insurance company, Progressive Auto Insurance () and a Spanish independent inventor, Salvador Minguijon Perez.

Many independent inventors are in favor of patenting new insurance products since it gives them protection from big companies when they bring their new insurance products to market. Independent inventors account for 70% of the new U.S. patent applications in this area.

Patenting new insurance products can be risky, as it is practically impossible for insurance companies to determine if their product will infringe on a pre-existing patent. For example, in 2004, The Hartford insurance company had to pay $80 million to an independent inventor, Bancorp Services, in order to settle a patent infringement and theft of trade secret lawsuit for a type of corporate owned life insurance product invented and patented by Bancorp.

There are currently about 150 new patent applications on insurance inventions filed per year in the United States. The rate at which patents have been issued has steadily risen from 15 in 2002 to 44 in 2006.

The first US insurance patent was granted in 2005, which concerned coverage of data transferred over the internet. Another example of an application posted was posted in 2009. This patent application describes a method for increasing the ease of changing insurance companies.

=== Insurance on demand ===
Insurance on demand (also IoD) is an insurance service that provides clients with coverage for a specific occasion or event when needed; i.e. only episodic rather than on a 24/7 basis as is typically provided by traditional policies. For example, air travelers can purchase a policy for one single plane flight, rather than a longer-lasting travel insurance plan).

===Insurance industry and rent-seeking===
Certain insurance products and practices have been described as rent-seeking by critics. That is, some insurance products or practices are useful primarily because of legal benefits, such as reducing taxes, as opposed to providing protection against risks of adverse events.

===Religious concerns===
Muslim scholars have varying opinions about life insurance. Life insurance policies that earn interest (or guaranteed bonus/NAV) are generally considered to be a form of &quot;riba&quot; (usury) and some consider even policies that do not earn interest to be a form of &quot;gharar&quot; (speculation). Some argue that &quot;gharar&quot; is not present due to the actuarial science behind the underwriting. Jewish rabbinical scholars also have expressed reservations regarding insurance as an avoidance of God&#x27;s will but most find it acceptable in moderation.

Some Christians believe insurance represents a lack of faith. There is a long history of resistance to commercial insurance in Anabaptist communities (Mennonites, Amish, Hutterites, Brethren in Christ), but many participate in community-based self-insurance programs that spread risk within their communities.

==See also==

* Agent of record
* DIRTI 5 – abbreviation for depreciation, interest repairs, taxes, and insurance
* Earthquake loss
* Financial adviser
* Global assets under management
* Insurance broker
* Insurance fraud
* Insurance Hall of Fame
* Insurance law
* International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics
* List of insurance topics
* Loss control consultant
* Outline of finance
* Reinsurance
* Risk pool
* Social security
* Tertiary sector of the economy (sector of the economy to which insurance belongs)
* &quot;The Invisible Bankers: Everything the Insurance Industry Never Wanted You to Know&quot; (book)
* Universal health care
* Welfare state
* &quot;Uberrima fides&quot; – Latin for &quot;utmost good faith&quot;, a legal doctrine used in insurance
Country-specific articles:
:* Insurance in Australia
:* Insurance industry in China
:* Insurance in India
:* Insurance in the United Kingdom
:* Insurance in the United States

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===


== Further reading ==

* Einav, Liran; Finkelstein, Amy; Fisman, Ray (2023). &quot;Risky Business: Why Insurance Markets Fail and What to Do About It&quot;. Yale University Press. .
* Insurance Law and Regulation: Cases and Materials by Kenneth S. Abraham. New York, N.Y : Foundation Press, 2005. 

==External links==
* Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding the US Insurance industry
* Federation of European Risk Management Associations
* Insurance Bureau of Canada
* Insurance Information Institute
* National Association of Insurance Commissioners
* The British Library – finding information on the insurance industry (UK focus)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="0" end="9" title="Insurance" label="Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="198" end="213" title="risk management" label="risk management"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="344" end="351" title="Insurance" label="insurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="353" end="370" title="Insurance" label="insurance company"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="372" end="389" title="Insurance" label="insurance carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="394" end="405" title="underwriter" label="underwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="459" end="471" title="Insurance" label="policyholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="536" end="543" title="Insurance" label="insured"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153790" start="960" end="978" title="insurable interest" label="insurable interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="1071" end="1079" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q977871" start="1092" end="1108" title="insurance policy" label="insurance policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="1383" end="1390" title="Insurance" label="premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111392" start="1572" end="1593" title="out-of-pocket expense" label="out-of-pocket expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560103" start="1673" end="1683" title="deductible" label="deductible"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="1705" end="1721" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q317749" start="1732" end="1741" title="copayment" label="copayment"/>
<link wikidata="Q547416" start="1760" end="1765" title="Hedge (finance)" label="hedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q476118" start="1793" end="1804" title="reinsurance" label="reinsurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2049" end="2056" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831949" start="2061" end="2067" title="Trade guilds of South India" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29945" start="2095" end="2098" title="3rd millennium BC" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257" start="2103" end="2106" title="2nd millennium BC" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="2107" end="2116" title="millennium" label="millennia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2295" end="2330" title="Code of Hammurabi#Laws" label="&amp;quot;Codex Hammurabi&amp;quot; Law 238"/>
<link wikidata="Q849424" start="2367" end="2378" title="sea captain" label="sea captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q21489913" start="2380" end="2392" title="Technical management" label="ship-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q353578" start="2397" end="2411" title="Chartering (shipping)" label="ship charterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q852190" start="2435" end="2445" title="Shipwreck" label="total loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386209" start="2450" end="2501" title="Pro rata" label="only required to pay one-half the value of the ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q500251" start="2509" end="2519" title="ship-owner" label="ship-owner"/>
<link wikidata="Q838526" start="2534" end="2555" title="Digest (Roman law)" label="Digesta seu Pandectae"/>
<link wikidata="Q187719" start="2594" end="2622" title="Corpus Juris Civilis" label="codification of laws ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="2626" end="2637" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911852" start="2651" end="2664" title="legal opinion" label="legal opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="2680" end="2692" title="Roman law" label="Roman jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q248628" start="2693" end="2699" title="Julius Paulus" label="Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q460995" start="2739" end="2749" title="List of Roman laws" label="Lex Rhodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971122" start="2802" end="2817" title="general average" label="general average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356184" start="2831" end="2847" title="marine insurance" label="marine insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="2877" end="2883" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="2934" end="2945" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q987129" start="2966" end="2981" title="Dorian invasion" label="Dorian invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="3013" end="3024" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q210443" start="3036" end="3051" title="Greek Dark Ages" label="Greek Dark Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="3117" end="3126" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q310117" start="3197" end="3209" title="Minya, Egypt" label="Minya, Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="3221" end="3243" title="Nerva–Antonine dynasty" label="Nerva–Antonine dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570005" start="3248" end="3254" title="Clay tablet" label="tablet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3277" end="3295" title="Antinous#Deification and the cult of Antinous" label="Temple of Antinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q124281" start="3299" end="3311" title="Antinoöpolis" label="Antinoöpolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="3313" end="3321" title="Roman Egypt" label="Aegyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497659" start="3334" end="3354" title="Articles of association" label="prescribed the rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445536" start="3359" end="3374" title="Benefit society" label="membership dues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998806" start="3380" end="3394" title="burial society" label="burial society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237621" start="3395" end="3404" title="Collegium (ancient Rome)" label="collegium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832670" start="3420" end="3428" title="Lanuvium" label="Lanuvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="3430" end="3436" title="Roman Italy" label="Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="3481" end="3488" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3506" end="3518" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3539" end="3557" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="3558" end="3575" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587475" start="3576" end="3593" title="Joseph P. Bradley" label="Joseph P. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q179985" start="3630" end="3637" title="actuary" label="actuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944153" start="3646" end="3683" title="Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company" label="Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995180" start="3719" end="3756" title="Institute of Actuaries" label="Journal of the Institute of Actuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="3812" end="3827" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q632184" start="3832" end="3842" title="life table" label="life table"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="3859" end="3871" title="Roman law" label="Roman jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q310076" start="3872" end="3878" title="Ulpian" label="Ulpian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076046" start="4040" end="4052" title="Dharmasastra" label="Dharmasastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="4054" end="4066" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="4071" end="4081" title="Manusmriti" label="Manusmriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q117253" start="4432" end="4443" title="Demosthenes" label="Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q889877" start="4534" end="4542" title="bottomry" label="bottomry"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="4653" end="4660" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="4801" end="4806" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356184" start="5176" end="5192" title="marine insurance" label="marine insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241240" start="5255" end="5277" title="Royal Exchange, London" label="Royal Exchange, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="5429" end="5446" title="Enlightenment era" label="Enlightenment-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5447" end="5453" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868302" start="5495" end="5513" title="Property insurance" label="Property insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="5555" end="5575" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="5793" end="5809" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="5991" end="6000" title="Economics" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984850" start="6001" end="6016" title="Nicholas Barbon" label="Nicholas Barbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="6313" end="6325" title="underwriting" label="underwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="6329" end="6345" title="business venture" label="business venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356184" start="6484" end="6500" title="marine insurance" label="marine insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257512" start="6541" end="6555" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s Coffee House" label="a coffee house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430712" start="6790" end="6812" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="6869" end="6883" title="Life insurance" label="Life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746123" start="6985" end="7034" title="Amicable Society for a Perpetual Assurance Office" label="Amicable Society for a Perpetual Assurance Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019164" start="7065" end="7079" title="William Talbot (bishop)" label="William Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731966" start="7084" end="7100" title="Allen baronets" label="Sir Thomas Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709989" start="7127" end="7144" title="Edward Rowe Mores" label="Edward Rowe Mores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732361" start="7161" end="7219" title="The Equitable Life Assurance Society" label="Society for Equitable Assurances on Lives and Survivorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q695318" start="7260" end="7274" title="mutual insurer" label="mutual insurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="7320" end="7334" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="7799" end="7806" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7864" end="7882" title="General_average#York Antwerp Rules" label="York Antwerp Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q577112" start="8088" end="8117" title="International Law Association" label="International Law Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q122131" start="8396" end="8403" title="History of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="8528" end="8545" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="8652" end="8665" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="8727" end="8734" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336898" start="8753" end="8780" title="National Insurance Act 1911" label="National Insurance Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8940" end="8956" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583737" start="8984" end="9000" title="Beveridge Report" label="Beveridge Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="9027" end="9040" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9185" end="9228" title="Global Federation of Insurance Associations" label="Global Federation of Insurance Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228652" start="9672" end="9679" title="pooling (resource management)" label="pooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042300" start="9972" end="9986" title="insurable risk" label="insurable risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416431" start="10063" end="10085" title="financial intermediary" label="financial intermediary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406896" start="10199" end="10210" title="self-insurance" label="self-insure"/>
<link wikidata="Q207952" start="10586" end="10606" title="law of large numbers" label="law of large numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430712" start="10686" end="10708" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="11094" end="11098" title="Fire" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="11100" end="11120" title="Traffic collision" label="automobile accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q637816" start="11232" end="11252" title="Occupational disease" label="Occupational disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="13104" end="13140" title="Financial Accounting Standards Board" label="Financial Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="13858" end="13869" title="independence (probability theory)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="14135" end="14142" title="Capital (economics)" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327272" start="14185" end="14205" title="earthquake insurance" label="earthquake insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="14235" end="14244" title="Tropical cyclone" label="hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460068" start="14305" end="14315" title="flood insurance" label="flood risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q476118" start="14648" end="14659" title="reinsurance" label="reinsurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="14842" end="14851" title="Indemnity" label="Indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153790" start="15341" end="15359" title="Insurable interest" label="Insurable interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="15873" end="15881" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q694059" start="15885" end="15902" title="Good faith (law)" label="Utmost good faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876492" start="15906" end="15920" title="Uberrima fides" label="Uberrima fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q694059" start="15965" end="15975" title="good faith (law)" label="good faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630714" start="16455" end="16470" title="proximate cause" label="proximate cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419673" start="16598" end="16606" title="exclusion clause" label="excluded"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="16963" end="16977" title="life insurance" label="life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="18522" end="18530" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q977871" start="18542" end="18558" title="insurance policy" label="insurance policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419673" start="18911" end="18921" title="Exclusion clause" label="exclusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="18980" end="18991" title="indemnity" label="indemnified"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334952" start="19477" end="19485" title="Overhead (business)" label="overhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209696" start="19634" end="19640" title="Profit (accounting)" label="profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068109" start="19726" end="19750" title="Nuclear exclusion clause" label="Nuclear exclusion clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065091" start="19813" end="19833" title="War exclusion clause" label="War exclusion clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q44454" start="20757" end="20769" title="moral hazard" label="moral hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q838081" start="20771" end="20786" title="insurance fraud" label="insurance fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q44454" start="20874" end="20886" title="moral hazard" label="moral hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="21639" end="21652" title="building code" label="building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="22559" end="22586" title="subscription business model" label="subscription business model"/>
<link wikidata="Q959606" start="22659" end="22670" title="compound interest" label="compounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4066775" start="22973" end="22987" title="cancellation (insurance)" label="earned premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="23093" end="23105" title="underwriting" label="underwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="23299" end="23308" title="investment" label="investing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128453" start="23404" end="23421" title="actuarial science" label="actuarial science"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="23476" end="23486" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="23491" end="23502" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="23752" end="23761" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100466" start="23935" end="23948" title="present value" label="present value"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485004" start="24040" end="24050" title="Loss ratio" label="Loss ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952580" start="24308" end="24329" title="multivariate analysis" label="multivariate analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883949" start="24664" end="24683" title="underwriting profit" label="underwriting profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="25096" end="25106" title="investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809658" start="25460" end="25491" title="Association of British Insurers" label="Association of British Insurers"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="25610" end="25631" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="25834" end="25847" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868302" start="25874" end="25882" title="property insurance" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813256" start="25887" end="25905" title="casualty insurance" label="casualty insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911332" start="26095" end="26109" title="Maurice R. Greenberg" label="Hank Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814941" start="26513" end="26535" title="Depression (economics)" label="economically depressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004322" start="26544" end="26555" title="Bear market" label="Bear market"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254447" start="26815" end="26848" title="insurance cycle" label="underwriting, or insurance, cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q285759" start="27048" end="27065" title="Insurance broker" label="brokers or agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650745" start="27221" end="27226" title="ACORD" label="ACORD"/>
<link wikidata="Q517656" start="27333" end="27351" title="records management" label="records management"/>
<link wikidata="Q918751" start="27356" end="27372" title="data entry clerk" label="data entry clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="28235" end="28244" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250427" start="28355" end="28366" title="deep pocket" label="deep pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159240" start="28741" end="28761" title="condition of average" label="condition of average"/>
<link wikidata="Q838081" start="29038" end="29068" title="insurance fraud" label="fraudulent insurance practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q832045" start="29081" end="29094" title="business risks" label="business risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042362" start="29274" end="29293" title="insurance bad faith" label="insurance bad faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q835173" start="29337" end="29353" title="agency (law)" label="insurance agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="29377" end="29387" title="Underwriting" label="underwrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068361" start="30262" end="30279" title="vehicle insurance" label="vehicle insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="30411" end="30419" title="traffic collision" label="accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064047" start="30424" end="30438" title="home insurance" label="home insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="30705" end="30713" title="Business" label="Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005852" start="30917" end="30945" title="business owner&amp;#x27;s policy" label="business owner&amp;#x27;s policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="31306" end="31323" title="traffic collision" label="traffic collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q708438" start="31979" end="31991" title="down payment" label="down payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118291" start="32666" end="32686" title="Disability insurance" label="Disability insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="32879" end="32892" title="mortgage loan" label="mortgage loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="32898" end="32909" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118291" start="33148" end="33168" title="disability insurance" label="disability insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001908" start="33646" end="33675" title="Business overhead expense disability insurance" label="Disability overhead insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q313971" start="33781" end="33817" title="Total permanent disability insurance" label="Total permanent disability insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="33965" end="33991" title="Workers&amp;#x27; compensation" label="Workers&amp;#x27; compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821213" start="34042" end="34046" title="wage" label="wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068361" start="34356" end="34360" title="Vehicle insurance" label="auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="34362" end="34382" title="Workers&amp;#x27; compensation" label="workers compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q992350" start="34393" end="34413" title="Liability insurance" label="liability insurances"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="34526" end="34538" title="criminal act" label="criminal act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="34637" end="34642" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="34646" end="34658" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703958" start="34662" end="34681" title="Terrorism insurance" label="Terrorism insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="34739" end="34748" title="terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="34797" end="34801" title="september 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703920" start="34807" end="34835" title="Terrorism Risk Insurance Act" label="Terrorism Risk Insurance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404774" start="35123" end="35150" title="Kidnap and ransom insurance" label="Kidnap and ransom insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225110" start="35326" end="35350" title="Political risk insurance" label="Political risk insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="35478" end="35488" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="35498" end="35507" title="politics" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510714" start="35921" end="35928" title="Annuity (financial contracts)" label="annuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="36301" end="36308" title="pension" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q946865" start="36405" end="36412" title="retirement" label="retiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q693464" start="36639" end="36643" title="cash" label="cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494304" start="36786" end="36804" title="endowment policy" label="endowment policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q885621" start="36849" end="36858" title="liquidation" label="liquidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="36859" end="36865" title="wealth" label="wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q856251" start="36947" end="36954" title="tax law" label="tax law"/>
<link wikidata="Q319622" start="37121" end="37127" title="saving" label="saving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689426" start="37341" end="37353" title="tax deferral" label="tax deferral"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="37780" end="37787" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="37793" end="37799" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="37804" end="37810" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="37869" end="37874" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="38018" end="38029" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="38196" end="38200" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="38202" end="38207" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11663" start="38211" end="38218" title="weather" label="weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460068" start="38299" end="38314" title="flood insurance" label="flood insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327272" start="38316" end="38336" title="earthquake insurance" label="earthquake insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064047" start="38338" end="38352" title="home insurance" label="home insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="38381" end="38397" title="boiler insurance" label="boiler insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055849" start="38565" end="38583" title="Aviation insurance" label="Aviation insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="38593" end="38601" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="38697" end="38704" title="Airport" label="Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="38870" end="38886" title="Boiler insurance" label="Boiler insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q811455" start="39049" end="39078" title="Builder&amp;#x27;s risk insurance" label="Builder&amp;#x27;s risk insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q863133" start="39661" end="39675" title="Crop insurance" label="Crop insurance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39932" end="39943" title="named peril" label="named peril"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044976" start="39946" end="39967" title="Index-based insurance" label="Index-based insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327272" start="40287" end="40307" title="Earthquake insurance" label="Earthquake insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="40386" end="40396" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560103" start="40558" end="40568" title="deductible" label="deductible"/>
<link wikidata="Q909789" start="40653" end="40677" title="Earthquake engineering" label="construction of the home"/>
<link wikidata="Q884117" start="40681" end="40694" title="Fidelity bond" label="Fidelity bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460068" start="40920" end="40935" title="Flood insurance" label="Flood insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972708" start="41120" end="41152" title="National Flood Insurance Program" label="National Flood Insurance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064047" start="41199" end="41213" title="Home insurance" label="Home insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484735" start="41928" end="41946" title="Landlords&amp;#x27; insurance" label="Landlord insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356184" start="42223" end="42239" title="Marine insurance" label="Marine insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034873" start="42316" end="42332" title="Inland waterways of the United States" label="inland waterways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313538" start="42906" end="42929" title="Renters&amp;#x27; insurance" label="Renters&amp;#x27; insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q748845" start="43462" end="43473" title="Surety bond" label="Surety bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="43658" end="43676" title="Volcano" label="volcanic eruptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="43778" end="43788" title="Tropical cyclone" label="hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147581" start="44727" end="44743" title="Public liability" label="Public liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151223" start="44926" end="44968" title="Directors and officers liability insurance" label="Directors and officers liability insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q472902" start="45350" end="45380" title="Professional liability insurance" label="Errors and omissions insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246539" start="45581" end="45606" title="Prize indemnity insurance" label="Prize indemnity insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="45770" end="45780" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337788" start="45792" end="45803" title="hole in one" label="hole-in-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="45809" end="45813" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q472902" start="45828" end="45860" title="Professional liability insurance" label="Professional liability insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q472902" start="45874" end="45906" title="professional indemnity insurance" label="professional indemnity insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565355" start="46262" end="46281" title="medical malpractice" label="medical malpractice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46935" end="46951" title="excess insurance" label="excess insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881413" start="47320" end="47359" title="Umbrella insurance" label="&amp;quot;umbrella&amp;quot; insurance policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189539" start="47532" end="47536" title="loan" label="loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202997" start="47571" end="47589" title="Mortgage insurance" label="Mortgage insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384703" start="47902" end="47924" title="Trade credit insurance" label="Trade credit insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145996" start="48095" end="48126" title="Collateral protection insurance" label="Collateral protection insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804136" start="48262" end="48277" title="cyber insurance" label="Cyber-insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q104493" start="48381" end="48386" title="Risk" label="risks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="48430" end="48452" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q456632" start="48469" end="48488" title="information privacy" label="information privacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48577" end="48595" title="All-risk insurance" label="All-risk insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068361" start="48824" end="48837" title="car insurance" label="car insurance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48910" end="48930" title="Bloodstock insurance" label="Bloodstock insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="48949" end="48954" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q832109" start="49179" end="49210" title="Business interruption insurance" label="Business interruption insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251360" start="49328" end="49344" title="Defense Base Act" label="Defense Base Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420812" start="49849" end="49869" title="Expatriate insurance" label="Expatriate insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384579" start="50155" end="50163" title="Plant Hire" label="hired-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q620405" start="50271" end="50295" title="Legal expenses insurance" label="Legal expenses insurance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50555" end="50581" title="Legal expenses insurance#Before the event insurance" label="before the event insurance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50586" end="50611" title="Legal expenses insurance#After the event insurance" label="after the event insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="51062" end="51072" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620824" start="51136" end="51176" title="nuclear and radiation accidents" label="incident involving radioactive materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068109" start="51235" end="51259" title="nuclear exclusion clause" label="nuclear exclusion clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402846" start="51292" end="51339" title="Price–Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act" label="Price–Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113364" start="51344" end="51369" title="Over-redemption insurance" label="Over-redemption insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259814" start="51549" end="51562" title="Pet insurance" label="Pet insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225746" start="51675" end="51694" title="Pollution insurance" label="Pollution insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q329717" start="52322" end="52332" title="Warranty" label="warranties"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824221" start="52334" end="52343" title="guarantee" label="guarantee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810126" start="52692" end="52707" title="Title insurance" label="Title insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="52743" end="52756" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q111699874" start="52787" end="52796" title="mortgage law" label="mortgagee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4469383" start="52816" end="52820" title="lien" label="lien"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="52938" end="52949" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270407" start="52965" end="52981" title="Travel insurance" label="Travel insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851780" start="53163" end="53180" title="Tuition insurance" label="Tuition insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046208" start="53276" end="53299" title="Interest rate insurance" label="Interest rate insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445536" start="53654" end="53681" title="Benefit society" label="fraternal benefit societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042776" start="53715" end="53733" title="No-fault insurance" label="No-fault insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406896" start="55100" end="55114" title="self-insurance" label="self-insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q476118" start="55926" end="55937" title="Reinsurance" label="Reinsurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449737" start="56058" end="56079" title="Financial reinsurance" label="Financial reinsurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653906" start="56193" end="56209" title="Social insurance" label="Social insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="56779" end="56792" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q647883" start="56934" end="56952" title="National Insurance" label="National Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="56956" end="56973" title="Social safety net" label="Social safety net"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="56977" end="56992" title="Social security" label="Social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550839" start="56996" end="57034" title="Social Security debate (United States)" label="Social Security debate (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="57038" end="57069" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="57073" end="57097" title="Social welfare provision" label="Social welfare provision"/>
<link wikidata="Q114363407" start="57100" end="57119" title="Stop-loss insurance" label="Stop-loss insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="57656" end="57665" title="religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="57688" end="57693" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="57703" end="57709" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="57754" end="57765" title="community" label="communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839081" start="57771" end="57779" title="disaster" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q44454" start="58295" end="58307" title="moral hazard" label="moral hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="58349" end="58363" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="58365" end="58374" title="The Crown" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="58417" end="58430" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406896" start="58825" end="58839" title="self-insurance" label="self-insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351914" start="59214" end="59223" title="risk pool" label="risk pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="60210" end="60224" title="Life insurance" label="Life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q873442" start="60322" end="60338" title="asset management" label="asset management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868302" start="60364" end="60372" title="property insurance" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813256" start="60373" end="60391" title="casualty insurance" label="casualty insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="60446" end="60462" title="Health insurance" label="Health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q678774" start="60516" end="60533" title="employee benefits" label="employee benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="60758" end="60761" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="60766" end="60776" title="accounting" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q39911" start="60989" end="60995" title="decade" label="decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q695318" start="61175" end="61181" title="Mutual insurance" label="mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q372784" start="61348" end="61363" title="Demutualization" label="Demutualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q476118" start="61653" end="61664" title="Reinsurance" label="Reinsurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303465" start="62019" end="62036" title="Captive insurance" label="Captive insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="63479" end="63494" title="risk management" label="risk management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302468" start="64013" end="64024" title="reciprocal inter-insurance exchange" label="reciprocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q278346" start="66172" end="66179" title="AM Best" label="AM Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q605565" start="66512" end="66520" title="Swiss Re" label="Swiss Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="67072" end="67086" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="67094" end="67107" title="European Single Market" label="single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800170" start="67275" end="67296" title="McCarran–Ferguson Act" label="McCarran–Ferguson Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970687" start="67425" end="67472" title="National Association of Insurance Commissioners" label="National Association of Insurance Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742413" start="67650" end="67681" title="1988 California Proposition 103" label="1988 California Proposition 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064047" start="67780" end="67794" title="home insurance" label="home insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="67841" end="67855" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986484" start="68220" end="68251" title="insurance in the United Kingdom" label="insurance in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q638053" start="68257" end="68285" title="Financial Services Authority" label="Financial Services Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q329717" start="68460" end="68468" title="warranty" label="warranty"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050915" start="68511" end="68538" title="insurance industry in China" label="insurance industry in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807264" start="68629" end="68669" title="People&amp;#x27;s Insurance Company of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Insurance Company of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q843516" start="68936" end="68973" title="China Insurance Regulatory Commission" label="China Insurance Regulatory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q806651" start="69482" end="69496" title="Central Bank of Russia" label="Bank of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281" start="69501" end="69507" title="Yandex" label="Yandex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143561" start="69519" end="69529" title="check mark" label="check mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058438" start="70390" end="70405" title="risk assessment" label="risk assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="70919" end="70942" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q44454" start="71782" end="71794" title="moral hazard" label="moral hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864574" start="71984" end="71995" title="Maladaptation" label="maladaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="72454" end="72464" title="advertising" label="advertised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920188" start="72574" end="72587" title="plain English" label="plain English"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="73579" end="73585" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560103" start="74826" end="74836" title="deductible" label="deductible"/>
<link wikidata="Q44454" start="75275" end="75287" title="moral hazard" label="moral hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="75306" end="75315" title="Redlining" label="Redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850662" start="75498" end="75514" title="Racial profiling" label="Racial profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="75518" end="75527" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="75908" end="75932" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042398" start="76015" end="76030" title="insurance score" label="insurance score"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164659" start="76683" end="76713" title="Consumer Federation of America" label="Consumer Federation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971828" start="76755" end="76783" title="National Consumer Law Center" label="National Consumer Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787103" start="77197" end="77209" title="credit score" label="credit score"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="77212" end="77218" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q28640" start="77220" end="77230" title="profession" label="occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11920938" start="77232" end="77246" title="marital status" label="marital status"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="77252" end="77261" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="77349" end="77363" title="discrimination" label="discriminatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q523022" start="78596" end="78608" title="risk premium" label="risk premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001897" start="78862" end="78884" title="business method patent" label="business method patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="78892" end="78905" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q719059" start="78972" end="78983" title="Usage-based insurance" label="Usage Based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068361" start="78984" end="78998" title="vehicle insurance" label="auto insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248721" start="79094" end="79120" title="Progressive Corporation" label="Progressive Auto Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q444110" start="79653" end="79665" title="The Hartford" label="The Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571749" start="80603" end="80607" title="24/7 service" label="24/7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428800" start="80902" end="80914" title="rent-seeking" label="rent-seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518246" start="81315" end="81319" title="riba" label="riba"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="81327" end="81332" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="81428" end="81439" title="speculation" label="speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="81832" end="81842" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="81856" end="81866" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="81868" end="81873" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="81875" end="81885" title="Hutterites" label="Hutterites"/>
<link wikidata="Q910556" start="81887" end="81905" title="Brethren in Christ" label="Brethren in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692096" start="82032" end="82047" title="Agent of record" label="Agent of record"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867097" start="82050" end="82057" title="DIRTI 5" label="DIRTI 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327272" start="82132" end="82147" title="Earthquake insurance" label="Earthquake loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q683476" start="82150" end="82167" title="Financial adviser" label="Financial adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570807" start="82170" end="82200" title="Global assets under management" label="Global assets under management"/>
<link wikidata="Q285759" start="82203" end="82219" title="Insurance broker" label="Insurance broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q838081" start="82222" end="82237" title="Insurance fraud" label="Insurance fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042319" start="82240" end="82262" title="Insurance Hall of Fame" label="Insurance Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037642" start="82265" end="82278" title="Insurance law" label="Insurance law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048372" start="82281" end="82343" title="International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics" label="International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82346" end="82370" title="Outline of finance#Insurance" label="List of insurance topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="82373" end="82396" title="Loss control consultant" label="Loss control consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112633" start="82399" end="82417" title="Outline of finance" label="Outline of finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q476118" start="82420" end="82431" title="Reinsurance" label="Reinsurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351914" start="82434" end="82443" title="Risk pool" label="Risk pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="82446" end="82461" title="Social security" label="Social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="82464" end="82494" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="Tertiary sector of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="82554" end="82635" title="The Invisible Bankers: Everything the Insurance Industry Never Wanted You to Know" label="The Invisible Bankers: Everything the Insurance Industry Never Wanted You to Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="82651" end="82672" title="Universal health care" label="Universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="82675" end="82688" title="Welfare state" label="Welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876492" start="82697" end="82711" title="Uberrima fides" label="Uberrima fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042375" start="82826" end="82848" title="Insurance in Australia" label="Insurance in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050915" start="82852" end="82879" title="Insurance industry in China" label="Insurance industry in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056354" start="82883" end="82901" title="Insurance in India" label="Insurance in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986484" start="82905" end="82936" title="Insurance in the United Kingdom" label="Insurance in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042385" start="82940" end="82970" title="Insurance in the United States" label="Insurance in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15179" wikidata="Q1149" url="?curid=15179" title="Indira Gandhi">
<text>Indira Priyadarshini Gandhi (&quot;née&quot; Nehru; 19 November 1917 – 31 October 1984) was an Indian politician and stateswoman who served as the prime minister of India from 1966 to 1977 and again from 1980 until her assassination in 1984. She was India&#x27;s first and, to date, only female prime minister, and a central figure in Indian politics as the leader of the Indian National Congress (INC). She was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, the first prime minister of India, and the mother of Rajiv Gandhi, who succeeded her in office as the country&#x27;s prime minister. Gandhi&#x27;s cumulative tenure of 15 years and 350 days makes her the second-longest-serving Indian prime minister after her father. Henry Kissinger described her as an &quot;Iron Lady&quot;, a nickname that became associated with her tough personality.

During her father Jawaharlal Nehru&#x27;s premiership from 1947 to 1964, Gandhi was his hostess and accompanied him on his numerous foreign trips. In 1959, she played a part in the dissolution of the communist-led Kerala state government as then-president of the Indian National Congress, otherwise a ceremonial position to which she was elected earlier that year. Lal Bahadur Shastri, who had succeeded Nehru as prime minister upon his death in 1964, appointed her minister of information and broadcasting in his government; the same year she was elected to the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the Indian Parliament. After Shastri&#x27;s sudden death in January 1966, Gandhi defeated her rival, Morarji Desai, in the INC&#x27;s parliamentary leadership election to become leader and also succeeded Shastri as prime minister. She led the Congress to victory in two subsequent elections, starting with the 1967 general election, in which she was first elected to the lower house of the Indian parliament, the Lok Sabha. In 1971, her party secured its first landslide victory since her father&#x27;s sweep in 1962, focusing on issues such as poverty. But following the nationwide state of emergency she implemented, she faced massive anti-incumbency sentiment causing the INC to lose the 1977 election, the first time in the history of India to happen so. She even lost her own parliamentary constituency. However, due to her portrayal as a strong leader and the weak governance of the Janata Party, her party won the next election by a landslide and she returned to the premiership.

As prime minister, Gandhi was known for her uncompromising political stances and centralization of power within the executive branch. In 1967, she headed a military conflict with China in which India repelled Chinese incursions into the Himalayas. In 1971, she went to war with Pakistan in support of the independence movement and war of independence in East Pakistan, which resulted in an Indian victory and the independence of Bangladesh, as well as increasing India&#x27;s influence to the point where it became the sole regional power in South Asia. She played a crucial role in initiating India&#x27;s first successful nuclear weapon test in 1974. Her rule saw India grow closer to the Soviet Union by signing a friendship treaty in 1971, with India receiving military, financial, and diplomatic support from the Soviet Union during its conflict with Pakistan in the same year. Though India was at the forefront of the non-aligned movement, Gandhi made it one of the Soviet Union&#x27;s closest allies in Asia, each often supporting the other in proxy wars and at the United Nations. Responding to separatist tendencies and a call for revolution, she instituted a state of emergency from 1975 to 1977, during which she ruled by decree and basic civil liberties were suspended. More than 100,000 political opponents, journalists and dissenters were imprisoned. She faced the growing Sikh separatism movement throughout her fourth premiership; in response, she ordered Operation Blue Star, which involved military action in the Golden Temple and killed hundreds of Sikhs. On 31 October 1984, she was assassinated by two of her bodyguards, both of whom were Sikh nationalists seeking retribution for the events at the temple.

Gandhi is remembered as the most powerful woman in the world during her tenure. Her supporters cite her leadership during victories over geopolitical rivals China and Pakistan, the Green Revolution, a growing economy in the early 1980s, and her anti-poverty campaign that led her to be known as &quot;Mother Indira&quot; (a pun on &quot;Mother India&quot;) among the country&#x27;s poor and rural classes. Critics note her cult of personality and authoritarian rule of India during the Emergency. In 1999, she was named &quot;Woman of the Millennium&quot; in an online poll organized by the BBC. In 2020, she was named by &quot;Time&quot; magazine among the 100 women who defined the past century as counterparts to the magazine&#x27;s previous choices for Man of the Year.

== Early life and career ==

Indira Gandhi was born Indira Nehru, into a Kashmiri Pandit family on 19 November 1917 in Allahabad (present-day Prayagraj) in Uttar Pradesh. Her father, Jawaharlal Nehru, was a leading figure in the Indian movement for independence from British rule, and became the first Prime Minister of the Dominion (and later Republic) of India. Indira was her parents&#x27; only surviving child (she had a younger brother who died while young); she grew up with her mother, Kamala Nehru, at the Anand Bhavan, a large family estate in Allahabad. In 1930, the Nehru family donated the mansion to the Indian National Congress and renamed it Swaraj Bhavan (meaning abode of freedom). A new mansion was built nearby to serve as the family residence and given the name of the old Anand Bhavan. Indira had a lonely and unhappy childhood. Her father was often away, directing political activities or incarcerated, while her mother was frequently bedridden with illness and later suffered an early death from tuberculosis. Indira had limited contact with her father, mostly through letters.

Indira Nehru was taught mostly at home by tutors and attended school intermittently until matriculation in 1934. She was a student at the Modern School in Delhi, St. Cecilia&#x27;s and St. Mary&#x27;s Convent schools in Allahabad, the International School of Geneva in Geneva, the Ecole Nouvelle in Bex in Vaud, Switzerland, and the Pupils&#x27; Own School in Poona in Maharashtra and in Bombay, which is affiliated with the University of Mumbai. She and her mother moved to the Belur Math headquarters of the Ramakrishna Mission where Swami Ranganathananda was her guardian. Indira then studied at the Vishwa Bharati in Santiniketan, which became Visva-Bharati University in 1951. During an interview with Rabindranath Tagore, he named Indira &quot;Priyadarshini&quot;, which means &quot;looking at everything with kindness&quot; in Sanskrit and she became known as Indira Priyadarshini Nehru. A year later, however, she had to leave university to attend to her ailing mother in Lausanne, Switzerland. There it was decided that Indira would continue her education at the University of Oxford. After her mother died, Indira attended the Badminton School in Bristol, England for a short time period and then enrolled at Somerville College in Oxford in 1937 to study history. She had to take the entrance examination twice, having failed at her first attempt with a poor performance in Latin. At Oxford, she excelled in history, political science, and economics but her grades in Latin—a compulsory subject—remained poor. However she was active socially at the university and was a member of the Oxford Majlis Asian Society.

During her time in Europe, Indira Nehru was plagued with ill health and was constantly attended to by doctors. She had to make repeated trips to Switzerland to recover, disrupting her studies. She was there in 1940, when Germany rapidly conquered Europe. Nehru tried to return to England through Portugal but was left stranded for nearly two months. She managed to enter England in early 1941, and from there returned to India without completing her studies at Oxford. The university later awarded her an honorary degree. In 2010, Oxford honoured her further by selecting her as one of the ten Oxasians, illustrious Asian graduates from the University of Oxford. During her stay in Britain, Nehru frequently met her future husband Feroze Gandhi (no relation to Mahatma Gandhi). They were married in Allahabad according to Adi Dharm rituals, although Feroze belonged to a Zoroastrian Parsi family of Gujarat. The couple had two sons, Rajiv Gandhi (born 1944) and Sanjay Gandhi (born 1946).

In September 1942, Indira Gandhi was arrested over her role in the Quit India Movement. She was released from jail in April 1943. &quot;Mud entered our souls in the drabness of prison,&quot; she later recalled her time in the jail. She added, &quot;When I came out, it was such a shock to see colors again I thought I would go out of my mind.&quot;

In the 1950s, Indira, now Indira Gandhi after her marriage, unofficially served her father as a personal assistant during his tenure as the first prime minister of India. Near the end of the 1950s, Gandhi served as the president of the Congress. In that capacity, she was instrumental in having the communist-led Kerala state government dismissed in 1959. That government was India&#x27;s first elected communist government. After her father&#x27;s death in 1964 she was appointed a member of the Rajya Sabha (upper house) and served in Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri&#x27;s cabinet as Minister of Information and Broadcasting. In January 1966, after Shastri&#x27;s death, the Congress legislative party elected her over Morarji Desai as their leader. Congress party veteran K. Kamaraj was instrumental in Gandhi achieving victory. Because she was a woman, other political leaders in India saw Gandhi as weak and hoped to use her as a puppet once elected: Congress President Kamaraj orchestrated Mrs. Gandhi&#x27;s selection as prime minister because he perceived her to be weak enough that he and the other regional party bosses could control her, and yet strong enough to beat Desai [her political opponent] in a party election because of the high regard for her father... a woman would be an ideal tool for the Syndicate.

== First, second and third terms as prime minister (1966–1977) ==
Gandhi&#x27;s first eleven years serving as prime minister saw her evolve from the perception of Congress party leaders as their puppet, to a strong leader with the iron resolve to split the party over her policy positions, or to go to war with Pakistan to assist Bangladesh in the 1971 liberation war. At the end of 1977, she was such a dominating figure in Indian politics that Congress party president D. K. Barooah had coined the phrase &quot;India is Indira and Indira is India.&quot;

=== First year ===
Gandhi formed her government with Morarji Desai as deputy prime minister and finance minister. At the beginning of her first term as prime minister, she was widely criticised by the media and the opposition as a &quot;Goongi goodiya&quot; (Hindi for a &quot;dumb doll&quot;) of the Congress party bosses who had orchestrated her election and then tried to constrain her.
Indira was a reluctant successor to her famed father, although she had accompanied him on several official foreign visits and played an anchor role in bringing down the first democratically elected communist government in Kerala. According to certain sources it was the socialist leader Ram Manohar Lohia that first derided her personality as the &quot;Goongi Goodiya&quot; (Hindi for &quot;dumb doll&quot;) that later was echoed by other Congress politicians who were wary of her rise in the party.

One of her first major actions was to crush the separatist Mizo National Front uprising in Mizoram in 1966.

=== 1967–1971 ===
The first electoral test for Gandhi was the 1967 general elections for the Lok Sabha and state assemblies. The Congress Party won a reduced majority in the Lok Sabha after these elections owing to widespread disenchantment over the rising prices of commodities, unemployment, economic stagnation and a food crisis. Gandhi was elected to the Lok Sabha from the Raebareli constituency. She had a rocky start after agreeing to devalue the rupee which created hardship for Indian businesses and consumers. The importation of wheat from the United States fell through due to political disputes.

For the first time, the party also lost power or lost its majority in a number of states across the country. After the 1967 elections, Gandhi gradually began to move towards socialist policies. In 1969, she fell out with senior Congress party leaders over several issues. Chief among them was her decision to support V. V. Giri, the independent candidate rather than the official Congress party candidate Neelam Sanjiva Reddy for the vacant position of president of India. The other was the announcement by the prime minister of Bank nationalisation without consulting the finance minister, Morarji Desai. These steps culminated in party president S. Nijalingappa expelling her from the party for indiscipline. Gandhi, in turn, floated her own faction of the Congress party and managed to retain most of the Congress MPs on her side with only 65 on the side of the Congress (O) faction. The Gandhi faction, called Congress (R), lost its majority in the parliament but remained in power with the support of regional parties such as DMK. The policies of the Congress under Gandhi, before the 1971 elections, also included proposals for the abolition of the Privy Purse to former rulers of the princely states and the 1969 nationalization of the fourteen largest banks in India.

==== Military conflict with China ====
In 1967, a military conflict alongside the border of the Himalayan Kingdom of Sikkim, then an Indian protectorate, broke out between India and China. India won by repelling Chinese attacks and forced the subsequent withdrawal of Chinese forces from the region. Throughout the conflict, the Indian losses were 88 killed and 163 wounded while Chinese casualties stood at 340 killed and 450 wounded, according to the Indian Defense Ministry. Chinese sources made no declarations of casualties but alleged India to be the aggressor.

In December 1967, Indira Gandhi remarked these developments that &quot;China continues to maintain an attitude of hostility towards us and spares no opportunity to malign us and to carry on anti-Indian propaganda not only against the Indian Government but the whole way of our democratic functioning.&quot; In 1975, Gandhi incorporated Sikkim into India, after a referendum in which a majority of Sikkimese voted to join India. The move was condemned as being a &quot;despicable act of the Indian Government&quot; by China. Chinese government mouthpiece &quot;China Daily&quot; wrote that &quot;the Nehrus, father and daughter, had always acted in this way, and Indira Gandhi had gone further&quot;.

=== 1971–1977 ===
Garibi Hatao (Remove Poverty) was the resonant theme for Gandhi&#x27;s 1971 political bid. The slogan was developed in response to the combined opposition alliance&#x27;s use of the two-word manifesto—&quot;Indira Hatao&quot; (Remove Indira). The Garibi Hatao slogan and the proposed anti-poverty programs that came with it were designed to give Gandhi independent national support, based on the rural and urban poor. This would allow her to bypass the dominant rural castes both in and of state and local governments as well as the urban commercial class. For their part, the previously voiceless poor would at last gain both political worth and political weight. The programs created through Garibi Hatao, though carried out locally, were funded and developed by the Central Government in New Delhi. The program was supervised and staffed by the Indian National Congress party. &quot;These programs also provided the central political leadership with new and vast patronage resources to be disbursed ... throughout the country.&quot;

The Congress government faced numerous problems during this term. Some of these were due to high inflation which in turn was caused by wartime expenses, drought in some parts of the country and, more importantly, the 1973 oil crisis. Opposition to her in the 1973–75 period, after the Gandhi wave had receded, was strongest in the states of Bihar and Gujarat. In Bihar, Jayaprakash Narayan, the veteran leader came out of retirement to lead the protest movement there.

==== War with Pakistan ====
Gandhi&#x27;s biggest achievement following the 1971 election came in December 1971 with India&#x27;s decisive victory over Pakistan in the Indo-Pakistani War. That victory occurred in the last two weeks of the Bangladesh Liberation War, which led to the formation of independent Bangladesh. An insurgency in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) formed in early 1971, with Bengali&#x27;s and East Pakistanis revolting against authoritarian rule from the central West Pakistan Government. In response, Pakistani security forces launched the infamous Operation Searchlight, in which Pakistan committed genocide among Bengali Hindus, nationalists and intelligentsia. Gandhi&#x27;s India was initially restrained from intervening in the insurgency but quickly started to support Bengali rebels through the provision of military supplies. Indian forces clashed multiple times with Pakistani forces in the Eastern border. At one point, Indian forces along with Mukti Bahini rebels allied together and attacked Pakistani forces at Dhalai. The attack, supported and later successfully executed by India, was done to stop Pakistani cross-border shelling. The battle occurred more than a month before India&#x27;s official intervention in December. Gandhi quickly dispatched more troops to the Eastern border with East Pakistan, hoping to support Mukti Bahini rebels and cease any Pakistani infiltration. Indian forces then clashed again with Pakistani forces after Indian forces crossed the border and secured Garibpur after a one-day battle lasting from 20 November 1971 to the 21st. The next day, on 22 November, Indian and Pakistani aircraft engaged in a dogfight over the Boyra Salient, in which thousands of people watched as 4 Indian Folland Gnats shot down 2 Pakistani Canadair Sabres and damaged another. Both Pakistani pilots that were shot down were captured as prisoners of war. The Battle of Boyra instantly made the 4 Indian pilots celebrities and created large-scale nationalism as the Bangladesh Liberation War saw more and more Indian intervention and escalation. Other clashes also happened on the same day but did not receive as much media attention as did the battle of Boyra and Garibpur. On 3 December 1971, the Pakistan Air Force launched Operation Chengiz Khan, which saw Pakistani aircraft attacking Indian airbases and military installations across the Western border in a pre-emptive strike. The initial night-time attack by Pakistani forces was foiled, failing to inflict any major damage on Indian airbases, allowing Indian aircraft to counterattack into West Pakistan. Gandhi quickly declared a state of emergency and addressed the nation on radio shortly after midnight, stating: &quot;We must be prepared for a long period of hardship and sacrifice.&quot;

Both countries mobilized for war and Gandhi ordered full-out war, ordering an invasion into East Pakistan. Pakistan&#x27;s Navy had not improved since the 1965 war, while the Pakistani airforce could not launch attacks on the same scale as the Indian airforce. The Pakistan Army quickly attempted major land operations on the Western border, but most of these attacks besides some in Kashmir stalled, and allowed Indian counterattacks to gain land. The Pakistan Army lacked wide-scale organization which contributed to miscommunication and high casualties in the Western front.

In the Eastern Front of the war, Indian generals opted for a high speed lightning war, using mechanized and airborne units to quickly bypass Pakistani opposition and make quick strides towards the capital of East Pakistan, Dhaka. Jagjit Singh Aurora (who later became a critic of Gandhi in 1984) led Indian Army&#x27;s Eastern Command. The Indian Air Force quickly overcame the small contingent of Pakistani aircraft in East Pakistan, allowing for air superiority over the region. Indian forces liberated Jessore and several other towns during the Battle of Sylhet between 7 December and 15 December 1971, which saw India conduct its first heliborne operation. India then conducted another airdrop on 9 December, with Indian forces led by Major General Sagat Singh capturing just under 5,000 Pakistani POWs and also crossing the Meghna River towards Dhaka. Two days later, Indian forces conducted the largest airborne operation since World War II. 750 men of the Army&#x27;s Parachute Regiment landed in Tangail and defeated the Pakistani forces in the area, securing a direct route to Dhaka. Little Pakistani forces escaped the battle with only 900 out of 7000 soldiers retreating back to Dhaka alive. By 12 December, Indian forces had reached the outskirts of Dhaka and had prepared to besiege the capital. Indian heavy artillery arrived by the 14th, and shelled the city.

As surrender became apparent by 14 December 1971, Pakistani paramilitaries and militia roamed the streets of Dhaka during the night, kidnapping, torturing and then executing any educated Bengali who was viewed as someone who could lead Bangladesh once Pakistan surrendered. Over 200 of these people were killed on the 14th. By 16 December, Pakistani morale had reached a low point, with the Indian Army finally encircling Dhaka and besieging the city. On the 16th, Indian forces issued a 30-minute ultimatum for the city to surrender. Seeing that the city&#x27;s defences paled in comparison to the Mukti Bahini and Indian forces outside the city, Lt-Gen. A.A.K. Niazi (Cdr. of Eastern Command) and his deputy, V-Adm. M.S. Khan surrendered the city without resistance. BBC News captured the moment of surrender as Indian soldiers from the Parachute Regiment streamed into the city. As Indian forces and Mukti Bahini rounded up the remaining Pakistani forces, Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora of India and A.A.K. Niazi of Pakistan signed the Pakistani Instrument of Surrender at 16:31Hrs IST on 16 December 1971. The surrender signified the collapse of the East Pakistan Government along with the end of the war. 93,000 soldiers of the Pakistani security forces surrendered, the largest surrender since World War II. The entire four-tiered military surrendered to India along with its officers and generals. Large crowds flooded the scenes as anti-Pakistani slogans emerged and Pakistani POWs were beaten by the locals. Eventually, Indian officers formed a human-chain to protect Pakistani POWs and Niazi from being lynched by the belligerent locals. Most of the 93,000 captured were Pakistan Army officers or paramilitary officers, along with 12,000 supporters (razakars). Hostilities officially ended on 17 December 1971. 8,000 Pakistani soldiers were killed along with 25,000 wounded; Indian forces suffered only 3,000 dead and 12,000 wounded. India claimed to have captured 3.6k square kilometres of Pakistani land on the Western Front while losing 126 square kilometres of land to Pakistan.

Gandhi was hailed as Goddess Durga by the people as well as the opposition leaders at the time when India defeated Pakistan in the war. In the elections held for State assemblies across India in March 1972, the Congress (R) swept to power in most states riding on the post-war &quot;Indira wave&quot;.

==== Verdict on electoral malpractice ====
On 12 June 1975, the Allahabad High Court declared Indira Gandhi&#x27;s election to the Lok Sabha in 1971 void on the grounds of electoral malpractice. In an election petition filed by her 1971 opponent, Raj Narain (who later defeated her in the 1977 parliamentary election running in the Raebareli constituency), alleged several major as well as minor instances of the use of government resources for campaigning. Gandhi had asked one of her colleagues in government, Ashoke Kumar Sen, to defend her in court. She gave evidence in her defence during the trial. After almost four years, the court found her guilty of dishonest election practices, excessive election expenditure, and of using government machinery and officials for party purposes. The judge, however, rejected the more serious charges of bribery, laid against her in the case.

The court ordered her stripped of her parliamentary seat and banned her from running for any office for six years. As the constitution requires that the Prime Minister must be a member of either the Lok Sabha or the Rajya Sabha, the two houses of the Parliament of India, she was effectively removed from office. However, Gandhi rejected calls to resign. She announced plans to appeal to the Supreme Court and insisted that the conviction did not undermine her position. She said, &quot;There is a lot of talk about our government not being clean, but from our experience the situation was very much worse when [opposition] parties were forming governments.&quot; She dismissed criticism of the way her Congress Party raised election campaign money, saying all parties used the same methods. The prime minister retained the support of her party, which issued a statement backing her.

After news of the verdict spread, hundreds of supporters demonstrated outside her house, pledging their loyalty. Indian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom Braj Kumar Nehru said Gandhi&#x27;s conviction would not harm her political career. &quot;Mrs Gandhi has still today overwhelming support in the country,&quot; he said. &quot;I believe the prime minister of India will continue in office until the electorate of India decides otherwise&quot;.

==== State of Emergency (1975–1977) ====
Gandhi moved to restore order by ordering the arrest of most of the opposition participating in the unrest. Her Cabinet and government recommended that then President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed declare a state of emergency because of the disorder and lawlessness following the Allahabad High Court decision. Accordingly, Ahmed declared a State of Emergency caused by internal disorder, based on the provisions of Article 352(1) of the Constitution, on 25 June 1975. At the time of emergency, there was a widespread rumour that Gandhi had ordered her search guards to eliminate firebrand trade unionist and socialist party leader George Fernandes, while he was on a run. Few International organisations and Government officials issued request letters to Indira Gandhi pleading her to relinquish such decrees. Fernandes had called a nationwide railway strike in 1974, that shut the railways for three weeks and became the largest industrial action in Asia. Ghandhi had turned furious over him and the strike was massively cracked down.

==== Rule by decree ====
Within a few months, President&#x27;s rule was imposed on the two opposition party ruled states of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu thereby bringing the entire country under direct Central rule or by governments led by the ruling Congress party. Police were granted powers to impose curfews and detain citizens indefinitely; all publications were subjected to substantial censorship by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. Finally, the impending legislative assembly elections were postponed indefinitely, with all opposition-controlled state governments being removed by virtue of the constitutional provision allowing for a dismissal of a state government on the recommendation of the state&#x27;s governor.

Indira Gandhi used the emergency provisions to change conflicting party members:
President Ahmed issued ordinances that did not require debate in the Parliament, allowing Gandhi to rule by decree.

==== Rise of Sanjay Gandhi ====
During the emergency Gandhi&#x27;s younger son, Sanjay Gandhi, entered into Indian politics. He wielded tremendous power during the emergency without holding any government office. According to Mark Tully, &quot;His inexperience did not stop him from using the Draconian powers his mother, Indira Gandhi, had taken to terrorise the administration, setting up what was in effect a police state.&quot; It was said that during the emergency Sanjay virtually ran India along with his friends, especially Bansi Lal. It was also quipped that Sanjay had total control over his mother and that the government was run by the PMH (Prime Minister House) rather than the PMO (Prime Minister Office).

== 1977 election and opposition years ==
In 1977, after extending the state of emergency twice, Indira Gandhi called elections to give the electorate a chance to vindicate her rule. She may have grossly misjudged her popularity by reading what the heavily censored press wrote about her. She was opposed by the Janata alliance of Opposition parties. The alliance was made up of Bharatiya Jana Sangh, Congress (O), The Socialist parties, and Charan Singh&#x27;s Bharatiya Kranti Dal representing northern peasants and farmers. The Janata alliance, with Jai Prakash Narayan as its spiritual guide, claimed the elections were the last chance for India to choose between &quot;democracy and dictatorship&quot;. The Congress Party split during the election campaign of 1977; veteran Gandhi supporters like Jagjivan Ram, Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna, and Nandini Satpathy were compelled to part ways and form a new political entity, the CFD (Congress for Democracy) due primarily to intra-party politicking and the circumstances created by Sanjay Gandhi. The prevailing rumour was that he intended to dislodge Indira Gandhi, and the trio stood to prevent that. The Gandhi&#x27;s Congress party was soundly crushed in the elections. The Janata Party&#x27;s democracy or dictatorship claim seemed to resonate with the public. Indira Gandhi and Sanjay Gandhi lost their seats, and Congress was reduced to 153 seats (compared with 350 in the previous Lok Sabha), 92 of which were in the South. The Janata alliance, under the leadership of Morarji Desai, came to power after the State of Emergency was lifted. The alliance parties later merged to form the Janata Party under the guidance of Gandhian leader, Jayaprakash Narayan. The other leaders of the Janata Party were Charan Singh, Raj Narain, George Fernandes, and Atal Bihari Vajpayee.

After the humiliating defeat in the election, the king of Nepal, through an intermediatory offered to move her and her family to Nepal. She refused to shift herself, but was open to move her two sons Sanjay Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi. However, after consulting with Kao, she declined the offer altogether keeping in view of her future political career.

=== In opposition and return to power ===
Since Indira Gandhi had lost her seat in the election, the defeated Congress party appointed Yashwantrao Chavan as their parliamentary party leader. Soon afterwards, the Congress party split again with Gandhi floating her own Congress faction called Congress(I) where I stood for Indira. She won a by-election in the Chikmagalur Constituency and took a seat in the Lok Sabha in November 1978 after the Janata Party&#x27;s attempts to have Kannada matinee idol Rajkumar run against her failed when he refused to contest the election saying he wanted to remain apolitical. However, the Janata government&#x27;s home minister, Charan Singh, ordered her arrest along with Sanjay Gandhi on several charges, none of which would be easy to prove in an Indian court. The arrest meant that Gandhi was automatically expelled from Parliament. The allegations included that she &quot;had planned or thought of killing all opposition leaders in jail during the Emergency&quot;. However, the strategy backfired disastrously. In response to her arrest, Gandhi&#x27;s supporters hijacked an Indian Airlines jet and demanded her immediate release. Her arrest and long-running trial gained her sympathy from many people. The Janata coalition was only united by its hatred of Gandhi (or &quot;that woman&quot; as some called her). The party included right wing Hindu Nationalists, Socialists, and former Congress party members. With so little in common, the Morarji Desai government was bogged down by infighting. In 1979, the government began to unravel over the issue of the dual loyalties of some members to Janata and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS)—the Hindu nationalist, paramilitary organisation. The ambitious Union finance minister, Charan Singh, who as the Union home minister during the previous year had ordered the Gandhi&#x27;s&#x27; arrests, took advantage of this and started courting Indira and Sanjay. After a significant exodus from the party to Singh&#x27;s faction, Desai resigned in July 1979. Singh was appointed prime minister, by President Reddy, after Indira Gandhi and Sanjay Gandhi promised Singh that Congress (I) would support his government from outside on certain conditions. The conditions included dropping all charges against Indira and Sanjay. Since Singh refused to drop them, Congress (I) withdrew its support and President Reddy dissolved Parliament in August 1979.

Before the 1980 elections Indira Gandhi approached the Shahi Imam of Jama Masjid at the time, Syed Abdullah Bukhari and entered into an agreement with him on the basis of 10-point programme to secure the support of the Muslim votes. In the elections held in January, Congress (I) under Gandhi&#x27;s leadership returned to power with a landslide majority.

== 1980 elections and fourth term ==
The Congress Party under Gandhi swept back into power in January 1980. In this election, Gandhi was elected by the voters of the Medak constituency. On 23 June, Sanjay Gandhi was killed in a plane crash while performing an aerobatic manoeuvre in New Delhi. In 1980, as a tribute to her son&#x27;s dream of launching an indigenously manufactured car, Indira Gandhi nationalized Sanjay&#x27;s debt-ridden company, Maruti Udyog, for Rs. 43,000,000 (4.34 crore) and invited joint venture bids from automobile companies around the world. Suzuki of Japan was selected as the partner. The company launched its first Indian-manufactured car in 1984.

By the time of Sanjay&#x27;s death, Indira Gandhi trusted only family members, and therefore persuaded her reluctant son, Rajiv, to enter politics. Her PMO office staff included H. Y. Sharada Prasad as her information adviser and speechwriter.

=== Operation Blue Star ===
After the 1977 elections, a coalition led by the Sikh-majority Akali Dal came to power in the northern Indian state of Punjab. In an effort to split the Akali Dal and gain popular support among the Sikhs, Gandhi&#x27;s Congress Party helped to bring the orthodox religious leader Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale to prominence in Punjab politics. Later, Bhindranwale&#x27;s organisation, Damdami Taksal, became embroiled in violence with another religious sect called the Sant Nirankari Mission and he was accused of instigating the murder of Jagat Narain, the owner of the &quot;Punjab Kesari&quot; newspaper. After being arrested, Bhindranwale disassociated himself from the Congress Party and joined Akali Dal. In July 1982, he led the campaign for the implementation of the Anandpur Resolution, which demanded greater autonomy for the Sikh-majority state. Meanwhile, a small group of Sikhs, including some of Bhindranwale&#x27;s followers, turned to militancy after being targeted by government officials and police for supporting the Anandpur Resolution. In 1982, Bhindranwale and approximately 200 armed followers moved into a guest house called the Guru Nanak Niwas near the Golden Temple.

By 1983, the Temple complex had become a fort for many militants. &quot;The Statesman&quot; later reported that light machine guns and semi-automatic rifles were known to have been brought into the compound. On 23 April 1983, the Punjab Police Deputy Inspector General A. S. Atwal was shot dead as he left the Temple compound. The next day, Harchand Singh Longowal (then president of Akali Dal) confirmed the involvement of Bhindranwale in the murder. After several futile negotiations, in June 1984, Gandhi ordered the Indian army to enter the Golden Temple to remove Bhindranwale and his supporters from the complex. The army used heavy artillery, including tanks, in the action code-named Operation Blue Star. The operation badly damaged or destroyed parts of the Temple complex, including the Akal Takht shrine and the Sikh library. It led to the deaths of many Sikh fighters and innocent pilgrims. The number of casualties remains disputed, with estimates ranging from many hundreds to many thousands.

Gandhi was accused of using the attack for political ends. Harjinder Singh Dilgeer stated that she attacked the temple complex to present herself as a great hero in order to win the general elections planned towards the end of 1984. There was fierce criticism of the action by Sikhs in India and overseas. There were also incidents of mutiny by Sikh soldiers in the aftermath of the attack.

== Assassination ==

On 31 October 1984, two of Gandhi&#x27;s Sikh bodyguards, Satwant Singh and Beant Singh, shot her with their service weapons in the garden of the prime minister&#x27;s residence at 1 Safdarjung Road, New Delhi, allegedly in revenge for Operation Blue Star. The shooting occurred as she was walking past a wicket gate guarded by the two men. She was to be interviewed by the British filmmaker Peter Ustinov, who was filming a documentary for Irish television. Beant shot her three times using his side-arm; Satwant fired 30 rounds. The men dropped their weapons and surrendered. Afterwards, they were taken away by other guards into a closed room where Beant was shot dead. Kehar Singh was later arrested for being part of the conspiracy in the attack. Satwant and Kehar were sentenced to death and hanged in Delhi&#x27;s Tihar Jail.

Gandhi was taken to the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences at 9:30 AM where doctors operated on her. She was declared dead at 2:20 PM. The post-mortem examination was conducted by a team of doctors headed by Tirath Das Dogra. Dogra said that Gandhi had sustained as many as 30 bullet wounds from two sources: a Sten submachine gun and a .38 Special revolver. The assailants had fired 31 bullets at her, of which 30 hit her; 23 had passed through her body while seven remained inside her. Dogra extracted bullets to establish the make of the weapons used and to match each weapon with the bullets recovered by ballistic examination. The bullets were matched with their respective weapons at the Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CFSL) Delhi. Subsequently, Dogra appeared in Shri Mahesh Chandra&#x27;s court as an expert witness (PW-5); he gave his testimony in several sessions. The cross examination was conducted by Shri Pran Nath Lekhi, the defence counsel. Salma Sultan provided the first news of her assassination on Doordarshan&#x27;s evening news on 31 October 1984, more than 10 hours after she was shot.
Gandhi was cremated in accordance with Hindu tradition on 3 November near Raj Ghat. The site where she was cremated is known today as Shakti Sthal. Paying homage, Gandhi&#x27;s body lay in state at Teen Murti House. Thousands of followers strained for a glimpse of the cremation. Her funeral was televised live on domestic and international stations, including the BBC. After her death, the Parade Ground was converted to the Indira Gandhi Park which was inaugurated by her son, Rajiv Gandhi.

Gandhi&#x27;s assassination dramatically changed the political landscape. Rajiv succeeded his mother as prime minister within hours of her murder and anti-Sikh riots erupted, lasting for several days and killing more than 3,000 Sikhs in New Delhi and an estimated 8,000 across India. Many Congress leaders were believed to be behind the anti-Sikh massacre.

=== International reaction ===
Gandhi&#x27;s death was mourned worldwide. World leaders condemned the assassination and said her death would leave a &#x27;big emptiness&#x27; in international affairs. In Moscow, Soviet President Konstantin Chernenko sent condolences, &quot;The Soviet people learned with pain and sorrow about the untimely death in a villainous assassination of the glorious daughter of the great Indian people, a fiery fighter for peace and security of peoples and a great friend of the Soviet Union&quot;. President Ronald Reagan, along with Secretary of State George Shultz, visited the Indian Embassy to sign a book of condolences and expressed his &#x27;shock, revulsion, and grief&#x27; over the assassination. 42nd vice president of the United States Walter Mondale called Gandhi &#x27;a great leader of a great democracy&#x27; and deplored &#x27;this shocking act of violence&#x27;. Asian, African, and European leaders mourned Gandhi as a great champion of democracy and leader of the Non-Aligned Movement expressed its &#x27;deepest grief&#x27; and called the killing a &#x27;terrorist&#x27; act. South Korean President Chun Doo-hwan, said Gandhi&#x27;s death meant the &#x27;loss of a great leader to the whole world.&#x27; Yugoslav President Veselin Đuranović, Pakistani President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, Italian President Sandro Pertini, Pope John Paul II at the Vatican, and French President François Mitterrand condemned the killing. At the United Nations, the General Assembly paused during its work as shocked delegates mourned the death. Assembly President Paul Lusaka of Zambia postponed a scheduled debate and hastily organized a memorial meeting.

== Foreign policy ==

Gandhi is remembered for her ability to effectively promote Indian foreign policy measures.

=== South Asia ===
In early 1971, disputed elections in Pakistan led then East Pakistan to declare independence as Bangladesh. Repression and violence by the Pakistani army led to 10 million refugees crossing the border into India over the following months. Finally, in December 1971, Gandhi intervened directly in the conflict to liberate Bangladesh. India emerged victorious following the war with Pakistan to become the dominant power of South Asia. India had signed a treaty with the Soviet Union promising mutual assistance in the case of war, while Pakistan received active support from the United States during the conflict. U.S. President Richard Nixon disliked Gandhi personally, referring to her as a &quot;bitch&quot; and a &quot;clever fox&quot; in his private communication with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. Nixon later wrote of the war: &quot;[Gandhi] suckered [America]. Suckered us ... this woman suckered us.&quot; Relations with the U.S. became distant as Gandhi developed closer ties with the Soviet Union after the war. The latter grew to become India&#x27;s largest trading partner and its biggest arms supplier for much of Gandhi&#x27;s premiership. India&#x27;s new hegemonic position, as articulated under the &quot;Indira Doctrine&quot;, led to attempts to bring the Himalayan states under India&#x27;s sphere of influence. Nepal and Bhutan remained aligned with India, while in 1975, after years of campaigning, Sikkim voted to join India in a referendum.

India maintained close ties with neighbouring Bangladesh (formerly East Pakistan) following the Liberation War. Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman recognised Gandhi&#x27;s contributions to the independence of Bangladesh. However, Mujibur Rahman&#x27;s pro-India policies antagonised many in Bangladeshi politics and the military, which feared that Bangladesh had become a client state of India. The Assassination of Mujibur Rahman in 1975 led to the establishment of Islamist military regimes that sought to distance the country from India. Gandhi&#x27;s relationship with the military regimes was strained because of her alleged support of anti-Islamist leftist guerrilla forces in Bangladesh. Generally, however, there was a rapprochement between Gandhi and the Bangladeshi regimes, although issues such as border disputes and the Farakka Dam remained an irritant to bilateral ties. In 2011, the Government of Bangladesh conferred its highest state award for non-nationals, the Bangladesh Freedom Honour posthumously on Gandhi for her &quot;outstanding contribution&quot; to the country&#x27;s independence.

Gandhi&#x27;s approach to dealing with Sri Lanka&#x27;s ethnic problems was initially accommodating. She enjoyed cordial relations with Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike. In 1974, India ceded the tiny islet of Katchatheevu to Sri Lanka to save Bandaranaike&#x27;s socialist government from a political disaster. However, relations soured over Sri Lanka&#x27;s movement away from socialism under J. R. Jayewardene, whom Gandhi despised as a &quot;western puppet&quot;. India under Gandhi was alleged to have supported the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) militants in the 1980s to put pressure on Jayewardene to abide by Indian interests. Nevertheless, Gandhi rejected demands to invade Sri Lanka in the aftermath of Black July 1983, an anti-Tamil pogrom carried out by Sinhalese mobs. Gandhi made a statement emphasising that she stood for the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka, although she also stated that India cannot &quot;remain a silent spectator to any injustice done to the Tamil community.&quot;

India&#x27;s relationship with Pakistan remained strained after the Shimla Accord in 1972. Gandhi&#x27;s authorisation of the detonation of a nuclear device at Pokhran in 1974 was viewed by Pakistani leader Zulfikar Ali Bhutto as an attempt to intimidate Pakistan into accepting India&#x27;s hegemony in the subcontinent. However, in May 1976, she and Bhutto both agreed to reopen diplomatic establishments and normalise relations. After General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq rose to power in Pakistan in 1978, India&#x27;s relations with its neighbour reached a nadir. Gandhi accused General Zia of supporting Khalistani militants in Punjab. Military hostilities recommenced in 1984 following Gandhi&#x27;s authorisation of Operation Meghdoot. India was victorious in the resulting Siachen conflict against Pakistan.

In order to keep the Soviet Union and the United States out of South Asia, Gandhi was instrumental in establishing the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) in 1983

=== Middle East ===
Gandhi remained a staunch supporter of the Palestinians in the Arab–Israeli conflict and was critical of the Middle East diplomacy sponsored by the United States. Israel was viewed as a religious state, and thus an analogue to India&#x27;s archrival Pakistan. Indian diplomats hoped to win Arab support in countering Pakistan in Kashmir. Nevertheless, Gandhi authorised the development of a secret channel of contact and security assistance with Israel in the late 1960s. Her lieutenant, P. V. Narasimha Rao, later became prime minister and approved full diplomatic ties with Israel in 1992.

India&#x27;s pro-Arab policy had mixed success. Establishment of close ties with the socialist and secular Baathist regimes to some extent neutralised Pakistani propaganda against India. However, the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 presented a dilemma for the Arab and Muslim states of the Middle East as the war was fought by two states both friendly to the Arabs. The progressive Arab regimes in Egypt, Syria, and Algeria chose to remain neutral, while the conservative pro-American Arab monarchies in Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and United Arab Emirates openly supported Pakistan. Egypt&#x27;s stance was met with dismay by the Indians, who had come to expect close co-operation with the Baathist regimes. But, the death of Nasser in 1970 and Sadat&#x27;s growing friendship with Riyadh, and his mounting differences with Moscow, constrained Egypt to a policy of neutrality. Gandhi&#x27;s overtures to Muammar Gaddafi were rebuffed. Libya agreed with the Arab monarchies in believing that Gandhi&#x27;s intervention in East Pakistan was an attack against Islam.

The 1971 war became a temporary stumbling block in growing Indo-Iranian ties. Although Iran had earlier characterized the Indo-Pakistani war in 1965 as Indian aggression, the Shah had launched an effort at rapprochement with India in 1969 as part of his effort to secure support for a larger Iranian role in the Persian Gulf. Gandhi&#x27;s tilt towards Moscow and her dismemberment of Pakistan was perceived by the Shah as part of a larger anti-Iran conspiracy involving India, Iraq, and the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, Iran had resisted Pakistani pressure to activate the Baghdad Pact and draw the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO) into the conflict. Gradually, Indian and Iranian disillusionment with their respective regional allies led to a renewed partnership between the nations. She was unhappy with the lack of support from India&#x27;s Arab allies during the war with Pakistan, while the Shah was apprehensive at the growing friendship between Pakistan and Arab states of the Persian Gulf, especially Saudi Arabia, and the growing influence of Islam in Pakistani society. There was an increase in Indian economic and military co-operation with Iran during the 1970s. The 1974 India-Iranian agreement led to Iran supplying nearly 75 percent of India&#x27;s crude oil demands. Gandhi appreciated the Shah&#x27;s disregard of Pan-Islamism in diplomacy.

=== Asia-Pacific ===
One of the major developments in Southeast Asia during Gandhi&#x27;s premiership was the formation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1967. Relations between ASEAN and India were mutually antagonistic. India perceived ASEAN to be linked to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) and, therefore, it was seen as a pro-American organisation. On their part, the ASEAN nations were unhappy with Gandhi&#x27;s sympathy for the Viet Cong and India&#x27;s strong links with the USSR. Furthermore, they were also apprehensions in the region about Gandhi&#x27;s plans, particularly after India played a big role in breaking up Pakistan and facilitating the emergence of Bangladesh as a sovereign country in 1971. India&#x27;s entry into the nuclear weapons club in 1974 also contributed to tensions in Southeast Asia. Relations only began to improve following Gandhi&#x27;s endorsement of the ZOPFAN declaration and the disintegration of the SEATO alliance in the aftermath of Pakistani and American defeats in the region. Nevertheless, Gandhi&#x27;s close relations with reunified Vietnam and her decision to recognize the Vietnam-installed Government of Cambodia in 1980 meant that India and ASEAN were unable to develop a viable partnership.

On 26 September 1981, Gandhi was conferred with the honorary degree of Doctor at the Laucala Graduation at the University of the South Pacific in Fiji.

=== Africa ===

Although independent India was initially viewed as a champion of various African independence movements, its cordial relationship with the Commonwealth of Nations and its liberal views of British policies in East Africa had harmed its image as a staunch supporter of various independence movements in the third world. Indian condemnation of militant struggles in Kenya and Algeria was in sharp contrast to China, who had supported armed struggle to win African independence. After reaching a high diplomatic point in the aftermath of Nehru&#x27;s role in the Suez Crisis, India&#x27;s isolation from Africa was almost complete when only four nations—Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria, and Libya—supported her during the Sino-Indian War in 1962. After Gandhi became prime minister, diplomatic and economic relations with the states which had sided with India during the Sino-Indian War were expanded. Gandhi began negotiations with the Kenyan government to establish the Africa-India Development Cooperation. The Indian government also started considering the possibility of bringing Indians settled in Africa within the framework of its policy goals to help recover its declining geo-strategic influence. Gandhi declared the people of Indian origin settled in Africa as &quot;Ambassadors of India&quot;. Efforts to rope in the Asian community to join Indian diplomacy, however, came to naught, in part because of the unwillingness of Indians to remain in politically insecure surroundings, and because of the exodus of African Indians to Britain with the passing of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act in 1968. In Uganda, the African Indian community suffered persecution and eventually expulsion under the government of Idi Amin.

Foreign and domestic policy successes in the 1970s enabled Gandhi to rebuild India&#x27;s image in the eyes of African states. Victory over Pakistan and India&#x27;s possession of nuclear weapons showed the degree of India&#x27;s progress. Furthermore, the conclusion of the Indo-Soviet treaty in 1971, and threatening gestures by the United States, to send its nuclear-armed Task Force 74 into the Bay of Bengal at the height of the East Pakistan crisis had enabled India to regain its anti-imperialist image. Gandhi firmly tied Indian anti-imperialist interests in Africa to those of the Soviet Union. Unlike Nehru, she openly and enthusiastically supported liberation struggles in Africa. At the same time, Chinese influence in Africa had declined owing to its incessant quarrels with the Soviet Union. These developments permanently halted India&#x27;s decline in Africa and helped to reestablish its geo-strategic presence.

=== The Commonwealth ===
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of mainly former British colonies. India maintained cordial relations with most of the members during Gandhi&#x27;s time in power. In the 1980s, she along with Canadian prime minister Pierre Trudeau, Zambia&#x27;s president Kenneth Kaunda, Australian prime minister Malcolm Fraser and Singapore prime minister Lee Kuan Yew was regarded as being one of the pillars of the Commonwealth. India under Gandhi also hosted the 1983 Commonwealth Heads of Government summit in New Delhi. Gandhi used the meetings as a forum to put pressure on member countries to cut economic, sports, and cultural ties with apartheid South Africa.

=== The Non-aligned Movement ===
In the early 1980s under Gandhi, India attempted to reassert its prominent role in the Non-Aligned Movement by focusing on the relationship between disarmament and economic development. By appealing to the economic grievances of developing countries, Gandhi and her successors exercised a moderating influence on the Non-aligned movement, diverting it from some of the Cold War issues that marred the controversial 1979 Havana meeting where Cuban leader Fidel Castro attempted to steer the movement towards the Soviet Union. Although hosting the 1983 summit at Delhi boosted Indian prestige within the movement, its close relations with the Soviet Union and its pro-Soviet positions on Afghanistan and Cambodia limited its influence.

=== Western Europe ===
Gandhi spent a number of years in Europe during her youth and had formed many friendships there. During her premiership she formed friendships with many leaders including West German chancellor, Willy Brandt and Austrian chancellor Bruno Kreisky. She enjoyed a close working relationship with many British leaders including conservative premiers, Edward Heath and Margaret Thatcher.

=== Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc countries ===
The relationship between India and the Soviet Union deepened during Gandhi&#x27;s rule. The main reason was the perceived bias of the United States and China, rivals of the USSR, towards Pakistan. The support of the Soviets with arms supplies and the casting of a veto at the United Nations helped in winning and consolidating the victory over Pakistan in the 1971 Bangladesh liberation war. Before the war, Gandhi signed a treaty of friendship with the Soviets. They were unhappy with the 1974 nuclear test conducted by India but did not support further action because of the ensuing Cold War with the United States. Gandhi was unhappy with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, but once again calculations involving relations with Pakistan and China kept her from criticising the Soviet Union harshly. The Soviets became the main arms supplier during the Gandhi years by offering cheap credit and transactions in rupees rather than in dollars. The easy trade deals also applied to non-military goods. Under Gandhi, by the early 1980s, the Soviets had become India&#x27;s largest trading partner.

==== Soviet intelligence in India ====
Soviet intelligence was involved in India during Indira Gandhi&#x27;s administration, sometimes at Gandhi&#x27;s expense. In the prelude to Operation Blue Star, by 1981, the Soviets had launched &quot;Operation Kontakt&quot;, which was based on a forged document purporting to contain details of the weapons and money provided by the ISI to Sikh militants who wanted to create an independent country. In November 1982, Yuri Andropov, the General Secretary of the Communist Party and leader of the Soviet Union, approved a proposal to fabricate Pakistani intelligence documents detailing ISI plans to foment religious disturbances in Punjab and promote the creation of Khalistan as an independent Sikh state. Indira Gandhi&#x27;s decision to move troops into the Punjab was based on her taking seriously the information provided by the Soviets regarding secret CIA support for the Sikhs.

According to the Mitrokhin Archive, the Soviets used a new recruit in the New Delhi residency named &quot;Agent S&quot; who was close to Indira Gandhi as a major channel for providing her disinformation. Agent S provided Indira Gandhi with false documents purporting to show Pakistani involvement in the Khalistan conspiracy. The KGB became confident that it could continue to deceive Indira Gandhi indefinitely with fabricated reports of CIA and Pakistani conspiracies against her. The Soviets persuaded Rajiv Gandhi during a visit to Moscow in 1983 that the CIA was engaged in subversion in the Punjab. When Rajiv Gandhi returned to India, he declared this to be true. The KGB was responsible for Indira Gandhi exaggerating the threats posed by both the CIA and Pakistan. This KGB role in facilitating Operation Bluestar was acknowledged by Subramanian Swamy who stated in 1992 &quot;The 1984 Operation Bluestar became necessary because of the vast disinformation against Sant Bhindranwale by the KGB, and repeated inside Parliament by the Congress Party of India.&quot;

A report following the Mitrokhin archive also caused some historiographical controversy about Indira Gandhi. In India, a senior leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party, L. K. Advani, requested of the Government a white paper on the role of foreign intelligence agencies and a judicial enquiry on the allegations. The spokesperson of the Indian Congress party referred to the book as &quot;pure sensationalism not even remotely based on facts or records&quot; and pointed out that the book is not based on official records from the Soviet Union. L.K Advani raised his voice because the book refers to ex-prime minister Indira Gandhi&#x27;s (Codenamed VANO) relations with the KGB. The KGB was alleged to be directly link to Prime Minister of India, Indira Gandhi (code-named Vano). &quot;Suitcases full of banknotes were said to be routinely taken to the Prime Minister&#x27;s house. Former Syndicate member S. K. Patil is reported to have said that Mrs. Gandhi did not even return the suitcases&quot;. An extensive footprint in the Indian media was also described- &quot;According to KGB files, by 1973 it had ten Indian newspapers on its payroll (which cannot be identified for legal reasons) as well as a press agency under its control. During 1972 the KGB claimed to have planted 3,789 articles in Indian newspapers–probably more than in any other country in the non-Communist world.&quot; According to its files, the number fell to 2,760 in 1973 but rose to 4,486 in 1974 and 5,510 in 1975. Mitrokhin estimated that in some major NATO countries, &quot;despite active-measures campaigns, the KGB was able to plant a little more than 1 per cent of the articles which it placed in the Indian press.&quot;

=== United States ===

When Gandhi came to power in 1966, Lyndon Johnson was the US president. At the time, India was reliant on the US for food aid. Gandhi resented the US policy of food aid being used as a tool to force India to adopt policies favoured by the US. She also resolutely refused to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Relations with the US were strained badly under President Richard Nixon and his favouring of Pakistan during the Bangladesh liberation war. Nixon despised Gandhi politically and personally. In 1981, Gandhi met President Ronald Reagan for the first time at the North–South Summit held to discuss global poverty. She had been described to him as an &#x27;Ogre&#x27;, but he found her charming and easy to work with and they formed a close working relationship during her premiership in the 1980s.

== Economic policy ==

Gandhi presided over three Five-Year Plans as prime minister, two of which succeeded in meeting their targeted growth.

There is considerable debate whether Gandhi was a socialist on principle or out of political expediency. Sunanda K. Datta-Ray described her as &quot;a master of rhetoric ... often more posture than policy&quot;, while &quot;The Times&quot; journalist, Peter Hazelhurst, famously quipped that Gandhi&#x27;s socialism was &quot;slightly left of self-interest.&quot; Critics have focused on the contradictions in the evolution of her stance towards communism. Gandhi was known for her anti-communist stance in the 1950s, with Meghnad Desai even describing her as &quot;the scourge of [India&#x27;s] Communist Party.&quot; Yet, she later forged close relations with Indian communists even while using the army to break the Naxalites. In this context, Gandhi was accused of formulating populist policies to suit her political needs. She was seemingly against the rich and big business while preserving the status quo to manipulate the support of the left in times of political insecurity, such as the late 1960s. Although in time Gandhi came to be viewed as the scourge of the right-wing and reactionary political elements of India, leftist opposition to her policies emerged. As early as 1969, critics had begun accusing her of insincerity and machiavellianism. &quot;The Indian Libertarian&quot; wrote, &quot;it would be difficult to find a more machiavellian leftist than Mrs Indira Gandhi... for here is Machiavelli at its best in the person of a suave, charming and astute politician.&quot; J. Barkley Rosser Jr. wrote that &quot;some have even seen the declaration of emergency rule in 1975 as a move to suppress [leftist] dissent against Gandhi&#x27;s policy shift to the right.&quot; In the 1980s, Gandhi was accused of &quot;betraying socialism&quot; after the beginning of &quot;Operation Forward&quot;, an attempt at economic reform. Nevertheless, others were more convinced of Gandhi&#x27;s sincerity and devotion to socialism. Pankaj Vohra noted that &quot;even the late prime minister&#x27;s critics would concede that the maximum number of legislations of social significance was brought about during her tenure... [and that] she lives in the hearts of millions of Indians who shared her concern for the poor and weaker sections and who supported her politics.&quot;

In summarising the biographical works on Gandhi, Blema S. Steinberg concludes she was decidedly non-ideological. Only 7.4% (24) of the total 330 biographical extractions posit ideology as a reason for her policy choices. Steinberg notes Gandhi&#x27;s association with socialism was superficial. She had only a general and traditional commitment to the ideology by way of her political and family ties. Gandhi personally had a fuzzy concept of socialism. In one of the early interviews she gave as prime minister, Gandhi ruminated, &quot;I suppose you could call me a socialist, but you have understand what we mean by that term ... we used the word [socialism] because it came closest to what we wanted to do here–which is to eradicate poverty. You can call it socialism; but if by using that word we arouse controversy, I don&#x27;t see why we should use it. I don&#x27;t believe in words at all.&quot; Regardless of the debate over her ideology or lack thereof, Gandhi remains a left-wing icon. She has been described by &quot;Hindustan Times&quot; columnist, Pankaj Vohra, as &quot;arguably the greatest mass leader of the last century.&quot; Her campaign slogan, Garibi Hatao (&#x27;Remove Poverty&#x27;), has become an often used motto of the Indian National Congress Party. To the rural and urban poor, untouchables, minorities and women in India, Gandhi was &quot;Indira Amma or Mother Indira.&quot;

=== Green Revolution and the Fourth Five-Year Plan ===
Gandhi inherited a weak and troubled economy. Fiscal problems associated with the war with Pakistan in 1965, along with a drought-induced food crisis that spawned famines, had plunged India into the sharpest recession since independence. The government responded by taking steps to liberalise the economy and agreeing to the devaluation of the currency in return for the restoration of foreign aid. The economy managed to recover in 1966 and ended up growing at 4.1% over 1966–1969. Much of that growth however, was offset by the fact that the external aid promised by the United States government and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), meant to ease the short-run costs of adjustment to a liberalised economy, never materialised. American policy makers had complained of continued restrictions imposed on the economy. At the same time, Indo-US relations were strained because of Gandhi&#x27;s criticism of the American bombing campaign in Vietnam. While it was thought at the time, and for decades after, that President Johnson&#x27;s policy of withholding food grain shipments was to coerce Indian support for the war, in fact, it was to offer India rainmaking technology that he wanted to use as a counterweight to China&#x27;s possession of the atomic bomb. In light of the circumstances, liberalisation became politically suspect and was soon abandoned. Grain diplomacy and currency devaluation became matters of intense national pride in India. After the bitter experience with Johnson, Gandhi decided not to request food aid in the future. Moreover, her government resolved never again to become &quot;so vulnerably dependent&quot; on aid, and painstakingly began building up substantial foreign exchange reserves. When food stocks slumped after poor harvests in 1972, the government made it a point to use foreign exchange to buy US wheat commercially rather than seek resumption of food aid.

The period of 1967–75 was characterised by socialist ascendency in India, which culminated in 1976 with the official declaration of state socialism. Gandhi not only abandoned the short-lived liberalisation programme but also aggressively expanded the public sector with new licensing requirements and other restrictions for industry. She began a new course by launching the Fourth Five-Year Plan in 1969. The government targeted growth at 5.7% while stating as its goals, &quot;growth with stability and progressive achievement of self-reliance.&quot; The rationale behind the overall plan was Gandhi&#x27;s &quot;Ten-Point Programme&quot; of 1967. This had been her first economic policy formulation, six months after coming to office. The programme emphasised greater state control of the economy with the understanding that government control assured greater welfare than private control. Related to this point were a set of policies that were meant to regulate the private sector. By the end of the 1960s, the reversal of the liberalisation process was complete, and India&#x27;s policies were characterised as &quot;protectionist as ever.&quot;

To deal with India&#x27;s food problems, Gandhi expanded the emphasis on production of inputs to agriculture that had already been initiated by her father, Jawaharlal Nehru. The Green Revolution in India subsequently culminated under her government in the 1970s. It transformed the country from a nation heavily reliant on imported grains, and prone to famine, to one largely able to feed itself, and becoming successful in achieving its goal of food security. Gandhi had a personal motive in pursuing agricultural self-sufficiency, having found India&#x27;s dependency on the U.S. for shipments of grains humiliating.

The economic period of 1967–1975 became significant for its major wave of nationalisation amidst increased regulation of the private sector. Some other objectives of the economic plan for that period were providing for the minimum needs of the community through a rural works program and the removal of the privy purses of the nobility. Those and many other goals of the 1967 programme were accomplished by 1974–1975. Nevertheless, the success of the overall economic plan was tempered by the fact that annual growth at 3.3–3.4% over 1969–1974 fell short of the targeted figure.

=== The Fifth Five-Year Plan ===
The Fifth Five-Year Plan (1974–1979) was enacted with the backdrop of the state of emergency and the &quot;Twenty Point Program&quot; of 1975. It was the economic rationale of the emergency, a political act which has often been justified on economic grounds. In contrast to the reception of Gandhi&#x27;s earlier economic plan, this one was criticised for being a &quot;hastily thrown together wish list.&quot; She promised to reduce poverty by targeting the consumption levels of the poor and enact wide-ranging social and economic reforms. In addition, the government targeted an annual growth rate of 4.4% over the period of the plan.

The measures of the emergency regime was able to halt the economic trouble of the early to mid-1970s, which had been marred by harvest failures, fiscal contraction, and the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchanged rates. The resulting turbulence in the foreign exchange markets was accentuated further by the oil shock of 1973. The government was able to exceed the targeted growth figure with an annual growth rate of 5.0–5.2% over the five-year period of the plan (1974–79). The economy grew at the rate of 9% in 1975–76 alone, and the Fifth Plan, became the first plan during which the per capita income of the economy grew by over 5%.

=== Operation Forward and the Sixth Five-Year Plan ===
Gandhi inherited a weak economy when she became prime minister again in 1980. The preceding year—1979–80—under the Janata Party government saw the strongest recession (−5.2%) in the history of modern India with inflation rampant at 18.2%. Gandhi proceeded to abrogate the Janata Party government&#x27;s Five-Year Plan in 1980 and launched the Sixth Five-Year Plan (1980–85). Her government targeted an average growth rate of 5.2% over the period of the plan. Measures to check inflation were also taken; by the early 1980s it was under control at an annual rate of about 5%.

Although Gandhi continued professing socialist beliefs, the Sixth Five-Year Plan was markedly different from the years of Garibi Hatao. Populist programmes and policies were replaced by pragmatism. There was an emphasis on tightening public expenditures, greater efficiency of the state-owned enterprises (SOE), which Gandhi qualified as a &quot;sad thing&quot;, and on stimulating the private sector through deregulation and liberation of the capital market. The government subsequently launched &quot;Operation Forward&quot; in 1982, the first cautious attempt at reform. The Sixth Plan went on to become the most successful of the Five-Year Plans yet; showing an average growth rate of 5.7% over 1980–85.

=== Inflation and unemployment ===
During Lal Bahadur Shastri&#x27;s last full year in office (1965), inflation averaged 7.7%, compared to 5.2% at the end of Gandhi&#x27;s first term in office (1977). On average, inflation in India had remained below 7% through the 1950s and 1960s. It then accelerated sharply in the 1970s, from 5.5% in 1970–71 to over 20% by 1973–74, due to the international oil crisis. Gandhi declared inflation the gravest of problems in 1974 (at 25.2%) and devised a severe anti-inflation program. The government was successful in bringing down inflation during the emergency; achieving negative figures of −1.1% by the end of 1975–76.

Gandhi inherited a tattered economy in her second term; harvest failures and a second oil shock in the late 1970s had caused inflation to rise again. During Charan Singh&#x27;s short time in office in the second half of 1979, inflation averaged 18.2%, compared to 6.5% during Gandhi&#x27;s last year in office (1984). General economic recovery under Gandhi led to an average inflation rate of 6.5% from 1981–82 to 1985–86—the lowest since the beginning of India&#x27;s inflation problems in the 1960s.

The unemployment rate remained constant at 9% over a nine-year period (1971–80) before declining to 8.3% in 1983.

== Domestic policy ==
=== Nationalisation ===
Despite the provisions, control and regulations of the Reserve Bank of India, most banks in India had continued to be owned and operated by private persons. Businessmen who owned the banks were often accused of channeling the deposits into their own companies and ignoring priority sector lending. Furthermore, there was a great resentment against &quot;class&quot; banking in India, which had left the poor (the majority of the population) unbanked. After becoming prime minister, Gandhi expressed her intention of nationalising the banks to alleviate poverty in a paper titled, &quot;Stray thoughts on Bank Nationalisation&quot;. The paper received overwhelming public support. In 1969, Gandhi moved to nationalise fourteen major commercial banks. After this, public sector bank branch deposits increased by approximately 800 percent; advances took a huge jump by 11,000 percent. Nationalisation also resulted in significant growth in the geographic coverage of banks; the number of bank branches rose from 8,200 to over 62,000, most of which were opened in unbanked, rural areas. The nationalisation drive not only helped to increase household savings, but it also provided considerable investments in the informal sector, in small- and medium-sized enterprises, and in agriculture, and contributed significantly to regional development and to the expansion of India&#x27;s industrial and agricultural base. Jayaprakash Narayan, who became famous for leading the opposition to Gandhi in the 1970s, solidly praised her nationalisation of banks.

Having been re-elected in 1971 on a nationalisation platform, Gandhi proceeded to nationalise the coal, steel, copper, refining, cotton textiles, and insurance industries. Most of this was done to protect employment and the interests of organised labour. The remaining private sector industries were placed under strict regulatory control. During the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971, foreign-owned private oil companies had refused to supply fuel to the Indian Navy and the Indian Air Force. In response, Gandhi nationalised some oil companies in 1973. However, major nationalisations occurred in 1974 and 1976, forming the oil majors. After nationalisation, the oil majors including the Indian Oil Corporation (IOC), the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation (HPCL), and the Bharat Petroleum Corporation (BPCL) had to keep a minimum stock level of oil to be supplied to the military when needed.

=== Administration ===
In 1966, Gandhi accepted the demands of the Akalis to reorganise Punjab on linguistic lines. The Hindi-speaking southern half of Punjab became a separate state, Haryana, while the Pahari speaking hilly areas in the northeast were joined to Himachal Pradesh. By this action she had hoped to ward off the growing political conflict between Hindu and Sikh groups in the region. However, a contentious issue that was considered unresolved by the Akalis was the status of Chandigarh, a prosperous city on the Punjab-Haryana border, which Gandhi declared a union territory to be shared as a capital by both the states.

Victory over Pakistan in 1971 consolidated Indian power in Kashmir. Gandhi indicated that she would make no major concessions on Kashmir. The most prominent of the Kashmiri separatists, Sheikh Abdullah, had to recognise India&#x27;s control over Kashmir in light of the new order in South Asia. The situation was normalised in the years following the war after Abdullah agreed to an accord with Gandhi, by giving up the demand for a plebiscite in return for a special autonomous status for Kashmir. In 1975, Gandhi declared the state of Jammu and Kashmir as a constituent unit of India. The Kashmir conflict remained largely peaceful if frozen under Gandhi&#x27;s premiership.

In 1972, Gandhi granted statehood to Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura while the North-East Frontier Agency was declared a union territory and renamed Arunachal Pradesh. The transition to statehood for the territories was successfully overseen by her administration and it was followed by the annexation of Sikkim in 1975.

=== Social reform ===
The principle of equal pay for equal work for both men and women was enshrined in the Indian Constitution under the Gandhi administration.

Gandhi questioned the continued existence of a privy purse for former rulers of princely states. She argued the case for abolition based on equal rights for all citizens and the need to reduce the government&#x27;s revenue deficit. The nobility responded by rallying around the Jana Sangh and other right-wing parties that stood in opposition to Gandhi&#x27;s attempts to abolish royal privileges. The motion to abolish privy purses, and the official recognition of the titles, was originally brought before the Parliament in 1970. It was passed in the Lok Sabha but fell short of the two-thirds majority in the Rajya Sabha by a single vote. Gandhi responded by having a Presidential proclamation issued; de-recognising the princes; with this withdrawal of recognition, their claims to privy purses were also legally lost. However, the proclamation was struck down by the Supreme Court of India. In 1971, she again motioned to abolish the privy purse and it was passed successfully as the 26th Amendment to the Constitution of India.

Gandhi claimed that only &quot;clear vision, iron will and the strictest discipline&quot; can remove poverty. She justified the imposition of the state of emergency in 1975 in the name of the socialist mission of the Congress. Armed with the power to rule by decree and without constitutional constraints, she embarked on a massive redistribution program. The provisions included rapid enforcement of land ceilings, housing for landless labourers, the abolition of bonded labour and a moratorium on the debts of the poor. North India was at the centre of the reforms. Millions of hectares of land were acquired and redistributed. The government was also successful in procuring houses for landless labourers; According to Francine Frankel, three-fourths of the targeted four million houses was achieved in 1975 alone. Nevertheless, others have disputed the success of the program and criticised Gandhi for not doing enough to reform land ownership. The political economist, Jyotindra Das Gupta, cryptically questioned &quot;whether or not the real supporters of land-holders were in jail or in power?&quot; Critics also accused Gandhi of choosing to &quot;talk left and act right&quot;, referring to her concurrent pro-business decisions and endeavours. J. Barkley Rosser Jr. wrote that &quot;some have even seen the declaration of emergency rule in 1975 as a move to suppress dissent against Gandhi&#x27;s policy shift to the right.&quot; Regardless of the controversy over the nature of the reforms, the long-term effects of the social changes gave rise to the prominence of middle-ranking farmers from intermediate and lower castes in North India. The rise of the newly empowered social classes challenged the political establishment of the Hindi Belt in the years to come.

=== Language policy ===
Under the 1950 Constitution of India, Hindi was to be the official national language by 1965. That was unacceptable to many non-Hindi-speaking states which wanted the continued use of English in government. In 1967, Gandhi introduced a constitutional amendment that guaranteed the de facto use of both Hindi and English as official languages. It established the official government policy of bilingualism in India and satisfied the non-Hindi-speaking Indian states. She thus put herself forward as a leader with a pan-Indian vision. Nevertheless, critics alleged that her stance was actually meant to weaken the position of rival Congress leaders from the northern states such as Uttar Pradesh, where there had been strong, sometimes violent, pro-Hindi agitations. Gandhi came out of the language conflicts with the strong support of the south Indian populace.

=== National security ===
In the late 1960s and 1970s, Gandhi had the Indian army crush militant Communist uprisings in the Indian state of West Bengal. The communist insurgency in India was completely suppressed during the state of emergency.

Gandhi considered the north-eastern region important, because of its strategic situation. In 1966, the Mizo uprising took place against the government of India and overran almost the whole of the Mizoram region. She ordered the Indian Army to launch massive retaliatory strikes in response. The rebellion was suppressed with the Indian Air Force carrying out airstrikes in Aizawl; it remains the only instance of India carrying out airstrikes in its own territory. The defeat of Pakistan in 1971 and the secession of East Pakistan as pro-India Bangladesh led to the collapse of the Mizo separatist movement. In 1972, after the less extremist Mizo leaders came to the negotiating table, Gandhi upgraded Mizoram to the status of a union territory. A small-scale insurgency by some militants continued into the late 1970s, but it was successfully dealt with by the government. The Mizo conflict was definitively resolved during the administration of Gandhi&#x27;s son Rajiv. Today, Mizoram is considered one of the most peaceful states in the north-east.

Responding to the insurgency in Nagaland, Indira Gandhi &quot;unleashed a powerful military offensive&quot; in the 1970s. Finally, a massive crackdown on the insurgents took place during the state of emergency ordered by Gandhi. The insurgents soon agreed to surrender and signed the Shillong Accord in 1975. While the agreement was considered a victory for the Indian government and ended large-scale conflicts, there have since been spurts of violence by rebel holdouts and ethnic conflict amongst the tribes.

=== India&#x27;s nuclear programme ===

Gandhi contributed to and carried out further, the vision of Jawaharlal Nehru, the former premier of India, to develop its nuclear program. Gandhi authorised the development of nuclear weapons in 1967, in response to &quot;Test No. 6&quot; by the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Gandhi saw the test as Chinese nuclear intimidation and promoted Nehru&#x27;s views to establish India&#x27;s stability and security interests independent from those of the nuclear superpowers.

The programme became fully mature in 1974, when Raja Ramanna reported to Gandhi that India had the ability to test its first nuclear weapon. Gandhi gave verbal authorisation for the test, and preparations were made in the Indian Army&#x27;s Pokhran Test Range.&lt;ref name=&quot;http://nuclearweaponarchive.org&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In 1974, India successfully conducted an underground nuclear test, unofficially code named &quot;Smiling Buddha&quot;, near the desert village of Pokhran in Rajasthan. As the world was quiet about this test, a vehement protest came from Pakistan as its prime minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, described the test as &quot;Indian hegemony&quot; to intimidate Pakistan. In response to this, Bhutto launched a massive campaign to make Pakistan a nuclear power. Bhutto asked the nation to unite and slogans such as &quot;hum ghaas aur pattay kha lay gay magar nuclear power ban k rhe gay&quot; (&quot;We will eat grass or leaves or even go hungry, but we will get nuclear power&quot;) were employed. Gandhi directed a letter to Bhutto, and later to the world, claiming the test was for peaceful purposes and part of India&#x27;s commitment to develop its programme for industrial and scientific use.

In spite of intense international criticism and steady decline in foreign investment and trade, the nuclear test was popular domestically. The test caused an immediate revival of Gandhi&#x27;s popularity, which had flagged considerably from its heights after the 1971 war. The overall popularity and image of the Congress Party was enhanced and the Congress Party was well received in the Indian Parliament.

== Electoral history ==

== Personal life==

She married Feroze Gandhi at the age of 25, in 1942. Their marriage lasted 18 years until he died of a heart attack in 1960. They had two sons—Rajiv and Sanjay. Initially, her younger son Sanjay had been her chosen heir, but after his death in a flying accident in June 1980, Indira Gandhi persuaded her reluctant elder son Rajiv to quit his job as a pilot and enter politics in February 1981. Rajiv took office as prime minister following his mother&#x27;s assassination in 1984; he served until December 1989. Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by a suicide bomber working on behalf of LTTE on 21 May 1991.

== Views on women ==
In 1952 in a letter to her American friend Dorothy Norman, Gandhi wrote: &quot;I am in no sense a feminist, but I believe in women being able to do everything... Given the opportunity to develop, capable Indian women have come to the top at once.&quot; While this statement appears paradoxical, it reflects Gandhi&#x27;s complex feelings toward her gender and feminism. Her egalitarian upbringing with her cousins helped contribute to her sense of natural equality. &quot;Flying kites, climbing trees, playing marbles with her boy cousins, Indira said she hardly knew the difference between a boy and a girl until the age of twelve.&quot;

Gandhi did not often discuss her gender but she involved herself in women&#x27;s issues before becoming the prime minister. Before her election as prime minister, she became active in the organisational wing of the Congress party, working in part in the Women&#x27;s Department. In 1956, she had an active role in setting up the Congress Party&#x27;s Women&#x27;s Section. Unsurprisingly, a lot of her involvement stemmed from her father. As an only child, Gandhi naturally stepped into the political light. And, as a woman, she naturally helped head the Women&#x27;s section of the Congress Party. She often tried to organise women to involve themselves in politics. Although rhetorically Gandhi may have attempted to separate her political success from her gender, she did involve herself in women&#x27;s organizations. The political parties in India paid substantial attention to Gandhi&#x27;s gender before she became prime minister, hoping to use her for political gain.
Even though men surrounded her during her upbringing, she still had a female role model as a child. Several books on Gandhi reference her interest in Joan of Arc. In Gandhi&#x27;s own accounts through her letters, she wrote to her friend Dorothy Norman, in 1952 she wrote: &quot;At about eight or nine I was taken to France; Jeanne d&#x27;Arc became a great heroine of mine. She was one of the first people I read about with enthusiasm.&quot; Another historian recounts Indira&#x27;s comparison of herself to Joan of Arc: &quot;Indira developed a fascination for Joan of Arc, telling her aunt, &#x27;Someday I am going to lead my people to freedom just as Joan of Arc did&#x27;!&quot; Gandhi&#x27;s linking of herself to Joan of Arc presents a model for historians to assess Gandhi. As one writer said: &quot;The Indian people were her children; members of her family were the only people capable of leading them.&quot;

Gandhi had been swept up in the call for Indian independence since she was born in 1917. Thus by 1947, she was already well immersed in politics, and by 1966, when she first assumed the position of prime minister, she had held several cabinet positions in her father&#x27;s office. Her advocacy for women&#x27;s rights began with her help in establishing the Congress Party&#x27;s Women&#x27;s Section. In 1956, she wrote in a letter: &quot;It is because of this that I am taking a much more active part in politics. I have to do a great deal of touring in order to set up the Congress Party Women&#x27;s Section, and am on numerous important committees.&quot; Gandhi spent a great deal of time throughout the 1950s helping to organise women. She wrote to Norman in 1959, irritable that women had organised around the communist cause but had not mobilised for the Indian cause: &quot;The women, whom I have been trying to organize for years, had always refused to come into politics. Now they are out in the field.&quot; Once appointed president in 1959, she &quot;travelled relentlessly, visiting remote parts of the country that had never before received a VIP... she talked to women, asked about child health and welfare, inquired after the crafts of the region&quot; Her actions throughout her ascent to power clearly reflect a desire to mobilise women. Gandhi did not see the purpose of feminism. She saw her own success as a woman, and also noted that: &quot;Given the opportunity to develop, capable Indian women have come to the top at once.&quot;

Gandhi felt guilty about her inability to fully devote her time to her children. She noted that her main problem in office was how to balance her political duties with tending to her children, and &quot;stressed that motherhood was the most important part of her life.&quot; At another point, she went into more detail: &quot;To a woman, motherhood is the highest fulfilment ... To bring a new being into this world, to see its perfection and to dream of its future greatness is the most moving of all experiences and fills one with wonder and exaltation.&quot; Her domestic initiatives did not necessarily reflect favourably on Indian women. Gandhi did not make a special effort to appoint women to cabinet positions. She did not appoint any women to full cabinet rank during her terms in office. Yet despite this, many women saw Gandhi as a symbol for feminism and an image of women&#x27;s power.

== Awards and honours ==

=== National honours ===
** Bharat Ratna (1971)

=== Foreign honours ===
** Gold Olympic Order (1983)
** Lenin Peace Prize (1985, posthumous)
** Bangladesh Freedom Honour (2011, posthumous)

=== Posthumous honours ===
*The southernmost Indira Point (6.74678°N 93.84260°E) is named after Gandhi.
*The Indira Awaas Yojana, a central government low-cost housing programme for the rural poor, was named after her.
*The international airport at New Delhi is named Indira Gandhi International Airport in her honour.
*The Indira Gandhi National Open University, the largest university in the world, is also named after her.
*Indian National Congress established the annual Indira Gandhi Award for National Integration in 1985, given in her memory on her death anniversary.
*The Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust also constituted the annual Indira Gandhi Prize.

== Legacy ==

American veteran politician Henry A. Kissinger had described Indira Gandhi as being an &quot;Iron lady&quot;, a nickname that became associated with her tough personality. After leading India to victory against Pakistan in the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971, President V. V. Giri awarded Gandhi with India&#x27;s highest civilian honour, the Bharat Ratna. In 2011, the Bangladesh Freedom Honour, Bangladesh&#x27;s highest civilian award for foreign nationals, was posthumously conferred on Gandhi for her &quot;outstanding contributions&quot; to Bangladesh&#x27;s Liberation War.

Gandhi&#x27;s main legacy was standing firm in the face of American pressure to defeat Pakistan and turn East Pakistan into independent Bangladesh. She was responsible for India joining the group of countries with nuclear weapons. Although India being officially part of the Non-Aligned Movement, she gave Indian foreign policy a tilt towards the Soviet bloc. In 1999, Gandhi was named &quot;Woman of the Millennium&quot; in an online poll organised by the BBC. In 2012, she was ranked number seven on &quot;Outlook India&#x27;s&quot; poll of the Greatest Indian.

Being at the forefront of Indian politics for decades, Gandhi left a powerful legacy on Indian politics. Similarly, some of her actions have also caused controversies. One of the criticisms concerns her rule to have damaged internal party democracy in the Congress party. Her detractors accuse her of weakening State chief ministers and thereby weakening the federal structure, weakening the independence of the judiciary, and weakening her cabinet by vesting power in her secretariat and her sons. Gandhi is also associated with fostering a culture of nepotism in Indian politics and in India&#x27;s institutions. She is also almost singularly associated with the period of emergency rule, described by some as a &quot;dark period&quot; in Indian democracy. The Forty-second Amendment of the Constitution of India which was adopted during the emergency can also be regarded as part of her legacy. Although judicial challenges and non-Congress governments tried to water down the amendment, the amendment still stands.

She was the only woman to occupy the office of the prime minister of India and in 2020, Gandhi was named by &quot;Time&quot; magazine among the world&#x27;s 100 powerful women who defined the last century. Shakti Sthal means a &quot;place of strength&quot; and is a monument to her.

== In popular culture ==

While portrayals of Indira Gandhi by actors in Indian cinema have generally been avoided, with filmmakers using back-shots, silhouettes and voiceovers to give impressions of her character, several films surrounding her tenure, policies or assassination have been made.

These include &quot;Aandhi&quot; (1975) by Gulzar, &quot;Kissa Kursi Ka&quot; (1975) by Amrit Nahata&quot;, Nasbandi&quot; (1978) by I. S. Johar, &quot;Maachis&quot; (1996) by Gulzar, &quot;Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi&quot; (2003) by Sudhir Mishra, &quot;Hawayein&quot; (2003) by Ammtoje Mann, &quot;Des Hoyaa Pardes&quot; (2004) by Manoj Punj, &quot;Kaya Taran&quot; (2004) by Sashi Kumar, &quot;Amu&quot; (2005) by Shonali Bose, &quot;Kaum De Heere&quot; (2014) by Ravinder Ravi, &quot;47 to 84&quot; (2014) by Rajiv Sharma, &quot;Punjab 1984&quot; (2014) by Anurag Singh, &quot;The Fourth Direction&quot; (2015) by Gurvinder Singh, &quot;Dharam Yudh Morcha&quot; (2016) by Naresh S. Garg, &quot;31 October&quot; (2016) by Shivaji Lotan Patil, &quot;Baadshaho&quot; (2017) by Milan Luthria, &quot;Toofan Singh&quot; (2017) by Baghal Singh, &quot;Sonchiriya&quot; (2019) by Abhishek Chaubey, &quot;Shukranu&quot; (2020) by Bishnu Dev Halder. &quot;Aandhi&quot;, &quot;Kissa Kursi Ka&quot; and &quot;Nasbandi&quot; are notable for having been released during Gandhi&#x27;s lifetime and were subject to censorship on exhibition during the Emergency.

&quot;Indus Valley to Indira Gandhi&quot; is a 1970 Indian two-part documentary film by S. Krishnaswamy which traces the history of India from the earliest times of the Indus Valley Civilization to the prime ministership of Indira Gandhi. The Films Division of India produced &quot;Our Indira&quot;, a 1973 short documentary film directed by S.N.S. Sastry showing the beginning of her first tenure as PM and her speeches from the Stockholm Conference.

&quot;Pradhanmantri&quot; (), a 2013 Indian documentary television series which aired on ABP News and covers the various policies and political tenures of Indian PMs, includes the tenureship of Gandhi in the episodes &quot;Indira Gandhi Becomes PM&quot;, &quot;Split in Congress Party&quot;, &quot;Story before Indo-Pakistani War of 1971&quot;, &quot;Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 and Birth of Bangladesh&quot;, &quot;1975–77 State of Emergency in India&quot;, and &quot;Indira Gandhi back as PM and Operation Blue Star&quot; with Navni Parihar portraying the role of Gandhi. Parihar also portrays Gandhi in the 2021 Indian film &quot;&quot; which is based on the 1971 Indo-Pakistani War.

The taboo surrounding the depiction of Indira Gandhi in Indian cinema has begun to dissipate in recent years with actors portraying her in films. Notable portrayals include: Sarita Choudhury in &quot;Midnight&#x27;s Children&quot; (2012); Mandeep Kohli in &quot;Jai Jawaan Jai Kisaan&quot; (2015); Supriya Vinod in &quot;Indu Sarkar&quot; (2017), &quot;&quot;/&quot;&quot; (2019) and &quot;Yashwantrao Chavan – Bakhar Eka Vaadalaachi&quot; (2014); Flora Jacob in &quot;Raid&quot; (2018), &quot;Thalaivi&quot; (2021) and &quot;Radhe Shyam&quot; (2022), Kishori Shahane in &quot;PM Narendra Modi&quot; (2019), Avantika Akerkar in &quot;Thackeray&quot; (2019) and &quot;83&quot; (2021), Supriya Karnik in &quot;Main Mulayam Singh Yadav&quot; (2021), Lara Dutta in &quot;Bell Bottom&quot; (2021), Fatima Sana Shaikh in &quot;Sam Bahadur&quot; (2023) and Kangana Ranaut in &quot;Emergency&quot; (2025).

The phrase &quot;indiragandi&quot; is used in Turkish slang as a way to convey the action of getting money through corruption or otherwise unethical means. This is largely due to the word &quot;indirmek&quot; (English: take down) being used similarly in slang, although the corruption scandal that Indira Gandhi presided over is also a factor.

== Bibliography ==
&quot;Book written by Indira Gandhi&quot;
* &quot;My Truth&quot; (1980), Orient Paperback, 

&quot;Books on Indira Gandhi&quot;
* &quot;My Years with Indira Gandhi&quot; by P. C. Alexander, Orient Paperbacks, , 
* &quot;Indira Gandhi&quot; by H. Y. Sharada Prasad, Penguin India, 
* &quot;Indira Gandhi – Tryst with Power&quot; by Nayantara Sahgal, Penguin India, 
*&quot;&quot; by Sagarika Ghose, 

== See also ==

* List of national presidents of the Indian National Congress
* List of assassinated Indian politicians
* List of elected and appointed female heads of state and government
* List of heads of state and government who suspended the constitution
* List of heads of state and government who were assassinated or executed

== References ==
=== Notes ===


=== References ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 


==Bibliography ==

* Guha, Ramachandra. &quot;India after Gandhi: The History of the World&#x27;s Largest Democracy&quot; (2007) 
* Hart, Henry C., ed. &quot;Indira Gandhi&#x27;s India&quot; (Routledge, 2019). excerpt 
* Jayakar, Pupul. &quot;Indira Gandhi: An Intimate Biography&quot; (1992) 
* Malhotra, Inder. &quot;Indira Gandhi: A personal and political biography&quot; (1991) 
* Malone, David M., C. Raja Mohan, and Srinath Raghavan, eds. &quot;The Oxford handbook of Indian foreign policy&quot; (2015) excerpt pp 104–111.
* Mansingh, Surjit. &quot;India′s Search for Power: Indira Gandhi′s Foreign Policy 1966–1982&quot; (1984) online
* Ved Mehta, &quot;A Family Affair: India Under Three Prime Ministers&quot; (1982) 
* Ramesh, Jairam. &quot;Indira Gandhi: a life in nature&quot; (Simon and Schuster, 2017); on environmentalism
* Sahgal, Nayantara. &quot;Indira Gandhi: Tryst with Power&quot; (Penguin Random House India, 2017).
* Tharoor, Shashi. &quot;Reasons of state: political development and India&#x27;s foreign policy under Indira Gandhi, 1966–1977&quot; (1982) online
* Shourie, Arun (1984). Mrs Gandhi&#x27;s second reign. New Delhi: Vikas.
* Dsouza, Chris Emmanuel. &quot;Bandh Samrat: Tales of Eternal Rebel George Fernandes&quot; (Cleverfox Publications, 2022) pp 34–42
* Indira Gandhi – Iron Lady of India by Sulakshi Thelikorala
* Thakur, Janadan (1977). &quot;All The Prime Minister’s Men &quot;. Vikas Publishing. 1977. ISBN 9780706905663.
== External links ==

* Indira Gandhi Meets with Lyndon Baines Johnson from Texas Archive of the Moving Image
* The Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust 
* 
* Rare pictures of Indira Gandhi
* Rare letters by Indira Gandhi 
* Famous and Historic speeches given by Indira Gandhi 
* Indira Gandhi on global underprivilege at &quot;Encyclopaedia Britannica&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="0" end="27" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Priyadarshini Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="29" end="44" title="Given name" label="&amp;quot;née&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="45" end="50" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="147" end="170" title="Prime Minister of India" label="prime minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347903" start="215" end="232" title="Assassination of Indira Gandhi" label="her assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="372" end="396" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="428" end="444" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="474" end="479" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="499" end="511" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="713" end="728" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1035" end="1044" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522885" start="1049" end="1072" title="Kerala state government" label="Kerala state government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850500" start="1081" end="1122" title="president of the Indian National Congress" label="president of the Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q244689" start="1200" end="1219" title="Lal Bahadur Shastri" label="Lal Bahadur Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376096" start="1268" end="1277" title="Death and state funeral of Jawaharlal Nehru" label="his death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294412" start="1301" end="1341" title="Minister of Information and Broadcasting (India)" label="minister of information and broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480020" start="1345" end="1359" title="Shastri ministry" label="his government"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="1398" end="1409" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="1434" end="1451" title="Indian Parliament" label="Indian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q218661" start="1531" end="1544" title="Morarji Desai" label="Morarji Desai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532250" start="1740" end="1761" title="1967 Indian general election" label="1967 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="1843" end="1852" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="1891" end="1908" title="landslide victory" label="landslide victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532199" start="1942" end="1946" title="1962 Indian general election" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726232" start="2013" end="2031" title="The Emergency (India)" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531393" start="2121" end="2134" title="1977 Indian general election" label="1977 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352638" start="2319" end="2331" title="Janata Party" label="Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532192" start="2351" end="2364" title="1980 Indian general election" label="next election"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="2499" end="2522" title="centralization of power" label="centralization of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="2534" end="2550" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222426" start="2574" end="2602" title="Nathu La and Cho La clashes" label="military conflict with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="2655" end="2664" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="2687" end="2704" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971" label="war with Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350205" start="2723" end="2744" title="Six point movement" label="independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="2749" end="2768" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="2772" end="2785" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="2847" end="2857" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="2942" end="2956" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="2960" end="2970" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426448" start="3042" end="3061" title="Smiling Buddha" label="nuclear weapon test"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3109" end="3121" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409068" start="3135" end="3152" title="Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation" label="friendship treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3342" end="3362" title="non-aligned movement" label="non-aligned movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3491" end="3505" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726232" start="3587" end="3623" title="The Emergency (India)" label="state of emergency from 1975 to 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146145" start="3642" end="3657" title="rule by decree" label="ruled by decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="3805" end="3820" title="Sikh separatism" label="Sikh separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987713" start="3890" end="3909" title="Operation Blue Star" label="Operation Blue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="3949" end="3962" title="Golden Temple" label="Golden Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="3986" end="3991" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100540" start="4328" end="4344" title="Green Revolution in India" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376944" start="4346" end="4363" title="Economic policy of the Indira Gandhi government" label="a growing economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838447" start="4392" end="4413" title="Garibi Hatao" label="anti-poverty campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411238" start="4484" end="4496" title="Mother India" label="Mother India"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="4570" end="4589" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4738" end="4741" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="4769" end="4785" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4904" end="4919" title="Time Person of the Year" label="Man of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996554" start="4995" end="5010" title="Kashmiri Pandit" label="Kashmiri Pandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="5064" end="5073" title="Prayagraj" label="Prayagraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="5078" end="5091" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="5105" end="5121" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="5151" end="5183" title="Indian movement for independence" label="Indian movement for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="5189" end="5201" title="British Raj" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775277" start="5246" end="5254" title="Dominion of India" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5266" end="5274" title="India" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633365" start="5415" end="5427" title="Kamala Nehru" label="Kamala Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653842" start="5436" end="5448" title="Swaraj Bhavan" label="Anand Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653842" start="5579" end="5592" title="Swaraj Bhavan" label="Swaraj Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751243" start="5715" end="5727" title="Anand Bhavan" label="Anand Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="5941" end="5953" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888864" start="6162" end="6175" title="Modern School (New Delhi)" label="Modern School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="6179" end="6184" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590256" start="6209" end="6232" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Convent Inter College, Prayagraj" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578024" start="6259" end="6289" title="International School of Geneva" label="International School of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="6293" end="6299" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q52261" start="6323" end="6326" title="Bex" label="Bex"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="6330" end="6347" title="Vaud" label="Vaud, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="6384" end="6389" title="Pune" label="Poona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="6393" end="6404" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="6412" end="6418" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q406402" start="6449" end="6469" title="University of Mumbai" label="University of Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q816234" start="6503" end="6513" title="Belur Math" label="Belur Math"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311277" start="6534" end="6553" title="Ramakrishna Mission" label="Ramakrishna Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635707" start="6560" end="6581" title="Swami Ranganathananda" label="Swami Ranganathananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026431" start="6645" end="6657" title="Shantiniketan" label="Santiniketan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575044" start="6672" end="6696" title="Visva-Bharati University" label="Visva-Bharati University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="6731" end="6750" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6774" end="6787" title=":wikt:प्रियदर्शिन्" label="Priyadarshini"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="6858" end="6866" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="7004" end="7025" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="7096" end="7116" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15195942" start="7161" end="7177" title="Badminton School" label="Badminton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="7181" end="7197" title="Bristol" label="Bristol, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q774489" start="7243" end="7271" title="Somerville College, Oxford" label="Somerville College in Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7408" end="7413" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7869" end="7876" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="7944" end="7952" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="8264" end="8269" title="Asian people" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="8289" end="8309" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q554175" start="8379" end="8392" title="Feroze Gandhi" label="Feroze Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="8409" end="8423" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682594" start="8470" end="8479" title="Adi Dharm" label="Adi Dharm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="8519" end="8530" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200263" start="8531" end="8536" title="Parsi" label="Parsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="8547" end="8554" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="8581" end="8593" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q730045" start="8610" end="8623" title="Sanjay Gandhi" label="Sanjay Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992677" start="8705" end="8724" title="Quit India Movement" label="Quit India Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="9134" end="9157" title="prime minister of India" label="prime minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="9224" end="9232" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="9287" end="9296" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522885" start="9301" end="9307" title="Government of Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="9485" end="9496" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q244689" start="9540" end="9559" title="Lal Bahadur Shastri" label="Lal Bahadur Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294412" start="9578" end="9618" title="Minister of Information and Broadcasting" label="Minister of Information and Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q218661" start="9713" end="9726" title="Morarji Desai" label="Morarji Desai"/>
<link wikidata="Q522048" start="9767" end="9777" title="K. Kamaraj" label="K. Kamaraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206622" start="10789" end="10802" title="D. K. Barooah" label="D. K. Barooah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759530" start="11552" end="11569" title="Ram Manohar Lohia" label="Ram Manohar Lohia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756731" start="11825" end="11853" title="Mizo National Front uprising" label="Mizo National Front uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="11857" end="11864" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532250" start="11937" end="11959" title="1967 Indian general election" label="1967 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="11968" end="11977" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q63117558" start="12253" end="12275" title="Raebareli (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Raebareli constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="12317" end="12324" title="devalue" label="devalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="12329" end="12334" title="Indian rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q312557" start="12801" end="12811" title="V. V. Giri" label="V. V. Giri"/>
<link wikidata="Q336913" start="12889" end="12909" title="Neelam Sanjiva Reddy" label="Neelam Sanjiva Reddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="12937" end="12955" title="president of India" label="president of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q554171" start="13132" end="13147" title="S. Nijalingappa" label="S. Nijalingappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523002" start="13349" end="13361" title="Congress (O)" label="Congress (O)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021036" start="13398" end="13410" title="Congress (R)" label="Congress (R)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255973" start="13515" end="13518" title="Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam" label="DMK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246350" start="13639" end="13650" title="Privy Purse in India" label="Privy Purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="13675" end="13689" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960459" start="13867" end="13884" title="Kingdom of Sikkim" label="Kingdom of Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="13901" end="13913" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="14666" end="14672" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513843" start="14691" end="14703" title="1975 Sikkimese monarchy referendum" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q851422" start="14890" end="14901" title="China Daily" label="China Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838447" start="15049" end="15061" title="Garibi Hatao" label="Garibi Hatao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824165" start="15333" end="15354" title="anti-poverty programs" label="anti-poverty programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="15517" end="15523" title="Caste system in India" label="castes"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="16303" end="16318" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="16427" end="16432" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="16437" end="16444" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q734509" start="16456" end="16475" title="Jayaprakash Narayan" label="Jayaprakash Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="16708" end="16716" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="16724" end="16742" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971" label="Indo-Pakistani War"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="16795" end="16820" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="16864" end="16874" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="16893" end="16906" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="16912" end="16922" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916113" start="17178" end="17186" title="Bangladesh genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330180" start="18309" end="18321" title="Folland Gnat" label="Folland Gnat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469021" start="18345" end="18359" title="Canadair Sabre" label="Canadair Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335318" start="18830" end="18852" title="Operation Chengiz Khan" label="Operation Chengiz Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="20008" end="20021" title="lightning war" label="lightning war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="20159" end="20164" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q983548" start="20166" end="20185" title="Jagjit Singh Aurora" label="Jagjit Singh Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399075" start="20689" end="20700" title="Sagat Singh" label="Sagat Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633435" start="20911" end="20929" title="Parachute Regiment (India)" label="Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="21548" end="21558" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641946" start="21968" end="21980" title="A.A.K. Niazi" label="A.A.K. Niazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520553" start="22030" end="22039" title="Mohammad Shariff" label="M.S. Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299470" start="23080" end="23087" title="razakar" label="razakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q382973" start="23443" end="23448" title="Durga" label="Durga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522720" start="23781" end="23801" title="Allahabad High Court" label="Allahabad High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285331" start="23964" end="23974" title="Raj Narain" label="Raj Narain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805815" start="24229" end="24245" title="Ashoke Kumar Sen" label="Ashoke Kumar Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="24726" end="24738" title="Constitution of India" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556694" start="24782" end="24788" title="Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha" label="member"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="24855" end="24874" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q743568" start="25649" end="25665" title="Braj Kumar Nehru" label="Braj Kumar Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q317778" start="26150" end="26170" title="Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed" label="Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="26181" end="26199" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056379" start="26606" end="26622" title="George Fernandes" label="George Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486618" start="27058" end="27079" title="President&amp;#x27;s rule" label="President&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="27148" end="27158" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294412" start="27417" end="27457" title="Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (India)" label="Ministry of Information and Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="27851" end="27861" title="decree" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146145" start="27928" end="27942" title="rule by decree" label="rule by decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q730045" start="28025" end="28038" title="Sanjay Gandhi" label="Sanjay Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009220" start="28171" end="28181" title="Mark Tully" label="Mark Tully"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634914" start="28477" end="28486" title="Bansi Lal" label="Bansi Lal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030145" start="28593" end="28619" title="7, Lok Kalyan Marg" label="PMH (Prime Minister House)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243280" start="28636" end="28663" title="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Office (India)" label="PMO (Prime Minister Office)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531393" start="28783" end="28792" title="1977 Indian general election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352638" start="28977" end="28992" title="Janata alliance" label="Janata alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245961" start="29044" end="29064" title="Bharatiya Jana Sangh" label="Bharatiya Jana Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523002" start="29066" end="29078" title="Congress (O)" label="Congress (O)"/>
<link wikidata="Q319824" start="29107" end="29119" title="Charan Singh" label="Charan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380843" start="29127" end="29147" title="Bharatiya Kranti Dal" label="Bharatiya Kranti Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q734509" start="29218" end="29237" title="Jai Prakash Narayan" label="Jai Prakash Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471625" start="29467" end="29479" title="Jagjivan Ram" label="Jagjivan Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712859" start="29481" end="29504" title="Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna" label="Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q467189" start="29510" end="29526" title="Nandini Satpathy" label="Nandini Satpathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160848" start="29597" end="29619" title="Congress for Democracy" label="Congress for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352638" start="30306" end="30318" title="Janata Party" label="Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056379" start="30448" end="30464" title="George Fernandes" label="George Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q162306" start="30543" end="30556" title="Birendra of Nepal" label="king of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="30622" end="30627" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273868" start="30756" end="30759" title="R. N. Kao" label="Kao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764541" start="30979" end="30997" title="Yashwantrao Chavan" label="Yashwantrao Chavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097473" start="31203" end="31227" title="Chikmagalur (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Chikmagalur Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="31325" end="31332" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q984634" start="31346" end="31354" title="Dr. Rajkumar" label="Rajkumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901933" start="31938" end="31957" title="Indian Airlines Flight 410" label="supporters hijacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q876323" start="31961" end="31976" title="Indian Airlines" label="Indian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="32228" end="32233" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296075" start="32493" end="32520" title="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh" label="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307223" start="32531" end="32548" title="Hindu nationalist" label="Hindu nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="32550" end="32562" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532192" start="33290" end="33304" title="1980 Indian general election" label="1980 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461610" start="33334" end="33344" title="Shahi Imam" label="Shahi Imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q233678" start="33348" end="33359" title="Jama Masjid, Delhi" label="Jama Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q13518381" start="33373" end="33394" title="Syed Abdullah Bukhari" label="Syed Abdullah Bukhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="33498" end="33504" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764036" start="33802" end="33820" title="Medak (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Medak constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q32015063" start="33896" end="33915" title="aerobatic manoeuvre" label="aerobatic manoeuvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q963718" start="34085" end="34097" title="Maruti Udyog" label="Maruti Udyog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137675" start="34124" end="34129" title="crore" label="crore"/>
<link wikidata="Q181642" start="34206" end="34212" title="Suzuki" label="Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q24285764" start="34494" end="34514" title="H. Y. Sharada Prasad" label="H. Y. Sharada Prasad"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="34638" end="34642" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="34652" end="34661" title="Akali Dal" label="Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="34708" end="34714" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q358874" start="34869" end="34895" title="Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale" label="Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212110" start="34971" end="34985" title="Damdami Taksal" label="Damdami Taksal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993365" start="35055" end="35077" title="Sant Nirankari Mission" label="Sant Nirankari Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122215" start="35126" end="35138" title="Jagat Narain" label="Jagat Narain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630070" start="35163" end="35176" title="Punjab Kesari" label="Punjab Kesari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751372" start="35361" end="35380" title="Anandpur Resolution" label="Anandpur Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="35765" end="35778" title="Golden Temple" label="Golden Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q372096" start="35853" end="35866" title="The Statesman (India)" label="The Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q720711" start="35893" end="35911" title="light machine guns" label="light machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291248" start="35916" end="35937" title="semi-automatic rifles" label="semi-automatic rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648359" start="36050" end="36061" title="A. S. Atwal" label="A. S. Atwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987713" start="36473" end="36492" title="Operation Blue Star" label="Operation Blue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q118893" start="36578" end="36588" title="Akal Takht" label="Akal Takht"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="37243" end="37247" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546004" start="37260" end="37273" title="Satwant Singh" label="Satwant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876319" start="37278" end="37289" title="Beant Singh (assassin)" label="Beant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398434" start="37385" end="37400" title="Safdarjung Road" label="Safdarjung Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="37402" end="37411" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987713" start="37438" end="37457" title="Operation Blue Star" label="Operation Blue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="37594" end="37607" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="37643" end="37659" title="Raidió Teilifís Éireann" label="Irish television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383467" start="37875" end="37886" title="Kehar Singh" label="Kehar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593538" start="38023" end="38033" title="Tihar Jail" label="Tihar Jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279500" start="38060" end="38100" title="All India Institutes of Medical Sciences" label="All India Institutes of Medical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809145" start="38250" end="38266" title="Tirath Das Dogra" label="Tirath Das Dogra"/>
<link wikidata="Q211782" start="38353" end="38357" title="Sten" label="Sten"/>
<link wikidata="Q178550" start="38358" end="38372" title="submachine gun" label="submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24634" start="38379" end="38390" title=".38 Special" label=".38 Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061108" start="38736" end="38771" title="Central Forensic Science Laboratory" label="Central Forensic Science Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018826" start="38967" end="38982" title="Pran Nath Lekhi" label="Pran Nath Lekhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106788" start="39005" end="39017" title="Salma Sultan" label="Salma Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763315" start="39066" end="39077" title="Doordarshan" label="Doordarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210083" start="39231" end="39239" title="Raj Ghat" label="Raj Ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q109421881" start="39291" end="39303" title="Shakti Sthal" label="Shakti Sthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="39522" end="39525" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="39636" end="39648" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="39888" end="39897" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="40213" end="40219" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q127442" start="40238" end="40258" title="Konstantin Chernenko" label="Konstantin Chernenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="40544" end="40557" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="40589" end="40602" title="George Shultz" label="George Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4374001" start="40616" end="40630" title="Embassy of India, Washington, D.C." label="Indian Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="40748" end="40783" title="vice president of the United States" label="vice president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="40784" end="40798" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q626814" start="41133" end="41145" title="Government of South Korea" label="South Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q14362" start="41156" end="41169" title="Chun Doo-hwan" label="Chun Doo-hwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="41261" end="41269" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q641395" start="41280" end="41297" title="Veselin Đuranović" label="Veselin Đuranović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250182" start="41299" end="41308" title="Government of Pakistan" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="41319" end="41338" title="Mohammad Zia ul-Haq" label="Mohammad Zia ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773971" start="41340" end="41347" title="Government of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233" start="41358" end="41372" title="Sandro Pertini" label="Sandro Pertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="41374" end="41391" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="41399" end="41406" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="41412" end="41418" title="Government of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="41429" end="41448" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="41479" end="41493" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="41499" end="41515" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q642870" start="41598" end="41609" title="Paul Lusaka" label="Paul Lusaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="41613" end="41619" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="41863" end="41871" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="41881" end="41894" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="41922" end="41932" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409068" start="42279" end="42285" title="Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="42454" end="42467" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q878767" start="42524" end="42529" title="Bitch (slang)" label="bitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="42618" end="42633" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905760" start="43106" end="43122" title="Himalayan states" label="Himalayan states"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="43163" end="43168" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="43173" end="43179" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513843" start="43284" end="43294" title="1975 Sikkimese monarchy referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025450" start="43303" end="43324" title="Indo-Bangla Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Peace" label="maintained close ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="43424" end="43445" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808521" start="43698" end="43729" title="Assassination of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Assassination of Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638941" start="44132" end="44143" title="Farakka Dam" label="Farakka Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056319" start="44197" end="44221" title="Government of Bangladesh" label="Government of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23055105" start="44279" end="44304" title="Bangladesh Freedom Honour" label="Bangladesh Freedom Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q213394" start="44466" end="44481" title="Sri Lankan civil war" label="ethnic problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q194291" start="44561" end="44582" title="Sirimavo Bandaranaike" label="Sirimavo Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720887" start="44623" end="44635" title="Katchatheevu" label="Katchatheevu"/>
<link wikidata="Q469661" start="44808" end="44825" title="J. R. Jayewardene" label="J. R. Jayewardene"/>
<link wikidata="Q80312" start="44934" end="44966" title="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam" label="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640918" start="45136" end="45151" title="Black July" label="Black July 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470998" start="45496" end="45509" title="Simla Agreement" label="Shimla Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426448" start="45533" end="45584" title="Smiling Buddha" label="authorisation of the detonation of a nuclear device"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="45635" end="45654" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="45874" end="45893" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="46029" end="46039" title="Khalistani" label="Khalistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="46053" end="46059" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445917" start="46143" end="46161" title="Operation Meghdoot" label="Operation Meghdoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000527" start="46201" end="46217" title="Siachen conflict" label="Siachen conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="46406" end="46411" title="SAARC" label="SAARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="46505" end="46526" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="46605" end="46611" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q231915" start="46654" end="46665" title="Two-nation theory" label="an analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139327" start="46682" end="46691" title="archrival" label="archrival"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="46771" end="46778" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q275146" start="46930" end="46949" title="P. V. Narasimha Rao" label="P. V. Narasimha Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="47142" end="47150" title="Baathist" label="Baathist"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="47428" end="47433" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="47435" end="47440" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="47446" end="47453" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844831" start="47502" end="47514" title="pro-American" label="pro-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="47534" end="47540" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="47542" end="47554" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="47556" end="47562" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="47568" end="47588" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="47759" end="47765" title="Nasser" label="Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="47778" end="47783" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="47815" end="47821" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="47937" end="47952" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="47968" end="47973" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="48090" end="48095" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424113" start="48157" end="48174" title="India–Iran relations" label="Indo-Iranian ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="48185" end="48189" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="48273" end="48277" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="48410" end="48422" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="48576" end="48580" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q379850" start="48671" end="48683" title="Baghdad Pact" label="Baghdad Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="49066" end="49097" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Arab states of the Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="49110" end="49122" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q430032" start="49432" end="49444" title="Pan-Islamism" label="Pan-Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="49514" end="49528" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="49587" end="49625" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="49747" end="49781" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="49932" end="49941" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="49981" end="49985" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q136335" start="50394" end="50412" title="Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality" label="ZOPFAN declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="50583" end="50590" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q867778" start="50657" end="50665" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="50858" end="50889" title="University of the South Pacific" label="University of the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="51055" end="51078" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="51124" end="51135" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="51221" end="51232" title="third world" label="third world"/>
<link wikidata="Q476855" start="51279" end="51284" title="Mau Mau Uprising" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="51289" end="51296" title="Algerian War" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="51475" end="51486" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="51566" end="51574" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="51576" end="51581" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="51583" end="51590" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="51627" end="51642" title="Sino-Indian War" label="Sino-Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153790" start="52477" end="52504" title="Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968" label="Commonwealth Immigrants Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="52517" end="52523" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207409" start="52554" end="52599" title="Expulsion of Asians from Uganda" label="suffered persecution and eventually expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="52624" end="52632" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687287" start="53011" end="53024" title="Task Force 74" label="Task Force 74"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="53034" end="53047" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="53594" end="53606" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="53803" end="53817" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="53818" end="53832" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18985034" start="53848" end="53857" title="President of Zambia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q105480" start="53858" end="53872" title="Kenneth Kaunda" label="Kenneth Kaunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="53874" end="53884" title="Australian Government" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="53885" end="53899" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="53900" end="53914" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="53919" end="53928" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q866756" start="53929" end="53943" title="Prime Minister of Singapore" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="53944" end="53956" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247874" start="54059" end="54091" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government" label="Commonwealth Heads of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="54233" end="54242" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="54378" end="54398" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="54520" end="54540" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="54660" end="54668" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="54745" end="54757" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="54977" end="54988" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="54993" end="55001" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="55220" end="55231" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="55244" end="55256" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q695599" start="55261" end="55269" title="Government of Austria" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44517" start="55281" end="55294" title="Bruno Kreisky" label="Bruno Kreisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="55396" end="55408" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="55413" end="55430" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="55633" end="55638" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="56127" end="56157" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987713" start="56757" end="56776" title="Operation Blue Star" label="Operation Blue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="57036" end="57049" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="57055" end="57072" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="57285" end="57294" title="Khalistan" label="Khalistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521159" start="57522" end="57539" title="Mitrokhin Archive" label="Mitrokhin Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="57835" end="57838" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="58010" end="58022" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="58041" end="58047" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530322" start="58348" end="58365" title="Subramanian Swamy" label="Subramanian Swamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q358874" start="58484" end="58496" title="Bhindranwale" label="Bhindranwale"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="58721" end="58743" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q468324" start="58745" end="58757" title="L. K. Advani" label="L. K. Advani"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="58970" end="58984" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387584" start="59483" end="59494" title="S. K. Patil" label="S. K. Patil"/>
<link wikidata="Q422886" start="60140" end="60155" title="Active measures" label="active-measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="60341" end="60355" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="60589" end="60639" title="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="60867" end="60880" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543355" start="60907" end="60925" title="North–South Summit" label="North–South Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521255" start="61193" end="61208" title="Five-Year Plans of India" label="Five-Year Plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638819" start="61391" end="61411" title="Sunanda K. Datta-Ray" label="Sunanda K. Datta-Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="61510" end="61519" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q335848" start="61809" end="61822" title="Meghnad Desai" label="Meghnad Desai"/>
<link wikidata="Q912158" start="62005" end="62013" title="Naxalite" label="Naxalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="62526" end="62537" title="machiavelli" label="machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="62689" end="62700" title="Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104803" start="62777" end="62798" title="J. Barkley Rosser Jr." label="J. Barkley Rosser Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="65633" end="65686" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465473" start="66116" end="66136" title="Food for Peace" label="food grain shipments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348321" start="67068" end="67107" title="List of amendments of the Constitution of India" label="official declaration of state socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100540" start="68289" end="68314" title="Green Revolution in India" label="Green Revolution in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="70173" end="70193" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="71551" end="71573" title="state-owned enterprise" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="72718" end="72734" title="second oil shock" label="second oil shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="73358" end="73379" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245479" start="73576" end="73599" title="priority sector lending" label="priority sector lending"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061848" start="73744" end="73752" title="unbanked" label="unbanked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="75202" end="75228" title="Indo-Pakistani war of 1971" label="Indo-Pakistani war of 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289348" start="75534" end="75556" title="Indian Oil Corporation" label="Indian Oil Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619375" start="75568" end="75599" title="Hindustan Petroleum Corporation" label="Hindustan Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q854826" start="75616" end="75644" title="Bharat Petroleum Corporation" label="Bharat Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260340" start="75777" end="75797" title="Punjabi Suba movement" label="accepted the demands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="75858" end="75863" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="75922" end="75929" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q946077" start="75941" end="75947" title="Pahari languages" label="Pahari"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="75976" end="75985" title="Northeast India" label="northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="76001" end="76017" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="76228" end="76238" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="76434" end="76441" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q983328" start="76561" end="76576" title="Sheikh Abdullah" label="Sheikh Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="76658" end="76668" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576099" start="76745" end="76764" title="1975 Indira–Sheikh accord" label="agreed to an accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q15543855" start="76835" end="76872" title="Article 370 of the Constitution of India" label="special autonomous status for Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180" start="76912" end="76929" title="Jammu and Kashmir (state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="77090" end="77099" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="77101" end="77108" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="77114" end="77121" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056876" start="77132" end="77158" title="North-East Frontier Agency" label="North-East Frontier Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162" start="77202" end="77219" title="Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="77358" end="77364" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241458" start="78208" end="78233" title="Presidential proclamation" label="Presidential proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="78409" end="78431" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="79094" end="79105" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453608" start="79294" end="79310" title="Francine Frankel" label="Francine Frankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104803" start="79826" end="79847" title="J. Barkley Rosser Jr." label="J. Barkley Rosser Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3522980" start="80316" end="80326" title="Hindi Belt" label="Hindi Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="80412" end="80417" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="81054" end="81067" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81324" end="81352" title="Naxalite#Violence in West Bengal" label="militant Communist uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="81376" end="81387" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726232" start="81460" end="81478" title="The Emergency (India)" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756731" start="81584" end="81597" title="March 1966 Mizo National Front uprising" label="Mizo uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="81677" end="81691" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram region"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="81709" end="81720" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="81810" end="81826" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q192379" start="81854" end="81860" title="Aizawl" label="Aizawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884653" start="82377" end="82398" title="Mizoram Peace Accord" label="definitively resolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599" start="82566" end="82574" title="Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496679" start="82818" end="82833" title="Shillong Accord of 1975" label="Shillong Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246849" start="82991" end="83005" title="National Socialist Council of Nagaland" label="rebel holdouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861435" start="83010" end="83044" title="Ethnic conflict in Nagaland" label="ethnic conflict amongst the tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="83148" end="83164" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329367" start="83310" end="83320" title="Test No. 6" label="Test No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q26370" start="83610" end="83622" title="Raja Ramanna" label="Raja Ramanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="83744" end="83748" title="nuclear testing" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779576" start="83803" end="83821" title="Pokhran Test Range" label="Pokhran Test Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779576" start="84041" end="84048" title="Pokhran" label="Pokhran"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="84280" end="84286" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382347" start="84673" end="84690" title="Peaceful nuclear explosion" label="peaceful purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="85051" end="85059" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971" label="1971 war"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="85177" end="85194" title="Indian Parliament" label="Indian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="85345" end="85357" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="85657" end="85671" title="Prime Minister of India" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347903" start="85700" end="85713" title="Assassination of Indira Gandhi" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423445" start="85771" end="85783" title="Assassination of Rajiv Gandhi" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="87634" end="87645" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="87801" end="87807" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q322132" start="90916" end="90928" title="Bharat Ratna" label="Bharat Ratna"/>
<link wikidata="Q634353" start="90964" end="90982" title="Olympic Order" label="Gold Olympic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q308907" start="90993" end="91010" title="Lenin Peace Prize" label="Lenin Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q23055105" start="91033" end="91058" title="Bangladesh Freedom Honour" label="Bangladesh Freedom Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341925" start="91124" end="91136" title="Indira Point" label="Indira Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024945" start="91188" end="91207" title="Indira Awaas Yojana" label="Indira Awaas Yojana"/>
<link wikidata="Q821275" start="91347" end="91382" title="Indira Gandhi International Airport" label="Indira Gandhi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028659" start="91403" end="91441" title="Indira Gandhi National Open University" label="Indira Gandhi National Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="91506" end="91530" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848371" start="91554" end="91598" title="Indira Gandhi Award for National Integration" label="Indira Gandhi Award for National Integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241794" start="91716" end="91735" title="Indira Gandhi Prize" label="Indira Gandhi Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="91780" end="91798" title="Henry A. Kissinger" label="Henry A. Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="91979" end="92004" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q322132" start="92097" end="92109" title="Bharat Ratna" label="Bharat Ratna"/>
<link wikidata="Q23055105" start="92124" end="92149" title="Bangladesh Freedom Honour" label="Bangladesh Freedom Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="92535" end="92565" title="countries with nuclear weapons" label="countries with nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="92683" end="92694" title="Soviet bloc" label="Soviet bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955600" start="92844" end="92864" title="Outlook (Indian magazine)" label="Outlook India&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11804721" start="92879" end="92898" title="the Greatest Indian" label="the Greatest Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="93454" end="93462" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472937" start="93664" end="93715" title="Forty-second Amendment of the Constitution of India" label="Forty-second Amendment of the Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="94029" end="94045" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q109421881" start="94127" end="94139" title="Shakti Sthal" label="Shakti Sthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420017" start="94521" end="94527" title="Aandhi" label="Aandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468339" start="94544" end="94550" title="Gulzar" label="Gulzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417148" start="94558" end="94572" title="Kissa Kursi Ka" label="Kissa Kursi Ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748660" start="94589" end="94601" title="Amrit Nahata" label="Amrit Nahata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061491" start="94609" end="94617" title="Nasbandi" label="Nasbandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11108314" start="94634" end="94645" title="I. S. Johar" label="I. S. Johar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720983" start="94653" end="94660" title="Maachis" label="Maachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687523" start="94691" end="94715" title="Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi" label="Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633806" start="94732" end="94745" title="Sudhir Mishra" label="Sudhir Mishra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248857" start="94753" end="94761" title="Hawayein (2003 film)" label="Hawayein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747327" start="94778" end="94790" title="Ammtoje Mann" label="Ammtoje Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263470" start="94798" end="94814" title="Des Hoyaa Pardes" label="Des Hoyaa Pardes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751185" start="94831" end="94841" title="Manoj Punj" label="Manoj Punj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380347" start="94849" end="94859" title="Kaya Taran" label="Kaya Taran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425129" start="94876" end="94887" title="Sashi Kumar" label="Sashi Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748915" start="94895" end="94898" title="Amu (film)" label="Amu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500359" start="94915" end="94927" title="Shonali Bose" label="Shonali Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q17595395" start="94935" end="94948" title="Kaum De Heere" label="Kaum De Heere"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983576" start="94986" end="94994" title="47 to 84" label="47 to 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078935" start="95031" end="95042" title="Punjab 1984" label="Punjab 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385584" start="95059" end="95071" title="Anurag Singh (director)" label="Anurag Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735063" start="95079" end="95099" title="The Fourth Direction" label="The Fourth Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620585" start="95116" end="95131" title="Gurvinder Singh" label="Gurvinder Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25213066" start="95133" end="95163" title="Dharam Yudh Morcha (film)" label="&amp;quot;Dharam Yudh Morcha&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20735522" start="95190" end="95212" title="31st October (film)" label="&amp;quot;31 October&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734271" start="95223" end="95242" title="Shivaji Lotan Patil" label="Shivaji Lotan Patil"/>
<link wikidata="Q20201985" start="95250" end="95259" title="Baadshaho" label="Baadshaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436476" start="95276" end="95289" title="Milan Luthria" label="Milan Luthria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60737522" start="95291" end="95315" title="Toofan Singh (film)" label="&amp;quot;Toofan Singh&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080201" start="95346" end="95356" title="Sonchiriya" label="Sonchiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667464" start="95373" end="95389" title="Abhishek Chaubey" label="Abhishek Chaubey"/>
<link wikidata="Q96220560" start="95397" end="95405" title="Shukranu" label="Shukranu"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="95716" end="95732" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="95769" end="95785" title="history of India" label="history of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="95817" end="95842" title="Indus Valley Civilization" label="Indus Valley Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449166" start="95891" end="95914" title="Films Division of India" label="Films Division of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781365" start="96078" end="96098" title="Stockholm Conference" label="Stockholm Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030932" start="96107" end="96120" title="Pradhanmantri" label="Pradhanmantri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630156" start="96190" end="96198" title="ABP News" label="ABP News"/>
<link wikidata="Q15650292" start="96629" end="96642" title="Navni Parihar" label="Navni Parihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="96762" end="96785" title="1971 Indo-Pakistani War" label="1971 Indo-Pakistani War"/>
<link wikidata="Q445995" start="96962" end="96978" title="Sarita Choudhury" label="Sarita Choudhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649787" start="96982" end="97018" title="Midnight&amp;#x27;s Children (film)" label="&amp;quot;Midnight&amp;#x27;s Children&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249509" start="97050" end="97071" title="Jai Jawaan Jai Kisaan (film)" label="Jai Jawaan Jai Kisaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30641050" start="97109" end="97120" title="Indu Sarkar" label="Indu Sarkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39670177" start="97251" end="97267" title="Raid (2018 film)" label="&amp;quot;Raid&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q77313154" start="97282" end="97290" title="Thalaivi" label="Thalaivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q97119189" start="97314" end="97325" title="Radhe Shyam" label="Radhe Shyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632633" start="97340" end="97355" title="Kishori Shahane" label="Kishori Shahane"/>
<link wikidata="Q62233423" start="97365" end="97381" title="PM Narendra Modi" label="PM Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291271" start="97416" end="97437" title="Thackeray (film)" label="&amp;quot;Thackeray&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q85419123" start="97449" end="97463" title="83 (film)" label="&amp;quot;83&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q96391559" start="97496" end="97520" title="Main Mulayam Singh Yadav" label="Main Mulayam Singh Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q290438" start="97535" end="97545" title="Lara Dutta" label="Lara Dutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q75071510" start="97555" end="97566" title="Bell Bottom (2021 film)" label="Bell Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202179" start="97581" end="97599" title="Fatima Sana Shaikh" label="Fatima Sana Shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q117279779" start="97603" end="97626" title="Sam Bahadur (film)" label="&amp;quot;Sam Bahadur&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737207" start="97638" end="97652" title="Kangana Ranaut" label="Kangana Ranaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q115945804" start="97656" end="97677" title="Emergency (2024 film)" label="&amp;quot;Emergency&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="97733" end="97740" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="97741" end="97746" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q110639821" start="98124" end="98140" title="Orient Paperback" label="Orient Paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521378" start="98224" end="98239" title="P. C. Alexander" label="P. C. Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q24285764" start="98294" end="98314" title="H. Y. Sharada Prasad" label="H. Y. Sharada Prasad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="98316" end="98329" title="Penguin India" label="Penguin India"/>
<link wikidata="Q448399" start="98382" end="98398" title="Nayantara Sahgal" label="Nayantara Sahgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="98400" end="98413" title="Penguin India" label="Penguin India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399060" start="98433" end="98447" title="Sagarika Ghose" label="Sagarika Ghose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850500" start="98469" end="98528" title="List of national presidents of the Indian National Congress" label="List of national presidents of the Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606248" start="98531" end="98570" title="List of assassinated Indian politicians" label="List of assassinated Indian politicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q829325" start="98573" end="98639" title="List of elected and appointed female heads of state and government" label="List of elected and appointed female heads of state and government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634153" start="98642" end="98710" title="List of heads of state and government who suspended the constitution" label="List of heads of state and government who suspended the constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30702141" start="98713" end="98784" title="List of heads of state and government who were assassinated or executed" label="List of heads of state and government who were assassinated or executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521662" start="98886" end="98903" title="Guha, Ramachandra" label="Guha, Ramachandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260760" start="99086" end="99100" title="Pupul Jayakar" label="Jayakar, Pupul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917875" start="99509" end="99518" title="Ved Mehta" label="Ved Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518399" start="99952" end="99965" title="Shourie, Arun" label="Shourie, Arun"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861158" start="100219" end="100234" title="Janardan Thakur" label="Thakur, Janadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768586" start="100406" end="100439" title="Texas Archive of the Moving Image" label="Texas Archive of the Moving Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="100650" end="100674" title="Encyclopaedia Britannica" label="Encyclopaedia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15180" wikidata="Q1666079" url="?curid=15180" title="Intergovernmentalism">
<text>In international relations, intergovernmentalism treats states (and national governments in particular) as the primary actors in the integration process. Intergovernmentalist approaches claim to be able to explain both periods of radical change in the European Union because of converging governmental preferences and periods of inertia because of diverging national interests. 

Intergovernmentalism is distinguishable from realism and neorealism because it recognized the significance of institutionalisation in international politics and the impact of domestic politics upon governmental preferences.

==Regional integration==
===European integration===

The best-known example of regional integration is the European Union (EU), an economic and political intergovernmental organisation of 27 member states, all in Europe. The EU operates through a system of supranational independent institutions and intergovernmental negotiated decisions by the member states. Institutions of the EU include the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, the European Council, the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Central Bank, the Court of Auditors, and the European Parliament. The European Parliament is elected every five years by EU citizens.

The EU has developed a single market through a standardised system of laws that apply in all member states. Within the Schengen Area (which includes 22 EU and 4 non-EU European states) passport controls have been abolished. EU policies favour the free movement of people, goods, services, and capital within its boundaries, enact legislation in justice and home affairs, and maintain common policies on trade, agriculture, fisheries and regional development.

A monetary union, the eurozone, was established in 1999 and is composed of 17 member states. Through the Common Foreign and Security Policy the EU has developed a role in external relations and defence. Permanent diplomatic missions have been established around the world. The EU is represented at the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the G8 and the G-20.

Intergovernmentalism represents a way for limiting the conferral of powers upon supranational institutions, halting the emergence of common policies. In the current institutional system of the EU, the European Council and the Council play the role of the institutions which have the last word about decisions and policies of the EU, institutionalizing a de facto intergovernmental control over the EU as a whole, with the possibility to give more power to a small group of states. This extreme consequence can create the condition of supremacy of someone over someone else violating the principle of a &quot;Union of Equals&quot;. However, from a neo-functionalist viewpoint, some scholars argue that despite the appearance of intergovernmental dominance, the EU&#x27;s supranational institutions have progressively expanded their influence through spillover effects, which gradually limit member states&#x27; control and enhance deeper integration.

===African integration===
The African Union (AU, or, in its other official languages, UA) is a continental intergovernmental union, similar but less integrated to the EU, consisting of 54 African states. The AU was presented on 26 May 2001 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and officially founded on 9 July 2002 in Durban, South Africa to replace the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). The most important decisions of the AU are made by the Assembly of the African Union, a semi-annual meeting of the heads of state and government of its member states. The AU&#x27;s secretariat, the African Union Commission, is based in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

==See also==
* Continental Union
* Continentalism
* Functionalism (international relations)
* Intergovernmental organization
* Liberal intergovernmentalism
* Global citizenship
* Neofunctionalism
* Union for the Mediterranean
* Union of South American Nations

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="3" end="26" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666079" start="28" end="48" title="Intergovernmentalism" label="intergovernmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="252" end="266" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q471183" start="425" end="432" title="Realism (international relations)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761068" start="437" end="447" title="Neorealism (international relations)" label="neorealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070165" start="490" end="510" title="institutionalisation" label="institutionalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="712" end="726" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q212141" start="736" end="744" title="Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="796" end="809" title="Member state of the European Union" label="member states"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="818" end="824" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335818" start="862" end="875" title="Supranational union" label="supranational"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="966" end="988" title="Institutions of the European Union" label="Institutions of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="1001" end="1020" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="1026" end="1055" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="1061" end="1077" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="1083" end="1121" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="1127" end="1148" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8900" start="1154" end="1171" title="Court of Auditors" label="Court of Auditors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="1181" end="1200" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q363404" start="1257" end="1268" title="citizenship of the European Union" label="EU citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="1294" end="1307" title="single market" label="single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="1390" end="1403" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="1518" end="1571" title="European Single Market" label="free movement of people, goods, services, and capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q661131" start="1674" end="1679" title="Common commercial policy (EU)" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="1681" end="1692" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q391962" start="1694" end="1703" title="Common Fisheries Policy" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217620" start="1708" end="1728" title="Regional policy of the European Union" label="regional development"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="1753" end="1761" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q672788" start="1836" end="1870" title="Common Foreign and Security Policy" label="Common Foreign and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24512" start="1902" end="1920" title="Foreign relations of the European Union" label="external relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q511733" start="1925" end="1932" title="Military of the European Union" label="defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043424" start="1944" end="1963" title="List of diplomatic missions of the European Union" label="diplomatic missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q117243" start="2033" end="2047" title="European Union and the United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2053" end="2077" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413355" start="2083" end="2085" title="European Union and the G8" label="G8"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="2094" end="2098" title="G-20 major economies" label="G-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="3082" end="3095" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q769802" start="3147" end="3182" title="Continental union" label="continental intergovernmental union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="3240" end="3246" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="3248" end="3254" title="Sovereign state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="3295" end="3306" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="3308" end="3316" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="3358" end="3364" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3366" end="3378" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="3394" end="3423" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992886" start="3486" end="3515" title="Assembly of the African Union" label="Assembly of the African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362881" start="3629" end="3653" title="African Union Commission" label="African Union Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="3667" end="3678" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q769802" start="3706" end="3723" title="Continental Union" label="Continental Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165343" start="3726" end="3740" title="Continentalism" label="Continentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474578" start="3743" end="3782" title="Functionalism (international relations)" label="Functionalism (international relations)"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="3785" end="3815" title="Intergovernmental organization" label="Intergovernmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540843" start="3818" end="3846" title="Liberal intergovernmentalism" label="Liberal intergovernmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785021" start="3849" end="3867" title="Global citizenship" label="Global citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977515" start="3870" end="3886" title="Neofunctionalism" label="Neofunctionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="3889" end="3916" title="Union for the Mediterranean" label="Union for the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230" start="3919" end="3950" title="Union of South American Nations" label="Union of South American Nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15181" wikidata="Q171995" url="?curid=15181" title="Individualism">
<text>Individualism is the moral stance, political philosophy, ideology, and social outlook that emphasizes the intrinsic worth of the individual. Individualists promote realizing one&#x27;s goals and desires, valuing independence and self-reliance, and advocating that the interests of the individual should gain precedence over the state or a social group, while opposing external interference upon one&#x27;s own interests by society or institutions such as the government. Individualism makes the individual its focus, and so starts &quot;with the fundamental premise that the human individual is of primary importance in the struggle for liberation&quot;. 

Individualism is often defined in contrast to communitarianism, collectivism and corporatism.

&quot;Individualism&quot; has been used as a term denoting &quot;[t]he quality of being an individual; individuality&quot;, related to possessing &quot;[a]n individual characteristic; a quirk&quot;. Individualism is also associated with artistic and bohemian interests and lifestyles where there is a tendency towards self-creation and experimentation as opposed to tradition or popular mass opinions and behaviors. It is also associated with humanist philosophical positions and ethics.

== Etymology ==
In the English language, the word &quot;individualism&quot; was first introduced as a pejorative by utopian socialists such as the Owenites in the late 1830s, although it is unclear if they were influenced by Saint-Simonianism or came up with it independently. A more positive use of the term in Britain came to be used with the writings of James Elishama Smith, a millenarian-turned-socialist and Christian Israelite. Although an early follower of Robert Owen, he eventually rejected Owen&#x27;s collective idea of property and found in individualism a &quot;universalism&quot; that allowed for the development of the &quot;original genius&quot;. Without individualism, Smith argued that individuals cannot amass property to increase one&#x27;s happiness. William Maccall, another Unitarian preacher and probably an acquaintance of Smith, came somewhat later, although influenced by John Stuart Mill, Thomas Carlyle and German Romanticism, to the same positive conclusions in his 1847 work &quot;Elements of Individualism&quot;.

== Individual ==

An individual is a person or any specific object in a collection. In the 15th century and earlier, and also today within the fields of statistics and metaphysics, individual means &quot;indivisible&quot;, typically describing any numerically singular thing, but sometimes meaning &quot;a person&quot; as in &quot;the problem of proper names&quot;. From the 17th century on, individual indicates separateness, as in individualism. Individuality is the state or quality of being an individuated being; a person separated from everything with unique character by possessing their own needs, goals, and desires in comparison to other people.

=== Individuation principle ===

The principle of individuation, or &quot;&quot;, describes the manner in which a thing is identified as distinguished from other things. For Carl Jung, individuation is a process of transformation, whereby the personal and collective unconscious is brought into consciousness (by means of dreams, active imagination or free association to take examples) to be assimilated into the whole personality. It is a completely natural process necessary for the integration of the psyche to take place. Jung considered individuation to be the central process of human development. In &quot;L&#x27;individuation psychique et collective&quot;, Gilbert Simondon developed a theory of individual and collective individuation in which the individual subject is considered as an effect of individuation rather than a cause. Thus, the individual atom is replaced by a never-ending ontological process of individuation. Individuation is an always incomplete process, always leaving a &quot;pre-individual&quot; left-over, itself making possible future individuations. The philosophy of Bernard Stiegler draws upon and modifies the work of Gilbert Simondon on individuation and also upon similar ideas in Friedrich Nietzsche and Sigmund Freud. For Stiegler, &quot;the &quot;I&quot;, as a psychic individual, can only be thought in relationship to &quot;we&quot;, which is a collective individual. The &quot;I&quot; is constituted in adopting a collective tradition, which it inherits and in which a plurality of &quot;I&quot;″s acknowledge each other&#x27;s existence.&quot;

== Individualism and society ==
Individualism holds that a person taking part in society attempts to learn and discover what their own interests are on a personal basis, without a presumed following of the interests of a societal structure (an individualist need not be an egoist). The individualist does not necessarily follow one particular philosophy. They may create an amalgamation of elements of many philosophies, based on personal interests in particular aspects that they find of use. On a societal level, the individualist participates on a personally structured political and moral ground. Independent thinking and opinion is a necessary trait of an individualist. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, claims that his concept of general will in &quot;The Social Contract&quot; is not the simple collection of individual wills and that it furthers the interests of the individual (the constraint of law itself would be beneficial for the individual, as the lack of respect for the law necessarily entails, in Rousseau&#x27;s eyes, a form of ignorance and submission to one&#x27;s passions instead of the preferred of reason).

Individualism versus collectivism is a common dichotomy in cross-cultural research. Global comparative studies have found that the world&#x27;s cultures vary in the degree to which they emphasize individual autonomy, freedom and initiative (individualistic traits), respectively conformity to group norms, maintaining traditions and obedience to in-group authority (collectivistic traits). Cultural differences between individualism and collectivism are differences in degrees, not in kind. Cultural individualism is strongly correlated with GDP per capita and venture capital investments. The cultures of economically developed regions such as Australia, New Zealand, Japan, South Korea, North America and Western Europe are the most individualistic in the world. Middle income regions such as Eastern Europe, South America and mainland East Asia have cultures which are neither very individualistic nor very collectivistic. The most collectivistic cultures in the world are from economically developing regions such as the Middle East and Northern Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, South and South-East Asia, Central Asia and Central America. Against this background, a number of prominent authors from various disciplines (e.g., Louis Dumont, Geert Hofstede, Anthony Giddens, Zygmunt Bauman, Ronald Inglehart) have supported the influential thesis that the modernization of a society goes hand in hand with an increasing degree of individualization. However, this thesis has also found its critics, who point out, among other things, that the cultural-historical development of individualism from antiquity to the present has not proceeded in a straight line, that some societies with a more collectivist orientation are nevertheless highly modernized and that the concepts of individualism, collectivism and modernity lack conceptual clarity so that an appropriately differentiated analysis of the alleged connection is still lacking.    

An earlier analysis by Ruth Benedict in her book The Chrysanthemum and the Sword states that societies and groups can differ in the extent to which they are based upon predominantly &quot;self-regarding&quot; (individualistic, and/or self-interested) behaviors, rather than &quot;other-regarding&quot; (group-oriented, and group, or society-minded) behaviors. Ruth Benedict made a distinction, relevant in this context, between guilt societies (e.g. medieval Europe) with an &quot;internal reference standard&quot; and shame societies (e.g. Japan, &quot;bringing shame upon one&#x27;s ancestors&quot;) with an &quot;external reference standard&quot;, where people look to their peers for feedback on whether an action is acceptable or not.

Individualism is often contrasted either with totalitarianism or with collectivism, but there is a spectrum of behaviors at the societal level ranging from highly individualistic societies through mixed societies to collectivist.

A 2022 study published by the Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization indicates that the individualistic societies have higher levels of charitable giving, providing a response to critics of individualism and capitalism. The authors propose that individualism increases charity through direct mechanisms (self-interested giving) and indirect mechanisms (reinforcing economic freedom). The findings support classical liberal arguments that individualism has virtues, aligning with the views of thinkers like Adam Smith and David Hume.

=== Competitive individualism ===
According to an Oxford Dictionary, &quot;competitive individualism&quot; in sociology is &quot;the view that achievement and non-achievement should depend on merit. Effort and ability are regarded as prerequisites of success. Competition is seen as an acceptable means of distributing limited resources and rewards.

=== Methodological individualism ===
Methodological individualism is the view that phenomena can only be understood by examining how they result from the motivations and actions of individual agents. In economics, people&#x27;s behavior is explained in terms of rational choices, as constrained by prices and incomes. The economist accepts individuals&#x27; preferences as givens. Becker and Stigler provide a forceful statement of this view:
On the traditional view, an explanation of economic phenomena that reaches a difference in tastes between people or times is the terminus of the argument: the problem is abandoned at this point to whoever studies and explains tastes (psychologists? anthropologists? phrenologists? sociobiologists?). On our preferred interpretation, one never reaches this impasse: the economist continues to search for differences in prices or incomes to explain any differences or changes in behavior.

== Political individualism ==

Individualists are chiefly concerned with protecting individual autonomy against obligations imposed by social institutions (such as the state or religious morality). For L. Susan Brown, &quot;Liberalism and anarchism are two political philosophies that are fundamentally concerned with individual freedom yet differ from one another in very distinct ways. Anarchism shares with liberalism a radical commitment to individual freedom while rejecting liberalism&#x27;s competitive property relations.&quot;

Civil libertarianism is a strain of political thought that supports civil liberties, or which emphasizes the supremacy of individual rights and personal freedoms over and against any kind of authority (such as a state, a corporation and social norms imposed through peer pressure, among others). Civil libertarianism is not a complete ideology; rather, it is a collection of views on the specific issues of civil liberties and civil rights. Because of this, a civil libertarian outlook is compatible with many other political philosophies, and civil libertarianism is found on both the right and left in modern politics. For scholar Ellen Meiksins Wood, &quot;there are doctrines of individualism that are opposed to Lockean individualism [...] and non-Lockean individualism may encompass socialism&quot;.

British historians such as Emily Robinson, Camilla Schofield, Florence Sutcliffe-Braithwaite and Natalie Thomlinson have argued that Britons were keen about defining and claiming their individual rights, identities and perspectives by the 1970s, demanding greater personal autonomy and self-determination and less outside control, angrily complaining that the establishment was withholding it. Historians argue that this shift in concerns helped cause Thatcherism and was incorporated into Thatcherism&#x27;s appeal.

=== Anarchism ===
Within anarchism, individualist anarchism represents several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups, society, traditions and ideological systems. Individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict.

In 1793, William Godwin, who has often been cited as the first anarchist, wrote &quot;Political Justice&quot;, which some consider to be the first expression of anarchism. Godwin, a philosophical anarchist, from a rationalist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a present &quot;necessary evil&quot; that would become increasingly irrelevant and powerless by the gradual spread of knowledge. Godwin advocated individualism, proposing that all cooperation in labour be eliminated on the premise that this would be most conducive with the general good.

An influential form of individualist anarchism called egoism, or egoist anarchism, was expounded by one of the earliest and best-known proponents of individualist anarchism, the German Max Stirner. Stirner&#x27;s &quot;The Ego and Its Own&quot;, published in 1844, is a founding text of the philosophy. According to Stirner, the only limitation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire, without regard for God, state, or morality. To Stirner, rights were &quot;spooks&quot; in the mind, and he held that society does not exist but &quot;the individuals are its reality&quot;. Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw unions of egoists, non-systematic associations continually renewed by all parties&#x27; support through an act of will, which Stirner proposed as a form of organization in place of the state. Egoist anarchists claim that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals. Egoist anarchism has inspired many interpretations of Stirner&#x27;s philosophy. It was re-discovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay.

Josiah Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist and &quot;The Peaceful Revolutionist&quot;, the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, was the first anarchist periodical published. For American anarchist historian Eunice Minette Schuster, &quot;[i]t is apparent [...] that Proudhonian Anarchism was to be found in the United States at least as early as 1848 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the Individualist Anarchism of Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrews. [...] William B. Greene presented this Proudhonian Mutualism in its purest and most systematic form&quot;. Henry David Thoreau was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the United States and Europe. Thoreau was an American author, poet, naturalist, tax resister, development critic, surveyor, historian, philosopher and leading transcendentalist, who is best known for his book &quot;Walden&quot;, a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings, and his essay &quot;Civil Disobedience&quot;, an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an unjust state. Later, Benjamin Tucker fused Stirner&#x27;s egoism with the economics of Warren and Proudhon in his eclectic influential publication &quot;Liberty&quot;.

From these early influences, anarchism and especially individualist anarchism was related to the issues of love and sex. In different countries, this attracted a small but diverse following of bohemian artists and intellectuals, free love and birth control advocates, individualist naturists nudists as in anarcho-naturism, freethought and anti-clerical activists as well as young anarchist outlaws in what came to be known as illegalism and individual reclamation, especially within European individualist anarchism and individualist anarchism in France. These authors and activists included Oscar Wilde, Émile Armand, Han Ryner, Henri Zisly, Renzo Novatore, Miguel Giménez Igualada, Adolf Brand and Lev Chernyi among others. In his important essay &quot;The Soul of Man Under Socialism&quot; from 1891, Wilde defended socialism as the way to guarantee individualism and so he saw that &quot;[w]ith the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true, beautiful, healthy Individualism. Nobody will waste his life in accumulating things, and the symbols for things. One will live. To live is the rarest thing in the world. Most people exist, that is all&quot;. For anarchist historian George Woodcock, &quot;Wilde&#x27;s aim in &quot;The Soul of Man Under Socialism&quot; is to seek the society most favorable to the artist. [...] for Wilde art is the supreme end, containing within itself enlightenment and regeneration, to which all else in society must be subordinated. [...] Wilde represents the anarchist as aesthete&quot;. Woodcock finds that &quot;[t]he most ambitious contribution to literary anarchism during the 1890s was undoubtedly Oscar Wilde &quot;The Soul of Man Under Socialism&quot;&quot; and finds that it is influenced mainly by the thought of William Godwin.

=== Autarchism ===

Autarchism promotes the principles of individualism, the moral ideology of individual liberty and self-reliance whilst rejecting compulsory government and supporting the elimination of government in favor of ruling oneself to the exclusion of rule by others. Robert LeFevre, recognized as an autarchist by anarcho-capitalist Murray Rothbard, distinguished autarchism from anarchy, whose economics he felt entailed interventions contrary to freedom in contrast to his own &quot;laissez-faire&quot; economics of the Austrian School.

=== Liberalism ===
Liberalism is thought &quot;that attaches [and advances the] importance...[of]...the civil and political rights of individuals and their freedoms of speech and expression.&quot; This belief is widely accepted in the United States, Europe, Australia and other Western nations, and was recognized as an important value by many Western philosophers throughout history, in particular since the Enlightenment. It is often rejected by collectivist ideas such as in Abrahamic or Confucian societies, although Taoists were and are known to be individualists. The Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote praising &quot;the idea of a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed&quot;.

Liberalism has its roots in the Age of Enlightenment and rejects many foundational assumptions that dominated most earlier theories of government, such as the Divine Right of Kings, hereditary status, and established religion. John Locke and Montesquieu are often credited with the philosophical foundations of classical liberalism, a political ideology inspired by the broader liberal movement. Locke wrote that &quot;no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions.&quot;

In the 17th century, liberal ideas began to influence European governments in nations such as the Netherlands, Switzerland, England and Poland, but they were strongly opposed, often by armed might, by those who favored absolute monarchy and established religion. In the 18th century, the first modern liberal state was founded without a monarch or a hereditary aristocracy in the United States of America. The US Declaration of Independence includes the words which echo Locke that &quot;all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to insure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.&quot;

Liberalism comes in many forms. According to John N. Gray, the essence of liberalism is toleration of different beliefs and of different ideas as to what constitutes a good life.

Liberalism generally values differing political opinions, even if they clash and cause discord.

== Philosophical individualism ==
=== Egoist anarchism ===

Egoist anarchism is a school of anarchist thought that originated in the philosophy of Max Stirner, a 19th-century Hegelian philosopher whose &quot;name appears with familiar regularity in historically orientated surveys of anarchist thought as one of the earliest and best-known exponents of individualist anarchism.&quot; According to Stirner, the only limitation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire, without regard for God, state, or morality. Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw unions of egoists, non-systematic associations continually renewed by all parties&#x27; support through an act of will which Stirner proposed as a form of organisation in place of the state.

Egoist anarchists argue that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals. Egoism has inspired many interpretations of Stirner&#x27;s philosophy, but it has also gone beyond Stirner within anarchism. It was re-discovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay. John Beverley Robinson wrote an essay called &quot;Egoism&quot; in which he states that &quot;Modern egoism, as propounded by Stirner and Nietzsche, and expounded by Ibsen, Shaw and others, is all these; but it is more. It is the realization by the individual that they are an individual; that, as far as they are concerned, they are the only individual.&quot; Stirner and Nietzsche, who exerted influence on anarchism despite its opposition, were frequently compared by French &quot;literary anarchists&quot; and anarchist interpretations of Nietzschean ideas appear to have also been influential in the United States.

=== Ethical egoism ===

Ethical egoism, also called simply egoism, is the normative ethical position that moral agents ought to do what is in their own . It differs from psychological egoism, which claims that people &quot;do&quot; only act in their self-interest. Ethical egoism also differs from rational egoism which holds merely that it is rational to act in one&#x27;s self-interest. However, these doctrines may occasionally be combined with ethical egoism.

Ethical egoism contrasts with ethical altruism, which holds that moral agents have an obligation to help and serve others. Egoism and altruism both contrast with ethical utilitarianism, which holds that a moral agent should treat one&#x27;s self (also known as the subject) with no higher regard than one has for others (as egoism does, by elevating self-interests and &quot;the self&quot; to a status not granted to others), but that one also should not (as altruism does) sacrifice one&#x27;s own interests to help others&#x27; interests, so long as one&#x27;s own interests (i.e. one&#x27;s own desires or well-being) are substantially-equivalent to the others&#x27; interests and well-being. Egoism, utilitarianism, and altruism are all forms of consequentialism, but egoism and altruism contrast with utilitarianism, in that egoism and altruism are both agent-focused forms of consequentialism (i.e. subject-focused or subjective), but utilitarianism is called agent-neutral (i.e. objective and impartial) as it does not treat the subject&#x27;s (i.e. the self&#x27;s, i.e. the moral &quot;agent&#x27;s&quot;) own interests as being more or less important than if the same interests, desires, or well-being were anyone else&#x27;s.

Ethical egoism does not require moral agents to harm the interests and well-being of others when making moral deliberation, e.g. what is in an agent&#x27;s self-interest may be incidentally detrimental, beneficial, or neutral in its effect on others. Individualism allows for others&#x27; interest and well-being to be disregarded or not as long as what is chosen is efficacious in satisfying the self-interest of the agent. Nor does ethical egoism necessarily entail that in pursuing self-interest one ought always to do what one wants to do, e.g. in the long term the fulfilment of short-term desires may prove detrimental to the self. Fleeting pleasance then takes a back seat to protracted eudaemonia. In the words of James Rachels, &quot;[e]thical egoism [...] endorses selfishness, but it doesn&#x27;t endorse foolishness.&quot;

Ethical egoism is sometimes the philosophical basis for support of libertarianism or individualist anarchism as in Max Stirner, although these can also be based on altruistic motivations. These are political positions based partly on a belief that individuals should not coercively prevent others from exercising freedom of action.

=== Existentialism ===

Existentialism is a term applied to the work of a number of 19th- and 20th-century philosophers who generally held, despite profound doctrinal differences, that the focus of philosophical thought should be to deal with the conditions of existence of the individual person and their emotions, actions, responsibilities, and thoughts. The early 19th century philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, posthumously regarded as the father of existentialism, maintained that the individual solely has the responsibilities of giving one&#x27;s own life meaning and living that life passionately and sincerely, in spite of many existential obstacles and distractions including despair, angst, absurdity, alienation and boredom.

Subsequent existential philosophers retain the emphasis on the individual, but differ in varying degrees on how one achieves and what constitutes a fulfilling life, what obstacles must be overcome, and what external and internal factors are involved, including the potential consequences of the existence or non-existence of God. Many existentialists have also regarded traditional systematic or academic philosophy in both style and content as too abstract and remote from concrete human experience. Existentialism became fashionable after World War II as a way to reassert the importance of human individuality and freedom.

Nietzsche&#x27;s concept of the superman is closely related to the idea of individualism and the pursuit of one&#x27;s own unique path and potential. As is seen in the following quote, the concept of superman reflects Nietzsche&#x27;s emphasis on the need to overcome traditional moral and societal norms in order to achieve personal growth and self-realization:

=== Freethought ===

Freethought holds that individuals should not accept ideas proposed as truth without recourse to knowledge and reason. Thus, freethinkers strive to build their opinions on the basis of facts, scientific inquiry and logical principles, independent of any logical fallacies or intellectually limiting effects of authority, confirmation bias, cognitive bias, conventional wisdom, popular culture, prejudice, sectarianism, tradition, urban legend and all other dogmas. Regarding religion, freethinkers hold that there is insufficient evidence to scientifically validate the existence of supernatural phenomena.

=== Humanism ===

Humanism is a perspective common to a wide range of ethical stances that attaches importance to human dignity, concerns, and capabilities, particularly rationality. Although the word has many senses, its meaning comes into focus when contrasted to the supernatural or to appeals to authority. Since the 19th century, humanism has been associated with an anti-clericalism inherited from the 18th-century Enlightenment &quot;philosophes&quot;. 21st century Humanism tends to strongly endorse human rights, including reproductive rights, gender equality, social justice, and the separation of church and state. The term covers organized non-theistic religions, secular humanism, and a humanistic life stance.

=== Hedonism ===

Philosophical hedonism is a meta-ethical theory of value which argues that pleasure is the only intrinsic good and pain is the only intrinsic bad. The basic idea behind hedonistic thought is that pleasure (an umbrella term for all inherently likable emotions) is the only thing that is good in and of itself or by its very nature. This implies evaluating the moral worth of character or behavior according to the extent that the pleasure it produces exceeds the pain it entails.

=== Libertinism ===

A libertine is one devoid of most moral restraints, which are seen as unnecessary or undesirable, especially one who ignores or even spurns accepted morals and forms of behaviour sanctified by the larger society. Libertines place value on physical pleasures, meaning those experienced through the senses. As a philosophy, libertinism gained new-found adherents in the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, particularly in France and Great Britain. Notable among these were John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester and the Marquis de Sade. During the Baroque era in France, there existed a freethinking circle of philosophers and intellectuals who were collectively known as &quot;libertinage érudit&quot; and which included Gabriel Naudé, Élie Diodati and François de La Mothe Le Vayer. The critic Vivian de Sola Pinto linked John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester&#x27;s libertinism to Hobbesian materialism.

=== Objectivism ===

Objectivism is a system of philosophy created by philosopher and novelist Ayn Rand which holds that reality exists independent of consciousness; human beings gain knowledge rationally from perception through the process of concept formation and inductive and deductive logic; the moral purpose of one&#x27;s life is the pursuit of one&#x27;s own happiness or rational self-interest. Rand thinks the only social system consistent with this morality is full respect for individual rights, embodied in pure &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism; and the role of art in human life is to transform man&#x27;s widest metaphysical ideas, by selective reproduction of reality, into a physical forma work of artthat he can comprehend and to which he can respond emotionally. Objectivism celebrates man as his own hero, &quot;with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute.&quot;

=== Philosophical anarchism ===

Philosophical anarchism is an anarchist school of thought which contends that the state lacks moral legitimacy. In contrast to revolutionary anarchism, philosophical anarchism does not advocate violent revolution to eliminate it but advocates peaceful evolution to superate it. Although philosophical anarchism does not necessarily imply any action or desire for the elimination of the state, philosophical anarchists do not believe that they have an obligation or duty to obey the state, or conversely that the state has a right to command.

Philosophical anarchism is a component especially of individualist anarchism. Philosophical anarchists of historical note include Mohandas Gandhi, William Godwin, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Max Stirner, Benjamin Tucker and Henry David Thoreau. Contemporary philosophical anarchists include A. John Simmons and Robert Paul Wolff.

=== Subjectivism ===

Subjectivism is a philosophical tenet that accords primacy to subjective experience as fundamental of all measure and law. In extreme forms such as solipsism, it may hold that the nature and existence of every object depends solely on someone&#x27;s subjective awareness of it. In the proposition 5.632 of the &quot;Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus&quot;, Ludwig Wittgenstein wrote: &quot;The subject doesn&#x27;t belong to the world, but it is a limit of the world&quot;. Metaphysical subjectivism is the theory that reality is what we perceive to be real, and that there is no underlying true reality that exists independently of perception. One can also hold that it is consciousness rather than perception that is reality (subjective idealism). In probability, a subjectivism stands for the belief that probabilities are simply degrees-of-belief by rational agents in a certain proposition and which have no objective reality in and of themselves.

Ethical subjectivism stands in opposition to moral realism, which claims that moral propositions refer to objective facts, independent of human opinion; to error theory, which denies that any moral propositions are true in any sense; and to non-cognitivism, which denies that moral sentences express propositions at all. The most common forms of ethical subjectivism are also forms of moral relativism, with moral standards held to be relative to each culture or society, i.e. cultural relativism, or even to every individual. The latter view, as put forward by Protagoras, holds that there are as many distinct scales of good and evil as there are subjects in the world. Moral subjectivism is that species of moral relativism that relativizes moral value to the individual subject.

Horst Matthai Quelle was a Spanish-language German anarchist philosopher influenced by Max Stirner. Quelle argued that since the individual gives form to the world, he is those objects, the others and the whole universe. One of his main views was a &quot;theory of infinite worlds&quot; which for him was developed by pre-socratic philosophers.

==== Solipsism ====

Solipsism is the philosophical idea that only one&#x27;s own mind is sure to exist. The term comes from Latin &quot;solus&quot; (&quot;alone&quot;) and &quot;ipse&quot; (&quot;self&quot;). Solipsism as an epistemological position holds that knowledge of anything outside one&#x27;s own mind is unsure. The external world and other minds cannot be known, and might not exist outside the mind. As a metaphysical position, solipsism goes further to the conclusion that the world and other minds do not exist. Solipsism is the only epistemological position that, by its own , is both and yet indefensible in the same manner. Although the number of individuals sincerely espousing solipsism has been small, it is not uncommon for one philosopher to accuse another&#x27;s arguments of entailing solipsism as an unwanted consequence, in a kind of reductio ad absurdum. In the history of philosophy, solipsism has served as a skeptical hypothesis.

== Economic individualism ==
The doctrine of economic individualism holds that each individual should be allowed autonomy in making their own economic decisions as opposed to those decisions being made by the community, the corporation or the state for him or her.

=== Classical liberalism ===

Liberalism is a political ideology that developed in the 19th century in the Americas, England, France and Western Europe. It followed earlier forms of liberalism in its commitment to personal freedom and popular government, but differed from earlier forms of liberalism in its commitment to classical economics and free markets.

Notable liberals in the 19th century include Jean-Baptiste Say, Thomas Malthus and David Ricardo. Classical liberalism, sometimes also used as a label to refer to all forms of liberalism before the 20th century, was revived in the 20th century by Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek and further developed by Milton Friedman, Robert Nozick, Loren Lomasky and Jan Narveson.

=== Libertarianism ===

Libertarianism upholds liberty as a core principle. Libertarians seek to maximize autonomy and political freedom, emphasizing free association, freedom of choice, individualism and voluntary association. Libertarianism shares a skepticism of authority and state power, but libertarians diverge on the scope of their opposition to existing economic and political systems. Various schools of libertarian thought offer a range of views regarding the legitimate functions of state and private power, often calling for the restriction or dissolution of coercive social institutions. Different categorizations have been used to distinguish various forms of libertarianism. This is done to distinguish libertarian views on the nature of property and capital, usually along left–right or socialist–capitalist lines.

==== Left-libertarianism ====

Left-libertarianism represents several related yet distinct approaches to politics, society, culture and political and social theory which stress both individual and political freedom alongside social justice. Unlike right-libertarians, left-libertarians believe that neither claiming nor mixing one&#x27;s labor with natural resources is enough to generate full private property rights, and maintain that natural resources (land, oil, gold, trees) ought to be held in some egalitarian manner, either unowned or owned collectively. Those left-libertarians who support property do so under different property norms and theories, or under the condition that recompense is offered to the local or global community.

Related terms include &quot;egalitarian libertarianism&quot;, &quot;left-wing libertarianism&quot;, &quot;libertarianism&quot;, &quot;libertarian socialism&quot;, &quot;social libertarianism&quot; and &quot;socialist libertarianism&quot;. Left-libertarianism can refer generally to these related and overlapping schools of thought:
* Anti-authoritarian varieties of left-wing politics, in particular within the socialist movement, usually known as libertarian socialism.
* Geolibertarianism, an American synthesis of libertarianism and Georgism.
* Left-wing market anarchism, stressing the socially transformative potential of non-aggression and anti-capitalist freed markets.
* Steiner–Vallentyne school, named after Hillel Steiner and Peter Vallentyne, whose proponents draw conclusions from classical liberal or market liberal premises.

==== Right-libertarianism ====

Right-libertarianism represents either non-collectivist forms of libertarianism or a variety of different libertarian views that scholars label to the right of libertarianism such as libertarian conservatism. Related terms include &quot;conservative libertarianism&quot;, &quot;libertarian capitalism&quot; and &quot;right-wing libertarianism&quot;. In the mid-20th century, right-libertarian ideologies such as anarcho-capitalism and minarchism co-opted the term &quot;libertarian&quot; to advocate &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism and strong private property rights such as in land, infrastructure and natural resources. The latter is the dominant form of libertarianism in the United States, where it advocates civil liberties, natural law, free-market capitalism and a major reversal of the modern welfare state.

=== Socialism ===
With regard to economic questions within individualist socialist schools such as individualist anarchism, there are adherents to mutualism (Pierre Joseph Proudhon, Émile Armand and early Benjamin Tucker); natural rights positions (early Benjamin Tucker, Lysander Spooner and Josiah Warren); and egoistic disrespect for &quot;ghosts&quot; such as private property and markets (Max Stirner, John Henry Mackay, Lev Chernyi, later Benjamin Tucker, Renzo Novatore and illegalism). Contemporary individualist anarchist Kevin Carson characterizes American individualist anarchism saying that &quot;[u]nlike the rest of the socialist movement, the individualist anarchists believed that the natural wage of labor in a free market was its product, and that economic exploitation could only take place when capitalists and landlords harnessed the power of the state in their interests. Thus, individualist anarchism was an alternative both to the increasing statism of the mainstream socialist movement, and to a classical liberal movement that was moving toward a mere apologetic for the power of big business.&quot;

==== Libertarian socialism ====

Libertarian socialism, sometimes dubbed left-libertarianism and socialist libertarianism, is an anti-authoritarian, anti-statist and libertarian tradition within the socialist movement that rejects the state socialist conception of socialism as a statist form where the state retains centralized control of the economy. Libertarian socialists criticize wage slavery relationships within the workplace, emphasizing workers&#x27; self-management of the workplace and decentralized structures of political organization.

Libertarian socialism asserts that a society based on freedom and justice can be achieved through abolishing authoritarian institutions that control certain means of production and subordinate the majority to an owning class or political and economic elite. Libertarian socialists advocate for decentralized structures based on direct democracy and federal or confederal associations such as libertarian municipalism, citizens&#x27; assemblies, trade unions and workers&#x27; councils.

All of this is generally done within a general call for liberty and free association through the identification, criticism and practical dismantling of illegitimate authority in all aspects of human life. Within the larger socialist movement, libertarian socialism seeks to distinguish itself from Leninism and social democracy.

Past and present currents and movements commonly described as libertarian socialist include anarchism (especially anarchist schools of thought such as anarcho-communism, anarcho-syndicalism, collectivist anarchism, green anarchism, individualist anarchism, mutualism, and social anarchism) as well as communalism, some forms of democratic socialism, guild socialism, libertarian Marxism (autonomism, council communism, left communism, and Luxemburgism, among others), participism, revolutionary syndicalism and some versions of utopian socialism.

==== Mutualism ====
Mutualism is an anarchist school of thought which can be traced to the writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who envisioned a socialist society where each person possess a means of production, either individually or collectively, with trade representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market. Integral to the scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank which would lend to producers at a minimal interest rate only high enough to cover the costs of administration. Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value which holds that when labor or its product is sold, it ought to receive goods or services in exchange embodying &quot;the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility&quot; and that receiving anything less would be considered exploitation, theft of labor, or usury.

== Criticisms ==
The Greek philosopher Plato emphasized that individuals must adhere to laws and perform duties while declining to grant individuals rights to limit or reject state interference in their lives.

German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel criticized individualism by claiming that human self-consciousness relies on recognition from others, therefore embracing a holistic view and rejecting the idea of the world as a collection of atomized individuals.

Fascists believe that the liberal emphasis on individual freedom produces national divisiveness.

Pope Francis criticised a &quot;me&quot;-centred form of individualism in his 2015 encyclical letter &quot;Laudato si&#x27;&quot;:As an example he comments on parents who &quot;can be prone to impulsive and wasteful consumption, which then affects their children who find it increasingly difficult to acquire a home of their own and build a family.&quot;

== Other views ==
=== As creative independent lifestyle ===

The anarchist writer and bohemian Oscar Wilde wrote in his famous essay &quot;The Soul of Man under Socialism&quot; that &quot;Art is individualism, and individualism is a disturbing and disintegrating force. There lies its immense value. For what it seeks is to disturb monotony of type, slavery of custom, tyranny of habit, and the reduction of man to the level of a machine.&quot; For anarchist historian George Woodcock, &quot;Wilde&#x27;s aim in &quot;The Soul of Man under Socialism&quot; is to seek the society most favorable to the artist, [...] for Wilde art is the supreme end, containing within itself enlightenment and regeneration, to which all else in society must be subordinated. [...] Wilde represents the anarchist as aesthete.&quot; In this way, &quot;individualism&quot; has been used to denote a personality with a strong tendency towards self-creation and experimentation as opposed to tradition or popular mass opinions and behaviors.

Anarchist writer Murray Bookchin describes a lot of individualist anarchists as people who &quot;expressed their opposition in uniquely personal forms, especially in fiery tracts, outrageous behavior, and aberrant lifestyles in the cultural ghettos of fin de siècle New York, Paris, and London. As a credo, individualist anarchism remained largely a bohemian lifestyle, most conspicuous in its demands for sexual freedom (&#x27;free love&#x27;) and enamored of innovations in art, behavior, and clothing.&quot;

In relation to this view of individuality, French individualist anarchist Émile Armand advocated egoistical denial of social conventions and dogmas to live in accord to one&#x27;s own ways and desires in daily life since he emphasized anarchism as a way of life and practice. In this way, he opined that &quot;the anarchist individualist tends to reproduce himself, to perpetuate his spirit in other individuals who will share his views and who will make it possible for a state of affairs to be established from which authoritarianism has been banished. It is this desire, this will, not only to live, but also to reproduce oneself, which we shall call &#x27;activity.″&quot;

In the book &quot;Imperfect Garden: The Legacy of Humanism&quot;, humanist philosopher Tzvetan Todorov identifies individualism as an important current of socio-political thought within modernity and as examples of it he mentions Michel de Montaigne, François de La Rochefoucauld, Marquis de Sade, and Charles Baudelaire. In La Rochefoucauld, he identifies a tendency similar to stoicism in which &quot;the honest person works his being in the manner of a sculptor who searches the liberation of the forms which are inside a block of marble, to extract the truth of that matter.&quot; In Baudelaire, he finds the dandy trait in which one searches to cultivate &quot;the idea of beauty within oneself, of satisfying one&#x27;s passions of feeling and thinking.&quot;

The Russian-American poet Joseph Brodsky once wrote that &quot;[t]he surest defense against Evil is extreme individualism, originality of thinking, whimsicality, evenif you willeccentricity. That is, something that can&#x27;t be feigned, faked, imitated; something even a seasoned imposter couldn&#x27;t be happy with.&quot; Ralph Waldo Emerson famously declared that &quot;[w]hoso would be a man must be a nonconformist&quot;a point of view developed at length in both the life and work of Henry David Thoreau. Equally memorable and influential on Walt Whitman is Emerson&#x27;s idea that &quot;a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of small minds, adored by little statesmen and philosophers and divines.&quot; Emerson opposed on principle the reliance on civil and religious social structures precisely because through them the individual approaches the divine second-hand, mediated by the once original experience of a genius from another age. According to Emerson, &quot;[an institution is the lengthened shadow of one man.&quot; To achieve this original relation, Emerson stated that one must &quot;[i]nsist on one&#x27;s self; never imitate&quot;, for if the relationship is secondary the connection is lost.

=== Religion ===

People in Western countries tend to be more individualistic than communitarian. The authors of one study proposed that this difference is due in part to the influence of the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages. They pointed specifically to its bans on incest, cousin marriage, adoption, and remarriage, and its promotion of the nuclear family over the extended family.

The Catholic Church teaches &quot;if we pray the Our Father sincerely, we leave individualism behind, because the love that we receive frees us ... our divisions and oppositions have to be overcome&quot; Many Catholics have believed Martin Luther and the Protestant Reformation were sources of individualism.

== See also ==

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Albrecht, James M. (2012) &quot;Reconstructing Individualism : A Pragmatic Tradition from Emerson to Ellison&quot;. Fordham University Press.
* Dewey, John. (1930). &quot;Individualism Old and New&quot;.
* Gagnier, Regenia. (2010). &quot;Individualism, Decadence and Globalization: On the Relationship of Part to Whole, 1859–1920&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan.
* 
* Macpherson, C.B. (2018). Individualism. In: &quot;The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan, London
* Meiksins Wood, Ellen. (1972). &quot;Mind and Politics: An Approach to the Meaning of Liberal and Socialist Individualism&quot;. University of California Press. 
* Shanahan, Daniel. (1991) &quot;Toward a Genealogy of Individualism&quot;. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press. .
* Watt, Ian. (1996) &quot;Myths of Modern Individualism.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
* Barzilai, Gad. (2003). &quot;Communities and Law.&quot; Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="0" end="13" title="Individualism" label="Individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="21" end="26" title="Ethics" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="35" end="55" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="57" end="65" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q795052" start="129" end="139" title="individual" label="individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="212" end="224" title="Self-sustainability" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="328" end="333" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="423" end="430" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="434" end="445" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q324530" start="703" end="719" title="communitarianism" label="communitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="721" end="733" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="738" end="749" title="corporatism" label="corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171841" start="938" end="943" title="Idiosyncrasy" label="quirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="989" end="997" title="artistic" label="artistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="1002" end="1010" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="1195" end="1203" title="humanist" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1264" end="1280" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q192447" start="1357" end="1375" title="utopian socialists" label="utopian socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359006" start="1388" end="1396" title="Owenism" label="Owenites"/>
<link wikidata="Q82934" start="1466" end="1483" title="Saint-Simonianism" label="Saint-Simonianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133416" start="1598" end="1618" title="James Elishama Smith" label="James Elishama Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="1622" end="1633" title="millenarian" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109769" start="1655" end="1674" title="Christian Israelite" label="Christian Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q179374" start="1706" end="1717" title="Robert Owen" label="Robert Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="1817" end="1829" title="universalism" label="universalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18735765" start="2014" end="2029" title="William Maccall" label="William Maccall"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="2039" end="2048" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="2141" end="2157" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="2159" end="2173" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="2178" end="2196" title="German Romanticism" label="German Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="2441" end="2451" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="2456" end="2467" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q147276" start="2634" end="2645" title="proper name" label="proper name"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="3119" end="3128" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q28995" start="3201" end="3223" title="collective unconscious" label="collective unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q935990" start="3275" end="3293" title="active imagination" label="active imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054460" start="3297" end="3313" title="free association (psychology)" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345582" start="3611" end="3627" title="Gilbert Simondon" label="Gilbert Simondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="3843" end="3862" title="Process philosophy" label="ontological process"/>
<link wikidata="Q822727" start="4047" end="4063" title="Bernard Stiegler" label="Bernard Stiegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345582" start="4100" end="4116" title="Gilbert Simondon" label="Gilbert Simondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="4165" end="4184" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="4189" end="4202" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q238350" start="4809" end="4815" title="egoist" label="egoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="5212" end="5233" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759670" start="5262" end="5274" title="general will" label="general will"/>
<link wikidata="Q190126" start="5284" end="5303" title="The Social Contract" label="The Social Contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q815577" start="5573" end="5582" title="ignorance" label="ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q335046" start="5612" end="5620" title="Passion (emotion)" label="passions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="5649" end="5655" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q621368" start="5718" end="5741" title="Cross-cultural studies" label="cross-cultural research"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091434" start="5876" end="5883" title="freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="5938" end="5948" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456974" start="5992" end="6001" title="Obedience (human behavior)" label="obedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="6201" end="6215" title="Lists of countries by GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="6220" end="6235" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="7620" end="7633" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038174" start="7646" end="7677" title="The Chrysanthemum and the Sword" label="The Chrysanthemum and the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="7957" end="7970" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230755" start="8025" end="8040" title="Guilt–shame–fear spectrum of cultures" label="guilt societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8047" end="8062" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230755" start="8116" end="8131" title="shame societies" label="shame societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="8384" end="8399" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="8408" end="8420" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295116" start="8599" end="8644" title="Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization" label="Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077064" start="8712" end="8729" title="charitable giving" label="charitable giving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="8784" end="8794" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448122" start="8880" end="8895" title="self-interest" label="self-interested"/>
<link wikidata="Q322996" start="8941" end="8957" title="economic freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="8981" end="8998" title="Classical liberalism" label="classical liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="9082" end="9092" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="9097" end="9107" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="9160" end="9177" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538883" start="9498" end="9526" title="Methodological individualism" label="Methodological individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139524" start="9723" end="9738" title="rational choice theory" label="rational choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q191020" start="9842" end="9848" title="Gary Becker" label="Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q243534" start="9853" end="9860" title="George Stigler" label="Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757690" start="10594" end="10608" title="L. Susan Brown" label="L. Susan Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="10721" end="10728" title="Freedom of will" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876201" start="10929" end="10949" title="Civil libertarianism" label="Civil libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661649" start="11051" end="11068" title="individual rights" label="individual rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="11073" end="11089" title="personal freedom" label="personal freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="11141" end="11146" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="11150" end="11161" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q784843" start="11195" end="11208" title="peer pressure" label="peer pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="11264" end="11272" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="11336" end="11351" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="11356" end="11368" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="11515" end="11520" title="Right-wing politics" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="11525" end="11529" title="Left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q434183" start="11562" end="11581" title="Ellen Meiksins Wood" label="Ellen Meiksins Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="11646" end="11653" title="John Locke" label="Lockean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="11718" end="11727" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="12022" end="12040" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q877530" start="12188" end="12199" title="Thatcherism" label="Thatcherism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076" start="12290" end="12313" title="individualist anarchism" label="individualist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q364340" start="12425" end="12429" title="will (philosophy)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q188569" start="12678" end="12692" title="William Godwin" label="William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094789" start="12755" end="12772" title="Political Justice" label="Political Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="12883" end="12894" title="rationalist" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="12899" end="12910" title="utilitarian" label="utilitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q795071" start="12956" end="12969" title="Limited government" label="minimal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348185" start="13316" end="13322" title="Egoist anarchism" label="egoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="13447" end="13458" title="Max Stirner" label="Max Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193108" start="13481" end="13500" title="The Ego and Its Own" label="The Ego and Its Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077952" start="13756" end="13762" title="Reification (fallacy)" label="spooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886749" start="13916" end="13933" title="union of egoists" label="unions of egoists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="14360" end="14364" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q62258" start="14374" end="14391" title="John Henry Mackay" label="John Henry Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q931005" start="14394" end="14407" title="Josiah Warren" label="Josiah Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="14691" end="14712" title="Mutualism (economic theory)" label="Proudhonian Anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178559" start="14874" end="14895" title="Stephen Pearl Andrews" label="Stephen Pearl Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q855938" start="14903" end="14920" title="William B. Greene" label="William B. Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="15004" end="15023" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859000" start="15189" end="15207" title="Development criticism" label="development critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="15254" end="15271" title="transcendentalist" label="transcendentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q863534" start="15310" end="15316" title="Walden" label="Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q56092" start="15342" end="15355" title="simple living" label="simple living"/>
<link wikidata="Q331092" start="15401" end="15419" title="Civil Disobedience (Thoreau)" label="Civil Disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q505871" start="15532" end="15547" title="Benjamin Tucker" label="Benjamin Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098886" start="15664" end="15671" title="Liberty (1881–1908)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118267" start="15777" end="15799" title="Anarchism and issues related to love and sex" label="issues of love and sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q867081" start="15909" end="15918" title="free love" label="free love"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="15923" end="15936" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="15962" end="15971" title="Naturism" label="naturists"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="15972" end="15979" title="Nudism" label="nudists"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="15986" end="16002" title="anarcho-naturism" label="anarcho-naturism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="16004" end="16015" title="freethought" label="freethought"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="16020" end="16033" title="Anti-clericalism" label="anti-clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516296" start="16107" end="16117" title="illegalism" label="illegalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571718" start="16122" end="16144" title="individual reclamation" label="individual reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076" start="16164" end="16196" title="European individualist anarchism" label="European individualist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076" start="16201" end="16234" title="individualist anarchism in France" label="individualist anarchism in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="16273" end="16284" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q274891" start="16286" end="16298" title="Émile Armand" label="Émile Armand"/>
<link wikidata="Q268322" start="16300" end="16309" title="Han Ryner" label="Han Ryner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132192" start="16311" end="16322" title="Henri Zisly" label="Henri Zisly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252828" start="16324" end="16338" title="Renzo Novatore" label="Renzo Novatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q720476" start="16340" end="16363" title="Miguel Giménez Igualada" label="Miguel Giménez Igualada"/>
<link wikidata="Q70900" start="16365" end="16376" title="Adolf Brand" label="Adolf Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q587593" start="16381" end="16392" title="Lev Chernyi" label="Lev Chernyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196990" start="16436" end="16467" title="The Soul of Man Under Socialism" label="The Soul of Man Under Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q954360" start="16873" end="16888" title="George Woodcock" label="George Woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q256922" start="17201" end="17209" title="aesthete" label="aesthete"/>
<link wikidata="Q188569" start="17451" end="17465" title="William Godwin" label="William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743857" start="17747" end="17761" title="Robert LeFevre" label="Robert LeFevre"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="17794" end="17812" title="anarcho-capitalist" label="anarcho-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="17813" end="17828" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q31895" start="17860" end="17867" title="anarchy" label="anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="17875" end="17884" title="Anarchist economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="17965" end="17978" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="18002" end="18017" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="18176" end="18209" title="Freedom of speech and expression" label="freedoms of speech and expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="18298" end="18305" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="18425" end="18442" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="18498" end="18507" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="18511" end="18520" title="Confucianism" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="18541" end="18547" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="18608" end="18623" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="18867" end="18887" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355086" start="18905" end="18917" title="Foundationalism" label="foundational"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="18994" end="19015" title="Divine Right of Kings" label="Divine Right of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="19040" end="19060" title="established religion" label="established religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="19062" end="19072" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="19077" end="19088" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="19146" end="19166" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="19746" end="19776" title="US Declaration of Independence" label="US Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075797" start="19944" end="19987" title="life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness" label="life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="20092" end="20115" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q522440" start="20169" end="20181" title="John N. Gray" label="John N. Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="20493" end="20510" title="anarchist thought" label="anarchist thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="20534" end="20559" title="philosophy of Max Stirner" label="philosophy of Max Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135769" start="20576" end="20584" title="Young Hegelians" label="Hegelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076" start="20754" end="20777" title="individualist anarchism" label="individualist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886749" start="20991" end="21008" title="unions of egoists" label="unions of egoists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="21175" end="21180" title="state (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="21479" end="21483" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q62258" start="21493" end="21510" title="John Henry Mackay" label="John Henry Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="21638" end="21645" title="Max Stirner" label="Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="21650" end="21659" title="Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="21678" end="21683" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="21685" end="21689" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="21885" end="21894" title="Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822917" start="21900" end="21930" title="Anarchism and Friedrich Nietzsche" label="exerted influence on anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822917" start="21960" end="21979" title="Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner" label="frequently compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290848" start="22055" end="22072" title="Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Nietzschean ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321845" start="22207" end="22224" title="normative ethics" label="normative ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883221" start="22239" end="22250" title="moral agent" label="moral agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362786" start="22303" end="22323" title="psychological egoism" label="psychological egoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472587" start="22343" end="22349" title="people" label="people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621223" start="22431" end="22446" title="rational egoism" label="rational egoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="22477" end="22485" title="Rationality" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737008" start="22636" end="22644" title="Altruism (ethics)" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648051" start="22684" end="22694" title="obligation" label="obligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q830757" start="22839" end="22843" title="self (philosophy)" label="self"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="22859" end="22870" title="subject (philosophy)" label="the subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186260" start="23196" end="23203" title="Desire (philosophy)" label="desires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="23207" end="23217" title="well-being" label="well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q646102" start="23348" end="23364" title="consequentialism" label="consequentialism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23457" end="23470" title="Consequentialism#Agent-focused or agent-neutral" label="agent-focused"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="23522" end="23532" title="Subjectivity" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="23584" end="23593" title="Objectivity (philosophy)" label="objective"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149193" start="23598" end="23607" title="impartial" label="impartial"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="24297" end="24303" title="logical consequence" label="entail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771260" start="24530" end="24540" title="eudaemonia" label="eudaemonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681014" start="24558" end="24571" title="James Rachels" label="James Rachels"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="24739" end="24753" title="libertarianism" label="libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076" start="24757" end="24780" title="individualist anarchism" label="individualist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="24787" end="24798" title="Max Stirner" label="Max Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="25397" end="25414" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054749" start="25564" end="25571" title="Meaning (existential)" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360032" start="25593" end="25619" title="Authenticity (philosophy)" label="passionately and sincerely"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25687" end="25694" title="Philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard#Despair" label="despair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522565" start="25696" end="25701" title="angst" label="angst"/>
<link wikidata="Q333625" start="25703" end="25712" title="Absurdism" label="absurdity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25714" end="25724" title="Philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard#Alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34255" start="25729" end="25736" title="boredom" label="boredom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745479" start="26034" end="26043" title="Christian existentialism" label="existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061983" start="26047" end="26060" title="atheist existentialism" label="non-existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26280" end="26292" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43484" start="26398" end="26406" title="Übermensch" label="superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="26822" end="26827" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="26862" end="26868" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q188572" start="26936" end="26940" title="fact" label="fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="26943" end="26961" title="scientific method" label="scientific inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="26966" end="26971" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186150" start="27013" end="27022" title="fallacy" label="fallacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="27072" end="27089" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127759" start="27091" end="27105" title="cognitive bias" label="cognitive bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646525" start="27107" end="27126" title="conventional wisdom" label="conventional wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="27128" end="27143" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="27145" end="27154" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="27156" end="27160" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="27170" end="27179" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="27181" end="27193" title="urban legend" label="urban legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="27208" end="27213" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="27226" end="27234" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="27334" end="27346" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="27429" end="27444" title="ethics" label="ethical stances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672919" start="27800" end="27811" title="philosophes" label="philosophes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="27867" end="27879" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536343" start="27891" end="27910" title="reproductive rights" label="reproductive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="27912" end="27927" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="27929" end="27943" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="27953" end="27983" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454631" start="28001" end="28033" title="Religious humanism" label="organized non-theistic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q312226" start="28035" end="28051" title="secular humanism" label="secular humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208195" start="28177" end="28185" title="pleasure" label="pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239172" start="28198" end="28212" title="intrinsic value (ethics)" label="intrinsic good"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="29019" end="29025" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="29030" end="29043" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q358912" start="29070" end="29104" title="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester" label="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="29113" end="29128" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="29141" end="29152" title="Baroque era" label="Baroque era"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="29180" end="29192" title="Freethought" label="freethinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q710176" start="29315" end="29328" title="Gabriel Naudé" label="Gabriel Naudé"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078217" start="29330" end="29342" title="Élie Diodati" label="Élie Diodati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451251" start="29347" end="29376" title="François de La Mothe Le Vayer" label="François de La Mothe Le Vayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937802" start="29389" end="29409" title="Vivian de Sola Pinto" label="Vivian de Sola Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q358912" start="29417" end="29451" title="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester" label="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="29474" end="29483" title="Hobbesian" label="Hobbesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="29484" end="29495" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="29593" end="29601" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="29619" end="29626" title="reality" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="30029" end="30042" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="30049" end="30059" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="30077" end="30080" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="30547" end="30574" title="anarchist school of thought" label="anarchist school of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="30599" end="30604" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="30611" end="30627" title="legitimacy (political)" label="moral legitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="31190" end="31205" title="Mohandas Gandhi" label="Mohandas Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188569" start="31207" end="31221" title="William Godwin" label="William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="31223" end="31245" title="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon" label="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="31247" end="31258" title="Max Stirner" label="Max Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q505871" start="31260" end="31275" title="Benjamin Tucker" label="Benjamin Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="31280" end="31299" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q58528260" start="31347" end="31362" title="A. John Simmons" label="A. John Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q739540" start="31367" end="31384" title="Robert Paul Wolff" label="Robert Paul Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q655717" start="31725" end="31755" title="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus" label="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="31763" end="31782" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="32080" end="32093" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q247218" start="32134" end="32153" title="subjective idealism" label="subjective idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="32159" end="32170" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q568188" start="32360" end="32380" title="Ethical subjectivism" label="Ethical subjectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100314" start="32405" end="32418" title="moral realism" label="moral realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q68012161" start="32516" end="32528" title="error theory" label="error theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156560" start="32601" end="32616" title="non-cognitivism" label="non-cognitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778848" start="32745" end="32761" title="moral relativism" label="moral relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q741550" start="32837" end="32856" title="cultural relativism" label="cultural relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q169243" start="32922" end="32932" title="Protagoras" label="Protagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q77595" start="33144" end="33164" title="Horst Matthai Quelle" label="Horst Matthai Quelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="33231" end="33242" title="Max Stirner" label="Max Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q178540" start="33462" end="33487" title="Pre-Socratic philosophy" label="pre-socratic philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="33528" end="33541" title="philosophical" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="33572" end="33576" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="33615" end="33620" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="33716" end="33731" title="epistemological" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="33752" end="33761" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="33813" end="33831" title="Philosophical skepticism" label="The external world"/>
<link wikidata="Q677734" start="33836" end="33847" title="problem of other minds" label="other minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="33908" end="33920" title="Metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q14402006" start="34351" end="34371" title="reductio ad absurdum" label="reductio ad absurdum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="34429" end="34449" title="skeptical hypothesis" label="skeptical hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="34485" end="34493" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="34565" end="34573" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="35040" end="35059" title="classical economics" label="classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="35064" end="35075" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q13513" start="35124" end="35141" title="Jean-Baptiste Say" label="Jean-Baptiste Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="35143" end="35157" title="Thomas Malthus" label="Thomas Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="35162" end="35175" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="35326" end="35342" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Ludwig von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="35347" end="35362" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="35388" end="35403" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q205927" start="35405" end="35418" title="Robert Nozick" label="Robert Nozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680396" start="35420" end="35433" title="Loren Lomasky" label="Loren Lomasky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149584" start="35438" end="35450" title="Jan Narveson" label="Jan Narveson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="35500" end="35507" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="35559" end="35567" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="35572" end="35589" title="political freedom" label="political freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500187" start="35603" end="35619" title="Free association (Marxism and anarchism)" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411057" start="35621" end="35638" title="freedom of choice" label="freedom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q48204" start="35658" end="35679" title="voluntary association" label="voluntary association"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324355" start="35719" end="35728" title="Political authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="35733" end="35738" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="35816" end="35824" title="Economic system" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="35829" end="35845" title="political system" label="political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="35966" end="35971" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="36034" end="36053" title="social institutions" label="social institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799101" start="36207" end="36215" title="Property rights (economics)" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="36220" end="36227" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="36243" end="36247" title="Left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="36248" end="36253" title="Right-wing politics" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="36257" end="36266" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="36267" end="36277" title="capitalist" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="36483" end="36500" title="political freedom" label="political freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="36511" end="36525" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533081" start="36606" end="36629" title="Labor theory of property" label="mixing one&amp;#x27;s labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="36635" end="36652" title="natural resources" label="natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="36680" end="36696" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="36791" end="36802" title="egalitarian" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227971" start="36829" end="36847" title="owned collectively" label="owned collectively"/>
<link wikidata="Q490933" start="37002" end="37007" title="Local community" label="local"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036557" start="37011" end="37027" title="global community" label="global community"/>
<link wikidata="Q831192" start="37058" end="37084" title="egalitarian libertarianism" label="egalitarian libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q831192" start="37098" end="37122" title="left-wing libertarianism" label="left-wing libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="37136" end="37150" title="libertarianism" label="libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852084" start="37164" end="37185" title="libertarian socialism" label="libertarian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q831192" start="37199" end="37220" title="social libertarianism" label="social libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852084" start="37237" end="37261" title="socialist libertarianism" label="socialist libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030234" start="37364" end="37382" title="Anti-authoritarian" label="Anti-authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="37396" end="37414" title="left-wing politics" label="left-wing politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522503" start="37441" end="37459" title="socialist movement" label="socialist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009337" start="37503" end="37520" title="Geolibertarianism" label="Geolibertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="37547" end="37561" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="37566" end="37574" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q945763" start="37578" end="37604" title="Left-wing market anarchism" label="Left-wing market anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q389647" start="37676" end="37691" title="anti-capitalist" label="anti-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q831192" start="37709" end="37734" title="Steiner–Vallentyne school" label="Steiner–Vallentyne school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763000" start="37748" end="37762" title="Hillel Steiner" label="Hillel Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4102937" start="37767" end="37783" title="Peter Vallentyne" label="Peter Vallentyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="37946" end="37958" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="38086" end="38110" title="libertarian conservatism" label="libertarian conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="38140" end="38167" title="conservative libertarianism" label="conservative libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="38181" end="38203" title="libertarian capitalism" label="libertarian capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="38220" end="38245" title="right-wing libertarianism" label="right-wing libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="38315" end="38333" title="anarcho-capitalism" label="anarcho-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444611" start="38338" end="38348" title="minarchism" label="minarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="38409" end="38422" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="38429" end="38439" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799101" start="38451" end="38474" title="private property rights" label="private property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="38565" end="38600" title="libertarianism in the United States" label="libertarianism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="38621" end="38636" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="38638" end="38649" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="38651" end="38673" title="free-market capitalism" label="free-market capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="38709" end="38722" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852084" start="38784" end="38807" title="individualist socialist" label="individualist socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076" start="38824" end="38847" title="individualist anarchism" label="individualist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="38872" end="38881" title="Mutualism (economic theory)" label="mutualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="38883" end="38905" title="Pierre Joseph Proudhon" label="Pierre Joseph Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q274891" start="38907" end="38919" title="Émile Armand" label="Émile Armand"/>
<link wikidata="Q505871" start="38930" end="38945" title="Benjamin Tucker" label="Benjamin Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="38948" end="38962" title="natural rights" label="natural rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q538091" start="38997" end="39013" title="Lysander Spooner" label="Lysander Spooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q931005" start="39018" end="39031" title="Josiah Warren" label="Josiah Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q62258" start="39132" end="39149" title="John Henry Mackay" label="John Henry Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q587593" start="39151" end="39162" title="Lev Chernyi" label="Lev Chernyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252828" start="39187" end="39201" title="Renzo Novatore" label="Renzo Novatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516296" start="39206" end="39216" title="illegalism" label="illegalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="39256" end="39268" title="Kevin Carson" label="Kevin Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030234" start="39981" end="39999" title="anti-authoritarian" label="anti-authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q646407" start="40001" end="40013" title="anti-statist" label="anti-statist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="40018" end="40029" title="libertarian" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522503" start="40051" end="40069" title="socialist movement" label="socialist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="40087" end="40102" title="state socialist" label="state socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="40117" end="40126" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="40132" end="40139" title="statist" label="statist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="40155" end="40160" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="40169" end="40180" title="centralized" label="centralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="40181" end="40203" title="State ownership" label="control of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q650487" start="40238" end="40250" title="wage slavery" label="wage slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q628858" start="40276" end="40285" title="workplace" label="workplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981562" start="40299" end="40328" title="workers&amp;#x27; self-management" label="workers&amp;#x27; self-management"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="40350" end="40363" title="Libertarian socialist decentralization" label="decentralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="40512" end="40525" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="40560" end="40579" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q192797" start="40654" end="40659" title="elite" label="elite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40697" end="40710" title="Decentralization#Libertarian socialist decentralization" label="decentralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="40731" end="40747" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40752" end="40759" title="Federalism#Federalism as the anarchist and libertarian socialist mode of political organization" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="40763" end="40773" title="Confederation" label="confederal"/>
<link wikidata="Q74953103" start="40795" end="40819" title="libertarian municipalism" label="libertarian municipalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021509" start="40821" end="40846" title="citizens&amp;#x27; assemblies" label="citizens&amp;#x27; assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="40848" end="40859" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q627093" start="40865" end="40886" title="workers&amp;#x27; council" label="workers&amp;#x27; council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40946" end="40953" title="Liberty#Socialism" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500187" start="40958" end="40974" title="Free association (Marxism and anarchism)" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="41188" end="41196" title="Leninism" label="Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="41201" end="41217" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="41312" end="41321" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="41334" end="41362" title="anarchist schools of thought" label="anarchist schools of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="41371" end="41388" title="anarcho-communism" label="anarcho-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188993" start="41390" end="41409" title="anarcho-syndicalism" label="anarcho-syndicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223178" start="41411" end="41433" title="collectivist anarchism" label="collectivist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q294864" start="41435" end="41450" title="green anarchism" label="green anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076" start="41452" end="41475" title="individualist anarchism" label="individualist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="41477" end="41486" title="Mutualism (economic theory)" label="mutualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q370919" start="41492" end="41508" title="social anarchism" label="social anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q315910" start="41521" end="41532" title="Communalism (Bookchin)" label="communalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="41548" end="41568" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q831159" start="41570" end="41585" title="guild socialism" label="guild socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q127393" start="41608" end="41618" title="autonomism" label="autonomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q933306" start="41620" end="41637" title="council communism" label="council communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066224" start="41639" end="41653" title="left communism" label="left communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="41659" end="41671" title="Luxemburgism" label="Luxemburgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353993" start="41701" end="41726" title="revolutionary syndicalism" label="revolutionary syndicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192447" start="41748" end="41765" title="utopian socialism" label="utopian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="41804" end="41831" title="anarchist school of thought" label="anarchist school of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="41871" end="41893" title="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon" label="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="41958" end="41977" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="42075" end="42086" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q584987" start="42293" end="42314" title="labor theory of value" label="labor theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="42614" end="42619" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="42643" end="42648" title="ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="42661" end="42666" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="42852" end="42881" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="43006" end="43014" title="holism" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="43196" end="43208" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="43279" end="43296" title="encyclical letter" label="encyclical letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20064904" start="43303" end="43319" title="Laudato si&amp;#x27;" label="Laudato si&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43497" end="43511" title="home#Tenure" label="acquire a home"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="43638" end="43646" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="43647" end="43658" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196990" start="43691" end="43722" title="The Soul of Man under Socialism" label="The Soul of Man under Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q954360" start="44021" end="44036" title="George Woodcock" label="George Woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q256922" start="44349" end="44357" title="aesthete" label="aesthete"/>
<link wikidata="Q315910" start="44589" end="44604" title="Murray Bookchin" label="Murray Bookchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q867081" start="45000" end="45009" title="free love" label="free love"/>
<link wikidata="Q274891" start="45158" end="45170" title="Émile Armand" label="Émile Armand"/>
<link wikidata="Q616772" start="45181" end="45191" title="ethical egoism" label="egoistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q313852" start="45849" end="45864" title="Tzvetan Todorov" label="Tzvetan Todorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="45992" end="46011" title="Michel de Montaigne" label="Michel de Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q273708" start="46013" end="46041" title="François de La Rochefoucauld (writer)" label="François de La Rochefoucauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="46043" end="46058" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="46064" end="46082" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Charles Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="46141" end="46149" title="stoicism" label="stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q876391" start="46375" end="46380" title="dandy" label="dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q862" start="46555" end="46569" title="Joseph Brodsky" label="Joseph Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="46854" end="46873" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="47020" end="47039" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="47078" end="47090" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="47939" end="47954" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="48016" end="48022" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q31485" start="48024" end="48039" title="cousin marriage" label="cousin marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="48041" end="48049" title="adoption" label="adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311547" start="48055" end="48065" title="remarriage" label="remarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="48092" end="48106" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q721790" start="48116" end="48131" title="extended family" label="extended family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="48367" end="48380" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="48389" end="48411" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="48645" end="48656" title="John Dewey" label="Dewey, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025338" start="48672" end="48697" title="Individualism Old and New" label="Individualism Old and New"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076074" start="48838" end="48856" title="Palgrave Macmillan" label="Palgrave Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711342" start="48863" end="48879" title="C. B. Macpherson" label="Macpherson, C.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q7753704" start="48913" end="48953" title="The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics" label="The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q434183" start="48990" end="49010" title="Ellen Meiksins Wood" label="Meiksins Wood, Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="49118" end="49148" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895718" start="49240" end="49273" title="University of Massachusetts Press" label="University of Massachusetts Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351106" start="49279" end="49288" title="Ian Watt" label="Watt, Ian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516258" start="49383" end="49396" title="Gad Barzilai" label="Barzilai, Gad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15187" wikidata="Q141124" url="?curid=15187" title="In vivo">
<text>Studies that are in vivo (Latin for &quot;within the living&quot;; often not italicized in English) are those in which the effects of various biological entities are tested on whole, living organisms or cells, usually animals, including humans, and plants, as opposed to a tissue extract or dead organism. This is not to be confused with experiments done &quot;in vitro&quot; (&quot;within the glass&quot;), i.e., in a laboratory environment using test tubes, Petri dishes, etc. Examples of investigations &quot;in vivo&quot; include: the pathogenesis of disease by comparing the effects of bacterial infection with the effects of purified bacterial toxins; the development of non-antibiotics, antiviral drugs, and new drugs generally; and new surgical procedures. Consequently, animal testing and clinical trials are major elements of &quot;in vivo&quot; research. &quot;In vivo&quot; testing is often employed over &quot;in vitro&quot; because it is better suited for observing the overall effects of an experiment on a living subject. In drug discovery, for example, verification of efficacy &quot;in vivo&quot; is crucial, because &quot;in vitro&quot; assays can sometimes yield misleading results with drug candidate molecules that are irrelevant &quot;in vivo&quot; (e.g., because such molecules cannot reach their site of &quot;in vivo&quot; action, for example as a result of rapid catabolism in the liver).

The English microbiologist Professor Harry Smith and his colleagues in the mid-1950s found that sterile filtrates of serum from animals infected with &quot;Bacillus anthracis&quot; were lethal for other animals, whereas extracts of culture fluid from the same organism grown &quot;in vitro&quot; were not. This discovery of anthrax toxin through the use of &quot;in vivo&quot; experiments had a major impact on studies of the pathogenesis of infectious disease.

The maxim &quot;in vivo veritas&quot; (&quot;in a living thing [there is] truth&quot;) is a play on &quot;in vino veritas&quot;, (&quot;in wine [there is] truth&quot;), a well-known proverb.

==&quot;In vivo&quot; versus &quot;ex vivo&quot; research==
In microbiology, &quot;in vivo&quot; is often used to refer to experimentation done in a whole organism, rather than in live isolated cells, for example, cultured cells derived from biopsies. In this situation, the more specific term is &quot;ex vivo&quot;. Once cells are disrupted and individual parts are tested or analyzed, this is known as &quot;in vitro&quot;.

==Methods of use==
According to Christopher Lipinski and Andrew Hopkins, &quot;Whether the aim is to discover drugs or to gain knowledge of biological systems, the nature and properties of a chemical tool cannot be considered independently of the system it is to be tested in. Compounds that bind to isolated recombinant proteins are one thing; chemical tools that can perturb cell function another; and pharmacological agents that can be tolerated by a live organism and perturb its systems are yet another. If it were simple to ascertain the properties required to develop a lead discovered &quot;in vitro&quot; to one that is active &quot;in vivo&quot;, drug discovery would be as reliable as drug manufacturing.&quot; Studies on &quot;In vivo&quot; behavior, determined the formulations of set specific drugs and their habits in a Biorelevant (or Biological relevance) medium.

== See also ==

* &quot;Ex vivo&quot;
* &quot;In natura&quot;
* &quot;In ovo&quot;
* &quot;In papyro&quot;
* &quot;In silico&quot;
* &quot;In simulacra&quot;
* &quot;In situ&quot;
* &quot;In utero&quot;
* &quot;In vitro&quot;
* &quot;In vivo&quot; imaging
* Vivisection

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="0" end="7" title="Experiment" label="Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="26" end="31" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="77" end="87" title="italicized" label="italicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="190" end="198" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="203" end="208" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q38344" start="218" end="225" title="Animal testing" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="237" end="243" title="Clinical trial" label="humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="273" end="287" title="biopsy" label="tissue extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="361" end="369" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q88399897" start="448" end="457" title="test tube" label="test tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q81714" start="460" end="470" title="Petri dish" label="Petri dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q372016" start="539" end="551" title="pathogenesis" label="pathogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q804517" start="591" end="610" title="Pathogenic bacteria" label="bacterial infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q262657" start="640" end="656" title="bacterial toxins" label="bacterial toxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q38344" start="779" end="793" title="animal testing" label="animal testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="798" end="813" title="clinical trials" label="clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418791" start="1041" end="1055" title="drug discovery" label="drug discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="1390" end="1400" title="catabolism" label="catabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779582" start="1429" end="1443" title="microbiologist" label="microbiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15968052" start="1454" end="1465" title="Harry Smith (microbiologist)" label="Harry Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q614156" start="1573" end="1591" title="Bacillus anthracis" label="Bacillus anthracis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935986" start="1741" end="1754" title="anthrax toxin" label="anthrax toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637711" start="1986" end="2001" title="in vino veritas" label="in vino veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="2135" end="2147" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="2227" end="2235" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2266" end="2271" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q189082" start="2286" end="2300" title="cultured cells" label="cultured cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="2314" end="2322" title="Biopsy" label="biopsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q310484" start="2375" end="2382" title="ex vivo" label="ex vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187643" start="2405" end="2414" title="Disrupted cell" label="disrupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="2483" end="2491" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q916723" start="2544" end="2552" title="Lipinski&amp;#x27;s Rule of Five" label="Lipinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="3099" end="3107" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q310484" start="3406" end="3413" title="Ex vivo" label="Ex vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011621" start="3428" end="3437" title="In natura" label="In natura"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055931" start="3452" end="3458" title="In ovo" label="In ovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011629" start="3473" end="3482" title="In papyro" label="In papyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q192572" start="3497" end="3506" title="In silico" label="In silico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011740" start="3521" end="3533" title="In simulacra" label="In simulacra"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="3548" end="3555" title="In situ" label="In situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="3570" end="3578" title="Uterus" label="In utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="3593" end="3601" title="In vitro" label="In vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239554" start="3610" end="3637" title="In vivo imaging" label="&amp;quot;In vivo&amp;quot; imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q259567" start="3640" end="3651" title="Vivisection" label="Vivisection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15188" wikidata="Q221681" url="?curid=15188" title="In vitro">
<text>In vitro (meaning &quot;in glass&quot;, or &quot;in the glass&quot;) studies are performed with microorganisms, cells, or biological molecules outside their normal biological context. Colloquially called &quot;test-tube experiments&quot;, these studies in biology and its subdisciplines are traditionally done in labware such as test tubes, flasks, Petri dishes, and microtiter plates. Studies conducted using components of an organism that have been isolated from their usual biological surroundings permit a more detailed or more convenient analysis than can be done with whole organisms; however, results obtained from &quot;in vitro&quot; experiments may not fully or accurately predict the effects on a whole organism. In contrast to &quot;in vitro&quot; experiments, &quot;in vivo&quot; studies are those conducted in living organisms, including humans, known as clinical trials, and whole plants.

==Definition==
&quot;In vitro&quot; (Latin for &quot;in glass&quot;; often not italicized in English usage) studies are conducted using components of an organism that have been isolated from their usual biological surroundings, such as microorganisms, cells, or biological molecules. For example, microorganisms or cells can be studied in artificial culture media, and proteins can be examined in solutions. Colloquially called &quot;test-tube experiments&quot;, these studies in biology, medicine, and their subdisciplines are traditionally done in test tubes, flasks, Petri dishes, etc. They now involve the full range of techniques used in molecular biology, such as the omics. 
In contrast, studies conducted in living beings (microorganisms, animals, humans, or whole plants) are called &quot;in vivo&quot;.

== Examples ==
Examples of &quot;in vitro&quot; studies include: the isolation, growth and identification of cells derived from multicellular organisms (in cell or tissue culture); subcellular components (e.g. mitochondria or ribosomes); cellular or subcellular extracts (e.g. wheat germ or reticulocyte extracts); purified molecules (such as proteins, DNA, or RNA); and the commercial production of antibiotics and other pharmaceutical products. Viruses, which only replicate in living cells, are studied in the laboratory in cell or tissue culture, and many animal virologists refer to such work as being &quot;in vitro&quot; to distinguish it from &quot;in vivo&quot; work in whole animals.

* Polymerase chain reaction is a method for selective replication of specific DNA and RNA sequences in the test tube.
* Protein purification involves the isolation of a specific protein of interest from a complex mixture of proteins, often obtained from homogenized cells or tissues.
* &quot;In vitro&quot; fertilization is used to allow spermatozoa to fertilize eggs in a culture dish before implanting the resulting embryo or embryos into the uterus of the prospective mother.
* &quot;In vitro&quot; diagnostics refers to a wide range of medical and veterinary laboratory tests that are used to diagnose diseases and monitor the clinical status of patients using samples of blood, cells, or other tissues obtained from a patient.
* &quot;In vitro&quot; testing has been used to characterize specific adsorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion processes of drugs or general chemicals inside a living organism; for example, Caco-2 cell experiments can be performed to estimate the absorption of compounds through the lining of the gastrointestinal tract; The partitioning of the compounds between organs can be determined to study distribution mechanisms; Suspension or plated cultures of primary hepatocytes or hepatocyte-like cell lines (Hep G2, HepaRG) can be used to study and quantify metabolism of chemicals. These ADME process parameters can then be integrated into so called &quot;physiologically based pharmacokinetic models&quot; or PBPK.

== Advantages ==
&quot;In vitro&quot; studies permit a species-specific, simpler, more convenient, and more detailed analysis than can be done with the whole organism. Just as studies in whole animals more and more replace human trials, so are &quot;in vitro&quot; studies replacing studies in whole animals.

===Simplicity===
Living organisms are extremely complex functional systems that are made up of, at a minimum, many tens of thousands of genes, protein molecules, RNA molecules, small organic compounds, inorganic ions, and complexes in an environment that is spatially organized by membranes, and in the case of multicellular organisms, organ systems. These myriad components interact with each other and with their environment in a way that processes food, removes waste, moves components to the correct location, and is responsive to signalling molecules, other organisms, light, sound, heat, taste, touch, and balance.

This complexity makes it difficult to identify the interactions between individual components and to explore their basic biological functions. &quot;In vitro&quot; work simplifies the system under study, so the investigator can focus on a small number of components.

For example, the identity of proteins of the immune system (e.g. antibodies), and the mechanism by which they recognize and bind to foreign antigens would remain very obscure if not for the extensive use of &quot;in vitro&quot; work to isolate the proteins, identify the cells and genes that produce them, study the physical properties of their interaction with antigens, and identify how those interactions lead to cellular signals that activate other components of the immune system.

===Species specificity===
Another advantage of &quot;in vitro&quot; methods is that human cells can be studied without &quot;extrapolation&quot; from an experimental animal&#x27;s cellular response.

===Convenience, automation===
&quot;In vitro&quot; methods can be miniaturized and automated, yielding high-throughput screening methods for testing molecules in pharmacology or toxicology.

== Disadvantages ==

The primary disadvantage of &quot;in vitro&quot; experimental studies is that it may be challenging to extrapolate from the results of &quot;in vitro&quot; work back to the biology of the intact organism. Investigators doing &quot;in vitro&quot; work must be careful to avoid over-interpretation of their results, which can lead to erroneous conclusions about organismal and systems biology.

For example, scientists developing a new viral drug to treat an infection with a pathogenic virus (e.g., HIV-1) may find that a candidate drug functions to prevent viral replication in an &quot;in vitro&quot; setting (typically cell culture). However, before this drug is used in the clinic, it must progress through a series of &quot;in vivo&quot; trials to determine if it is safe and effective in intact organisms (typically small animals, primates, and humans in succession). Typically, most candidate drugs that are effective &quot;in vitro&quot; prove to be ineffective &quot;in vivo&quot; because of issues associated with delivery of the drug to the affected tissues, toxicity towards essential parts of the organism that were not represented in the initial &quot;in vitro&quot; studies, or other issues.

== &quot;In vitro&quot; test batteries ==
A method which could help decrease animal testing is the use of &quot;in vitro&quot; batteries, where several &quot;in vitro&quot; assays are compiled to cover multiple endpoints. Within developmental neurotoxicity and reproductive toxicity there are hopes for test batteries to become easy screening methods for prioritization for which chemicals to be risk assessed and in which order. Within ecotoxicology &quot;in vitro&quot; test batteries are already in use for regulatory purpose and for toxicological evaluation of chemicals. &quot;In vitro&quot; tests can also be combined with &quot;in vivo&quot; testing to make a &quot;in vitro in vivo&quot; test battery, for example for pharmaceutical testing.

== &quot;In vitro&quot; to &quot;in vivo&quot; extrapolation ==

Results obtained from &quot;in vitro&quot; experiments cannot usually be transposed, as is, to predict the reaction of an entire organism &quot;in vivo&quot;. Building a consistent and reliable extrapolation procedure from &quot;in vitro&quot; results to &quot;in vivo&quot; is therefore extremely important. Solutions include:

*Increasing the complexity of &quot;in vitro&quot; systems to reproduce tissues and interactions between them (as in &quot;human on chip&quot; systems)
*Using mathematical modeling to numerically simulate the behavior of the complex system, where the &quot;in vitro&quot; data provide model parameter values

These two approaches are not incompatible; better &quot;in vitro&quot; systems provide better data to mathematical models. However, increasingly sophisticated &quot;in vitro&quot; experiments collect increasingly numerous, complex, and challenging data to integrate. Mathematical models, such as systems biology models, are much needed here.

=== Extrapolating in pharmacology ===
In pharmacology, IVIVE can be used to approximate pharmacokinetics (PK) or pharmacodynamics (PD).
Since the timing and intensity of effects on a given target depend on the concentration time course of candidate drug (parent molecule or metabolites) at that target site, &quot;in vivo&quot; tissue and organ sensitivities can be completely different or even inverse of those observed on cells cultured and exposed &quot;in vitro&quot;. That indicates that extrapolating effects observed &quot;in vitro&quot; needs a quantitative model of &quot;in vivo&quot; PK. Physiologically based PK (PBPK) models are generally accepted to be central to the extrapolations.

In the case of early effects or those without intercellular communications, the same cellular exposure concentration is assumed to cause the same effects, both qualitatively and quantitatively, &quot;in vitro&quot; and &quot;in vivo&quot;. In these conditions, developing a simple PD model of the dose–response relationship observed &quot;in vitro&quot;, and transposing it without changes to predict &quot;in vivo&quot; effects is not enough.

==See also==
*Animal testing
*&quot;Ex vivo&quot;
*&quot;In situ&quot;
*&quot;In utero&quot;
*&quot;In vivo&quot;
*&quot;In silico&quot;
*&quot;In papyro&quot;
*Animal &quot;in vitro&quot; cellular and developmental biology
*Plant &quot;in vitro&quot; cellular and developmental biology
*&quot;In vitro&quot; toxicology
*In vitro to in vivo extrapolation
*Slice preparation

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="69" end="76" title="Research" label="studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="96" end="109" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="112" end="117" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q206229" start="122" end="141" title="biological molecule" label="biological molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q88399897" start="210" end="219" title="test-tube" label="test-tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="256" end="263" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q81714" start="349" end="359" title="Petri dish" label="Petri dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q534260" start="367" end="383" title="microtiter plate" label="microtiter plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="427" end="435" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="779" end="786" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="869" end="883" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="942" end="947" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q575920" start="1255" end="1268" title="culture medium" label="culture media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="1302" end="1310" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q158666" start="1579" end="1584" title="omics" label="omics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="1847" end="1870" title="multicellular organisms" label="multicellular organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q189082" start="1875" end="1879" title="cell culture" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287622" start="1883" end="1897" title="tissue culture" label="tissue culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="1929" end="1941" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="1945" end="1954" title="ribosomes" label="ribosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641345" start="1996" end="2006" title="wheat germ" label="wheat germ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404923" start="2010" end="2022" title="reticulocyte" label="reticulocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="2062" end="2069" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2072" end="2075" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="2080" end="2083" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="2416" end="2441" title="Polymerase chain reaction" label="Polymerase chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q903485" start="2534" end="2554" title="Protein purification" label="Protein purification"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="2700" end="2734" title="In vitro fertilisation" label="&amp;quot;In vitro&amp;quot; fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671652" start="2895" end="2927" title="In vitro diagnostics" label="&amp;quot;In vitro&amp;quot; diagnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q54882834" start="3671" end="3677" title="HepaRG" label="HepaRG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562769" start="3866" end="3870" title="PBPK" label="PBPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338704" start="7422" end="7435" title="neurotoxicity" label="neurotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q815297" start="8929" end="8944" title="systems biology" label="systems biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="9064" end="9080" title="pharmacokinetics" label="pharmacokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q725307" start="9089" end="9105" title="pharmacodynamics" label="pharmacodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562769" start="9601" end="9605" title="PBPK" label="PBPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="9900" end="9907" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251001" start="9972" end="9998" title="dose–response relationship" label="dose–response relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="10082" end="10089" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38344" start="10134" end="10148" title="Animal testing" label="Animal testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q310484" start="10156" end="10163" title="Ex vivo" label="Ex vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="10177" end="10184" title="In situ" label="In situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="10198" end="10206" title="Uterus" label="In utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="10220" end="10227" title="In vivo" label="In vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192572" start="10241" end="10250" title="In silico" label="In silico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011629" start="10264" end="10273" title="In papyro" label="In papyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q106537899" start="10281" end="10343" title="In Vitro Cellular &amp;amp; Developmental Biology - Animal" label="Animal &amp;quot;in vitro&amp;quot; cellular and developmental biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q106537899" start="10345" end="10406" title="In Vitro Cellular &amp;amp; Developmental Biology - Plant" label="Plant &amp;quot;in vitro&amp;quot; cellular and developmental biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013136" start="10408" end="10439" title="In vitro toxicology" label="&amp;quot;In vitro&amp;quot; toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050441" start="10441" end="10474" title="In vitro to in vivo extrapolation" label="In vitro to in vivo extrapolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540236" start="10476" end="10493" title="Slice preparation" label="Slice preparation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15189" wikidata="Q14954905" url="?curid=15189" title="IEEE 754-1985">
<text>IEEE 754-1985 is a historic industry standard for representing floating-point numbers in computers, officially adopted in 1985 and superseded in 2008 by IEEE 754-2008, and then again in 2019 by minor revision IEEE 754-2019. During its 23 years, it was the most widely used format for floating-point computation. It was implemented in software, in the form of floating-point libraries, and in hardware, in the instructions of many CPUs and FPUs. The first integrated circuit to implement the draft of what was to become IEEE 754-1985 was the Intel 8087.

IEEE 754-1985 represents numbers in binary, providing definitions for four levels of precision, of which the two most commonly used are: 

The standard also defines representations for positive and negative infinity, a &quot;negative zero&quot;, five exceptions to handle invalid results like division by zero, special values called NaNs for representing those exceptions, denormal numbers to represent numbers smaller than shown above, and four rounding modes.

== Representation of numbers ==


Floating-point numbers in IEEE 754 format consist of three fields: a sign bit, a biased exponent, and a fraction. The following example illustrates the meaning of each.

The decimal number 0.1562510 represented in binary is 0.001012 (that is, 1/8 + 1/32). (Subscripts indicate the number base.) Analogous to scientific notation, where numbers are written to have a single non-zero digit to the left of the decimal point, we rewrite this number so it has a single 1 bit to the left of the &quot;binary point&quot;. We simply multiply by the appropriate power of 2 to compensate for shifting the bits left by three positions:

: formula_1

Now we can read off the fraction and the exponent: the fraction is .012 and the exponent is −3.

As illustrated in the pictures, the three fields in the IEEE 754 representation of this number are:

: &quot;sign&quot; = 0, because the number is positive. (1 indicates negative.)
: &quot;biased exponent&quot; = −3 + the &quot;bias&quot;. In single precision, the bias is 127, so in this example the biased exponent is 124; in double precision, the bias is 1023, so the biased exponent in this example is 1020.
: &quot;fraction&quot; = .01000…2.

IEEE 754 adds a bias to the exponent so that numbers can in many cases be compared conveniently by the same hardware that compares signed 2&#x27;s-complement integers. Using a biased exponent, the lesser of two positive floating-point numbers will come out &quot;less than&quot; the greater following the same ordering as for sign and magnitude integers. If two floating-point numbers have different signs, the sign-and-magnitude comparison also works with biased exponents. However, if both biased-exponent floating-point numbers are negative, then the ordering must be reversed. If the exponent were represented as, say, a 2&#x27;s-complement number, comparison to see which of two numbers is greater would not be as convenient.

The leading 1 bit is omitted since all numbers except zero start with a leading 1; the leading 1 is implicit and doesn&#x27;t actually need to be stored which gives an extra bit of precision for &quot;free.&quot;

=== Zero ===

The number zero is represented specially:

: &quot;sign&quot; = 0 for positive zero, 1 for negative zero.
: &quot;biased exponent&quot; = 0.
: &quot;fraction&quot; = 0.

=== Denormalized numbers ===

The number representations described above are called &quot;normalized,&quot; meaning that the implicit leading binary digit is a 1. To reduce the loss of precision when an underflow occurs, IEEE 754 includes the ability to represent fractions smaller than are possible in the normalized representation, by making the implicit leading digit a 0. Such numbers are called denormal. They don&#x27;t include as many significant digits as a normalized number, but they enable a gradual loss of precision when the result of an operation is not exactly zero but is too close to zero to be represented by a normalized number.

A denormal number is represented with a biased exponent of all 0 bits, which represents an exponent of −126 in single precision (not −127), or −1022 in double precision (not −1023). In contrast, the smallest biased exponent representing a normal number is 1 (see examples below).

== Representation of non-numbers ==

The biased-exponent field is filled with all 1 bits to indicate either infinity or an invalid result of a computation.

=== Positive and negative infinity ===

Positive and negative infinity are represented thus:

: &quot;sign&quot; = 0 for positive infinity, 1 for negative infinity.
: &quot;biased exponent&quot; = all 1 bits.
: &quot;fraction&quot; = all 0 bits.

=== NaN ===

Some operations of floating-point arithmetic are invalid, such as taking the square root of a negative number. The act of reaching an invalid result is called a floating-point &quot;exception.&quot; An exceptional result is represented by a special code called a NaN, for &quot;Not a Number&quot;. All NaNs in IEEE 754-1985 have this format:

: &quot;sign&quot; = either 0 or 1.
: &quot;biased exponent&quot; = all 1 bits.
: &quot;fraction&quot; = anything except all 0 bits (since all 0 bits represents infinity).

== Range and precision ==

Precision is defined as the minimum difference between two successive mantissa representations; thus it is a function only in the mantissa; while the gap is defined as the difference between two successive numbers.

=== Single precision ===
Single-precision numbers occupy 32 bits. In single precision:
* The positive and negative numbers closest to zero (represented by the denormalized value with all 0s in the exponent field and the binary value 1 in the fraction field) are
*: ±2−23 × 2−126 ≈ ±1.40130
* The positive and negative normalized numbers closest to zero (represented with the binary value 1 in the exponent field and 0 in the fraction field) are
*: ±1 × 2−126 ≈ ±1.17549
* The finite positive and finite negative numbers furthest from zero (represented by the value with 254 in the exponent field and all 1s in the fraction field) are
*: ±(2−2−23) × 2127 ≈ ±3.40282

Some example range and gap values for given exponents in single precision:

As an example, 16,777,217 cannot be encoded as a 32-bit float as it will be rounded to 16,777,216. However, all integers within the representable range that are a power of 2 can be stored in a 32-bit float without rounding.

=== Double precision ===

Double-precision numbers occupy 64 bits. In double precision:
* The positive and negative numbers closest to zero (represented by the denormalized value with all 0s in the Exp field and the binary value 1 in the Fraction field) are
*: ±2−52 × 2−1022 ≈ ±4.94066
* The positive and negative normalized numbers closest to zero (represented with the binary value 1 in the Exp field and 0 in the fraction field) are
*: ±1 × 2−1022 ≈ ±2.22507
* The finite positive and finite negative numbers furthest from zero (represented by the value with 2046 in the Exp field and all 1s in the fraction field) are
*: ±(2−2−52) × 21023 ≈ ±1.79769

Some example range and gap values for given exponents in double precision:

=== Extended formats ===

The standard also recommends extended format(s) to be used to perform internal computations at a higher precision than that required for the final result, to minimise round-off errors: the standard only specifies minimum precision and exponent requirements for such formats. The x87 80-bit extended format is the most commonly implemented extended format that meets these requirements.

== Examples ==

Here are some examples of single-precision IEEE 754 representations:

==Comparing floating-point numbers==
Every possible bit combination is either a NaN or a number with a unique value in the affinely extended real number system with its associated order, except for the two combinations of bits for negative zero and positive zero, which sometimes require special attention (see below). The binary representation has the special property that, excluding NaNs, any two numbers can be compared as sign and magnitude integers (endianness issues apply). When comparing as 2&#x27;s-complement integers: If the sign bits differ, the negative number precedes the positive number, so 2&#x27;s complement gives the correct result (except that negative zero and positive zero should be considered equal). If both values are positive, the 2&#x27;s complement comparison again gives the correct result. Otherwise (two negative numbers), the correct FP ordering is the opposite of the 2&#x27;s complement ordering.

Rounding errors inherent to floating point calculations may limit the use of comparisons for checking the exact equality of results. Choosing an acceptable range is a complex topic. A common technique is to use a comparison epsilon value to perform approximate comparisons. Depending on how lenient the comparisons are, common values include codice_1 or codice_2 for single-precision, and codice_3 for double-precision. Another common technique is ULP, which checks what the difference is in the last place digits, effectively checking how many steps away the two values are.

Although negative zero and positive zero are generally considered equal for comparison purposes, some programming language relational operators and similar constructs treat them as distinct. According to the Java Language Specification, comparison and equality operators treat them as equal, but codice_4 and codice_5 distinguish them (officially starting with Java version 1.1 but actually with 1.1.1), as do the comparison methods codice_6, codice_7 and even codice_8 of classes codice_9 and codice_10.

==Rounding floating-point numbers==
The IEEE standard has four different rounding modes; the first is the default; the others are called &quot;directed roundings&quot;.

* Round to Nearest – rounds to the nearest value; if the number falls midway it is rounded to the nearest value with an even (zero) least significant bit, which means it is rounded up 50% of the time (in IEEE 754-2008 this mode is called &quot;roundTiesToEven&quot; to distinguish it from another round-to-nearest mode)
* Round toward 0 – directed rounding towards zero
* Round toward +∞ – directed rounding towards positive infinity
* Round toward −∞ – directed rounding towards negative infinity.

==Extending the real numbers==
The IEEE standard employs (and extends) the affinely extended real number system, with separate positive and negative infinities. During drafting, there was a proposal for the standard to incorporate the projectively extended real number system, with a single unsigned infinity, by providing programmers with a mode selection option. In the interest of reducing the complexity of the final standard, the projective mode was dropped, however. The Intel 8087 and Intel 80287 floating point co-processors both support this projective mode.

==Functions and predicates==

===Standard operations===
The following functions must be provided:
*Add, subtract, multiply, divide
*Square root
*Floating point remainder. This is not like a normal modulo operation, it can be negative for two positive numbers. It returns the exact value of .
*Round to nearest integer. For undirected rounding when halfway between two integers the even integer is chosen.
*Comparison operations. Besides the more obvious results, IEEE 754 defines that −∞ = −∞, +∞ = +∞ and x ≠ codice_11 for any x (including codice_11).

===Recommended functions and predicates===
* codice_13 returns x with the sign of y, so codice_14 equals codice_15. This is one of the few operations which operates on a NaN in a way resembling arithmetic. The function codice_16 is new in the C99 standard.
* −x returns x with the sign reversed. This is different from 0−x in some cases, notably when x is 0. So −(0) is −0, but the sign of 0−0 depends on the rounding mode.
* codice_17
* codice_18
* codice_19 a predicate for &quot;x is a finite value&quot;, equivalent to −Inf &lt; x &lt; Inf
* codice_20 a predicate for &quot;x is a NaN&quot;, equivalent to &quot;x ≠ x&quot;
* codice_21 (codice_22 in Fortran), which turns out to have different behavior than codice_23 (codice_24 in Fortran, codice_25 in C) due to NaN.
* codice_26 is true when &quot;x is unordered with y&quot;, i.e., either x or y is a NaN.
* codice_27
* codice_28 returns the next representable value from x in the direction towards y

==History==
In 1976, Intel was starting the development of a floating-point coprocessor. Intel hoped to be able to sell a chip containing good implementations of all the operations found in the widely varying maths software libraries.

John Palmer, who managed the project, believed the effort should be backed by a standard unifying floating point operations across disparate processors. He contacted William Kahan of the University of California, who had helped improve the accuracy of Hewlett-Packard&#x27;s calculators. Kahan suggested that Intel use the floating point of Digital Equipment Corporation&#x27;s (DEC) VAX. The first VAX, the VAX-11/780 had just come out in late 1977, and its floating point was highly regarded. However, seeking to market their chip to the broadest possible market, Intel wanted the best floating point possible, and Kahan went on to draw up specifications. Kahan initially recommended that the floating point base be decimal but the hardware design of the coprocessor was too far along to make that change.

The work within Intel worried other vendors, who set up a standardization effort to ensure a &quot;level playing field&quot;. Kahan attended the second IEEE 754 standards working group meeting, held in November 1977. He subsequently received permission from Intel to put forward a draft proposal based on his work for their coprocessor; he was allowed to explain details of the format and its rationale, but not anything related to Intel&#x27;s implementation architecture. The draft was co-written with Jerome Coonen and Harold Stone, and was initially known as the &quot;Kahan-Coonen-Stone proposal&quot; or &quot;K-C-S format&quot;.

As an 8-bit exponent was not wide enough for some operations desired for double-precision numbers, e.g. to store the product of two 32-bit numbers, both Kahan&#x27;s proposal and a counter-proposal by DEC therefore used 11 bits, like the time-tested 60-bit floating-point format of the CDC 6600 from 1965. Kahan&#x27;s proposal also provided for infinities, which are useful when dealing with division-by-zero conditions; not-a-number values, which are useful when dealing with invalid operations; denormal numbers, which help mitigate problems caused by underflow; and a better balanced exponent bias, which can help avoid overflow and underflow when taking the reciprocal of a number.

Even before it was approved, the draft standard had been implemented by a number of manufacturers. The Intel 8087, which was announced in 1980, was the first chip to implement the draft standard.

In 1980, the Intel 8087 chip was already released, but DEC remained opposed, to denormal numbers in particular, because of performance concerns and since it would give DEC a competitive advantage to standardise on DEC&#x27;s format.

The arguments over gradual underflow lasted until 1981 when an expert hired by DEC to assess it sided against the dissenters. DEC had the study done in order to demonstrate that gradual underflow was a bad idea, but the study concluded the opposite, and DEC gave in. In 1985, the standard was ratified, but it had already become the de facto standard a year earlier, implemented by many manufacturers.
==See also==
* IEEE 754
* Minifloat for simple examples of properties of IEEE 754 floating point numbers
* Fixed-point arithmetic

==Notes==
==References==
== Further reading ==
* 
* : A compendium of non-intuitive behaviours of floating-point on popular architectures, with implications for program verification and testing.

==External links==
* Comparing floats
* Coprocessor.info: x87 FPU pictures, development and manufacturer information
* IEEE 854-1987 — History and minutes
* IEEE754 (Single and Double precision) Online Converter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14954905" start="0" end="13" title="IEEE 754-1985" label="IEEE 754-1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="37" end="45" title="technical standard" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="63" end="77" title="floating-point" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="89" end="98" title="computers" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q951059" start="153" end="166" title="IEEE 754-2008" label="IEEE 754-2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q828287" start="209" end="222" title="IEEE 754-2019" label="IEEE 754-2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="374" end="383" title="library (computing)" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="409" end="421" title="instruction (computer science)" label="instructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="430" end="433" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="439" end="443" title="floating-point unit" label="FPUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="455" end="473" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632017" start="541" end="551" title="Intel 8087" label="Intel 8087"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="590" end="596" title="binary numeral system" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="761" end="769" title="infinity" label="infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217675" start="779" end="792" title="negative zero" label="negative zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q848539" start="847" end="863" title="division by zero" label="division by zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q858684" start="887" end="890" title="NaN" label="NaN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070094" start="927" end="943" title="denormal numbers" label="denormal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q663208" start="1000" end="1008" title="rounding" label="rounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440851" start="1120" end="1128" title="sign bit" label="sign bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421511" start="1132" end="1147" title="exponent bias" label="biased exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="1339" end="1343" title="radix" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="1359" end="1378" title="scientific notation" label="scientific notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385618" start="2250" end="2254" title="offset binary" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q232577" start="2372" end="2391" title="2&amp;#x27;s-complement" label="2&amp;#x27;s-complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359789" start="2560" end="2578" title="sign and magnitude" label="sign and magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q217675" start="3264" end="3277" title="signed zero" label="positive zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q217675" start="3285" end="3298" title="signed zero" label="negative zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q669129" start="3567" end="3576" title="Arithmetic underflow" label="underflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070094" start="3764" end="3772" title="denormal numbers" label="denormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="3806" end="3824" title="significant digits" label="significant digits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3915" end="3924" title="Floating-point arithmetic#Floating-point operations" label="operation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4276" end="4284" title="#Examples" label="examples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039387" start="4491" end="4521" title="Extended real line" label="Positive and negative infinity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4730" end="4755" title="Floating-point arithmetic#Floating-point operations" label="floating-point arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q858684" start="4989" end="5001" title="Not a Number" label="Not a Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307173" start="5495" end="5511" title="Single-precision" label="Single-precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243369" start="6463" end="6479" title="Double-precision" label="Double-precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="7474" end="7477" title="x87" label="x87"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421900" start="7478" end="7500" title="extended precision" label="80-bit extended format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039387" start="7791" end="7827" title="affinely extended real number system" label="affinely extended real number system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7991" end="8012" title="#Representation_of_numbers" label="binary representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359789" start="8095" end="8113" title="sign and magnitude" label="sign and magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="8124" end="8134" title="endianness" label="endianness"/>
<link wikidata="Q232577" start="8168" end="8187" title="2&amp;#x27;s-complement" label="2&amp;#x27;s-complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="9282" end="9302" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142873" start="9303" end="9322" title="relational operator" label="relational operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="9388" end="9392" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q663208" start="9829" end="9846" title="directed rounding" label="directed rounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q951059" start="10060" end="10073" title="IEEE 754-2008" label="IEEE 754-2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039387" start="10431" end="10467" title="affinely extended real number system" label="affinely extended real number system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558939" start="10591" end="10631" title="projectively extended real number system" label="projectively extended real number system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632017" start="10833" end="10843" title="Intel 8087" label="Intel 8087"/>
<link wikidata="Q291904" start="10848" end="10859" title="Intel 80287" label="Intel 80287"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="11024" end="11055" title="arithmetic operations" label="Add, subtract, multiply, divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="11057" end="11068" title="Square root" label="Square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799665" start="11122" end="11138" title="modulo operation" label="modulo operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q663208" start="11218" end="11242" title="rounding to integer" label="Round to nearest integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144319" start="11941" end="11950" title="Predicate (mathematics)" label="predicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="12133" end="12140" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="12237" end="12238" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="12459" end="12464" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="12514" end="12525" title="coprocessor" label="coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q92782" start="12840" end="12853" title="William Kahan" label="William Kahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="12861" end="12885" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="12926" end="12941" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="13015" end="13044" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154338" start="13082" end="13092" title="VAX-11/780" label="VAX-11/780"/>
<link wikidata="Q15480194" start="14005" end="14017" title="Harold S. Stone" label="Harold Stone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14370" end="14398" title="CDC 6600#60-bit floating point" label="60-bit floating-point format"/>
<link wikidata="Q683851" start="14406" end="14414" title="CDC 6600" label="CDC 6600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070094" start="14618" end="14633" title="denormal number" label="denormal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421511" start="14708" end="14721" title="exponent bias" label="exponent bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632017" start="15018" end="15028" title="Intel 8087" label="Intel 8087"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070094" start="15258" end="15275" title="gradual underflow" label="gradual underflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="15318" end="15321" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q828287" start="15656" end="15664" title="IEEE 754" label="IEEE 754"/>
<link wikidata="Q449270" start="15667" end="15676" title="Minifloat" label="Minifloat"/>
<link wikidata="Q649900" start="15748" end="15770" title="Fixed-point arithmetic" label="Fixed-point arithmetic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15190" wikidata="Q725524" url="?curid=15190" title="Intel 80186">
<text>The Intel 80186, also known as the iAPX 186, or just 186, is a microprocessor and microcontroller introduced in 1982. It was based on the Intel 8086 and, like it, had a 16-bit external data bus multiplexed with a 20-bit address bus. The 80188 variant, with an 8-bit external data bus was also available.

== Description ==

The 80186 series was designed to reduce the number of integrated circuits required. It included features such as clock generator, interrupt controller, timers, wait state generator, DMA channels, and external chip select lines. It was used in numerous embedded systems, as microcontrollers with external memory.

The initial clock rate of the 80186 was 6 MHz, but due to more hardware available for the microcode to use, especially for address calculation, many individual instructions completed in fewer clock cycles than on an 8086 at the same clock frequency. For instance, the common &quot;register+immediate&quot; addressing mode was significantly faster than on the 8086, especially when a memory location was both (one of) the operand(s) and the destination. Multiply and divide also showed great improvement, being several times as fast as on the original 8086, and multi-bit shifts were done almost four times as quickly as in the 8086.

A few new instructions were introduced with the 80186 (referred to as the 8086-2 instruction set in some datasheets): &quot;enter&quot;/&quot;leave&quot; (replacing several instructions when handling stack frames), &quot;pusha&quot;/&quot;popa&quot; (push/pop all general registers), &quot;bound&quot; (check array index against bounds), and &quot;ins&quot;/&quot;outs&quot; (input/output of string). A useful &quot;immediate&quot; mode was added for the &quot;push&quot;, &quot;imul&quot;, and multi-bit shift instructions. These instructions were also included in the contemporary 80286 and in successor chips.

==Variants==
The (redesigned) CMOS version, 80C186, introduced DRAM refresh, a power-save mode, and a direct interface to the 80C187 floating-point numeric coprocessor. Intel second-sourced this microprocessor to Fujitsu Limited around 1985. Both packages for Intel 80186 version were available in 68-pin PLCC and PGA in sampling at third quarter of 1985. The 12.5 MHz Intel 80186-12 version using the 1.5 μm HMOS-III process for US$36 in quantities of 100. The 12.5 MHz Intel 80C186 version using the CHMOS III-E technology using approximately 90 mA under normal load and only 32 mA under power-save mode. It was available in 68-pin PLCC, CPGA, or CLCC package.

The M80C186 military version was available in 10 and 12 MHz versions. They met MIL-STD-883 Rev. C and MIL-STD-1553 bus application standards. The 12 MHz CHMOS version consumes approximately 100 mA. The available packages were 68-pin CPGA and CQFP. The 10 MHz M80C186 PGA version was available for US$378 in 100-unit quantities.

The 80C186EB was a fully static design for the application-specific standard product using the 1 μm CHMOS IV technology. They were available in 3- and 5-volt versions with 84-lead PLCC and 80-lead EIAJ QFP packaging. It was also available for US$16.95 in 1,000-unit quantities.

The Intel 80C186EC contains 4 DMA channels, 2 interrupt controllers, 22 I/O which control two serial channels, and 4 timers. This version was available for US$17.70 in quantites of 1,000 units. This microcontroller only available in 5-volt version. Both Intel 80C186EC and 80C186EA contains three different power-management modes, which has idle, powerdown and powersave. The 80C186EA has both 5- and 3-volt versions.

The 80C186XL version was available up to 20 MHz, which is compatible with existing CMOS version of 80C186 that has 25% higher performance and 50% lower power consumption. This version used 1 μm CHMOS process technology. Both 80C186EA and 80C186XL were available for US$11.80 in quantities of 1,000 units.

== 80188 series ==
The 80188 variant, with an 8-bit external data bus was also available; this made it less expensive to connect to peripherals. The 16-bit registers and the one megabyte address range were unchanged, however. It had a throughput of 1 million instructions per second. Intel second sourced this microprocessor to Fujitsu Limited around 1985. Both packages of Intel 80188 version were available in 68-pin PLCC and PGA in sampling at third quarter of 1985. The available 80C188EB in fully static design for the application-specific standard product using the 1-micron CHMOS IV technology. They were available in 3- and 5-Volts version with 84-lead PLCC and 80-lead EIAJ QFP version. It was also available for US$15.15 in 1,000 unit quantities.

The 80188 series was generally intended for embedded systems, as microcontrollers with external memory. Therefore, to reduce the number of chips required, it included features such as clock generator, interrupt controller, timers, wait state generator, DMA channels, and external chip select lines.
While the N80188 was compatible with the 8087 numeric co-processor, the 80C188 was not. It did not have the ESC control codes integrated.

== Uses ==

=== In personal computers ===
Because the integrated hardware included in the 80186 was incompatible with the support chips chosen by IBM for the 8088-based IBM PC released a few months earlier, the chip did not see wide success in the PC market. IBM chose the 80286 for its successor, the IBM PC/AT, released in August 1984. Most other PC-compatible manufactures followed.

Regardless, several notable personal computers used the 80186:
* Danish Regnecentralen: RC750 Partner running CCP/M
* Danish Regnecentralen: RC759 Piccoline running CCP/M
* Australian Dulmont Magnum laptop, one of the first laptops
* Wang Office Assistant, marketed as a PC-like stand-alone word processor
* MAD-1, a semi–IBM PC-compatible desktop computer with a modular design
* Pronto System 16, another PC compatible
* Mindset, a very early graphics workstation
* Siemens (not 100% IBM PC compatible but using MS-DOS 2.11)
* Compis, a Swedish school computer
* French SMT-Goupil G4
* RM Nimbus PC-186, the first version of a series of British school computers
* Unisys ICON, a Canadian school computer
* ORB Computer by ABS
* HP 100LX, HP 200LX, HP 1000CX, and HP OmniGo 700LX
* Tandy 2000 desktop, a somewhat PC-compatible workstation with sharp graphics for its day
* Telex 1260, a desktop PC-XT compatible
* Philips :YES
* Nokia MikroMikko 2
* IBM PCradio

In addition to the above examples of stand-alone implementations of the 80186 for personal computers, there were at least two examples of &quot;add-in&quot; accelerator card implementations: the BBC Master 512, Acorn&#x27;s plug-in for the BBC Master range of computers containing an 80186–10 with 512 KB of RAM, and the Orchid Technology PC Turbo 186, released in 1985. It was intended for use with the original Intel 8088-based IBM PC (Model 5150).

=== Other devices ===
The Intel 80186 and 80188 are often embedded in electronic devices that are not primarily computers. For example:
* The 80186 was used to control the Microtek 8086 in-circuit emulator.
* The 80188 was embedded inside the Intel 14.4EX modem released in 1991. The 16 MHz processor was used to perform complex algorithms needed for forward error correction, trellis modulation, and echo cancellation in the modem.
* The second-generation SatisFAXtion board, which is a FAX/modem ISA card, uses this processor.
* The IBM 7171 protocol converter, which made ASCII character-oriented terminals appear as an IBM 3270 terminal to an IBM mainframe, used the Intel 80186 as its CPU.
* It was also used on the controller card for Digital Equipment Corporation&#x27;s DECtalk speech synthesizer system.

== End of life ==
On March 30, 2006, Intel announced that production of the 80186 and 80188, along with the production of other processor models such as the 80386 and 80486, would cease at the end of September 2007. Pin- and instruction-compatible replacements might still be manufactured by various third-party sources, and FPGA versions are publicly available.

== See also ==
* iAPX, for the iAPX name
* NEC V20/V30, for a third-party CPU also supporting the 80186 instructions

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Intel Datasheet
* Scan of the Intel 80186 data book at datasheetarchive.com
* Intel 80186/80188 images and descriptions at cpu-collection.de
* Chipdb.org
* Scan of the Intel 80188 data book at datasheetarchive.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="10" end="15" title="Intel 80186" label="80186"/>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="35" end="43" title="Intel 80186" label="iAPX 186"/>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="53" end="56" title="Intel 80186" label="186"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="63" end="77" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="82" end="97" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="138" end="148" title="Intel 8086" label="Intel 8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="169" end="175" title="16-bit" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185" end="193" title="Bus (computing)#Address bus" label="data bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="220" end="231" title="address bus" label="address bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="237" end="242" title="Intel 80186" label="80188"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="260" end="265" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="378" end="397" title="integrated circuits" label="integrated circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164847" start="437" end="452" title="clock generator" label="clock generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756494" start="454" end="474" title="interrupt controller" label="interrupt controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q186612" start="476" end="482" title="hardware timer" label="timers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068739" start="484" end="494" title="wait state" label="wait state"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="506" end="509" title="direct memory access" label="DMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074526" start="533" end="544" title="chip select" label="chip select"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="576" end="591" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="597" end="612" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="679" end="682" title="MHz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="727" end="736" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q367183" start="943" end="958" title="addressing mode" label="addressing mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172383" start="1376" end="1385" title="datasheet" label="datasheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="1915" end="1919" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815755" start="1948" end="1960" title="DRAM refresh" label="DRAM refresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="2041" end="2052" title="coprocessor" label="coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q168226" start="2060" end="2073" title="second-source" label="second-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="2098" end="2105" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369857" start="2190" end="2194" title="Plastic leaded chip carrier" label="PLCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q130985" start="2199" end="2202" title="Pin grid array" label="PGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135912" start="2287" end="2293" title="1.5 μm process" label="1.5 μm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2294" end="2302" title="Depletion-load NMOS logic#Intel HMOS" label="HMOS-III"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599396" start="2387" end="2392" title="CHMOS" label="CHMOS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2525" end="2529" title="Pin grid array#Ceramic" label="CPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716097" start="2628" end="2639" title="MIL-STD-883" label="MIL-STD-883"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192270" start="2651" end="2663" title="MIL-STD-1553" label="MIL-STD-1553"/>
<link wikidata="Q676152" start="2791" end="2795" title="Quad flat package" label="CQFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="2925" end="2962" title="application-specific standard product" label="application-specific standard product"/>
<link wikidata="Q450855" start="2973" end="2977" title="1 μm process" label="1 μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358257" start="3075" end="3079" title="EIAJ" label="EIAJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q676152" start="3080" end="3083" title="QFP" label="QFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="3928" end="3933" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="3943" end="3951" title="data bus" label="data bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="4014" end="4024" title="peripheral" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="4060" end="4068" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q71486" start="4141" end="4164" title="instructions per second" label="instructions per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="4210" end="4217" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="4406" end="4443" title="application-specific standard product" label="application-specific standard product"/>
<link wikidata="Q450855" start="4454" end="4462" title="1 μm process" label="1-micron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599396" start="4463" end="4468" title="CHMOS" label="CHMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358257" start="4560" end="4564" title="EIAJ" label="EIAJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q676152" start="4565" end="4568" title="QFP" label="QFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="4684" end="4699" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="4705" end="4720" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164847" start="4824" end="4839" title="clock generator" label="clock generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756494" start="4841" end="4861" title="interrupt controller" label="interrupt controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068739" start="4871" end="4881" title="wait state" label="wait state"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="4893" end="4896" title="Direct memory access" label="DMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074526" start="4920" end="4931" title="chip select" label="chip select"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="5224" end="5227" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="5236" end="5240" title="8088" label="8088"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5247" end="5253" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="5351" end="5356" title="80286" label="80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="5380" end="5389" title="IBM Personal Computer/AT" label="IBM PC/AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="5493" end="5510" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q928216" start="5537" end="5551" title="Regnecentralen" label="Regnecentralen"/>
<link wikidata="Q928216" start="5590" end="5604" title="Regnecentralen" label="Regnecentralen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313466" start="5649" end="5663" title="Dulmont Magnum" label="Dulmont Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206799" start="5699" end="5703" title="Wang Laboratories" label="Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q116867509" start="5773" end="5778" title="MAD-1" label="MAD-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q116687345" start="5846" end="5862" title="Pronto System 16" label="Pronto System 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314792" start="5888" end="5895" title="Mindset (computer)" label="Mindset"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="5933" end="5940" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="5951" end="5968" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="5979" end="5985" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383555" start="5994" end="6000" title="Compis" label="Compis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="6004" end="6011" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459779" start="6037" end="6047" title="SMT-Goupil" label="SMT-Goupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277116" start="6053" end="6062" title="RM Nimbus" label="RM Nimbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887053" start="6131" end="6142" title="Unisys ICON" label="Unisys ICON"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151150" start="6195" end="6203" title="HP 100LX" label="HP 100LX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151150" start="6205" end="6213" title="HP 200LX" label="HP 200LX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151150" start="6215" end="6224" title="HP 1000CX" label="HP 1000CX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151150" start="6230" end="6245" title="HP OmniGo 700LX" label="HP OmniGo 700LX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682524" start="6248" end="6258" title="Tandy 2000" label="Tandy 2000"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6380" end="6392" title="Philips :YES" label="Philips :YES"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413222" start="6401" end="6411" title="MikroMikko" label="MikroMikko"/>
<link wikidata="Q108934080" start="6416" end="6427" title="IBM PCradio" label="IBM PCradio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6624" end="6638" title="BBC Master#Master 512" label="BBC Master 512"/>
<link wikidata="Q342149" start="6640" end="6645" title="Acorn Computers" label="Acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202931" start="6750" end="6767" title="Orchid Technology" label="Orchid Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="6842" end="6852" title="Intel 8088" label="Intel 8088"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="6859" end="6865" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q557200" start="7258" end="7276" title="trellis modulation" label="trellis modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="7369" end="7372" title="FAX" label="FAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="7373" end="7378" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q273326" start="7379" end="7382" title="Industry Standard Architecture" label="ISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="7456" end="7461" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="7462" end="7489" title="character-oriented terminal" label="character-oriented terminal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7504" end="7512" title="IBM 3270" label="IBM 3270"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204797" start="7659" end="7666" title="DECtalk" label="DECtalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996492" start="8076" end="8080" title="iAPX" label="iAPX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369202" start="8102" end="8109" title="NEC V20" label="NEC V20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369202" start="8110" end="8113" title="NEC V30" label="V30"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15191" wikidata="Q43173" url="?curid=15191" title="Inquisition">
<text>The Inquisition was a Catholic judicial procedure where the ecclesiastical judges could initiate, investigate and try cases in their jurisdiction. Popularly it became the name for various medieval and reformation-era State-organized tribunals whose aim was to combat heresy, apostasy, blasphemy, witchcraft, and customs considered to be deviant, using this procedure. Violence, isolation, torture or the threat of its application, have been used by the Inquisition to extract confessions and denunciations. Studies of the records have found that the overwhelming majority of sentences consisted of penances, but convictions of unrepentant heresy were handed over to the secular courts for the application of local law, which generally resulted in execution or life imprisonment.

Inquisitions with the aim of combatting religious sedition (e.g. apostasy or heresy) had their start in the 12th-century Kingdom of France, particularly among the Cathars and the Waldensians. The inquisitorial courts from this time until the mid-15th century are together known as the Medieval Inquisition. Other banned groups investigated by medieval inquisitions, which primarily took place in France and Italy, include the Spiritual Franciscans, the Hussites, and the Beguines. Beginning in the 1250s, inquisitors were generally chosen from members of the Dominican Order, replacing the earlier practice of using local clergy as judges.

Inquisitions also expanded to other European countries, resulting in the Spanish Inquisition and the Portuguese Inquisition. The Spanish and Portuguese inquisitions often focused on the New Christians or &quot;Conversos&quot; (the former Jews who converted to Christianity to avoid antisemitic regulations and persecution), the &quot;Marranos&quot; (people who were forced to abandon Judaism against their will by violence and threats of expulsion) and on Muslim converts to Catholicism, as a result of suspicions that they had secretly reverted to their previous religions, as well as the fear of possible rebellions and armed uprisings, as had occurred in previous times. Spain and Portugal also operated inquisitorial courts not only in Europe, but also throughout their empires: the Goa Inquisition, the Peruvian Inquisition, and the Mexican Inquisition, among others. Inquisitions conducted in the Papal States were known as the Roman Inquisition. 

The scope of the inquisitions grew significantly in response to the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Counter-Reformation. In 1542, a putative governing institution, the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition was created. With the exception of the Papal States, ecclessiastical inquisition courts were abolished in the early 19th century, after the Napoleonic Wars in Europe and the Spanish American wars of independence in the Americas. The papal institution survived as part of the Roman Curia, although it underwent a series of name and focus changes, now part of the &quot;Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith&quot;.

The opening of Spanish and Roman archives over the last 50 years has caused some historians to substantially revise their understanding of the Inquisition, some to the extent of characterizing previous views as &quot;a body of legends and myths&quot;. Many famous instruments of torture are now considered fakes and propaganda. 

==Definition and goals==

Today, the English term &quot;Inquisition&quot; is popularly applied to any one of the regional tribunals or later national institutions that worked against heretics or other offenders against the canon law of the Catholic Church. Although the term &quot;Inquisition&quot; is usually applied to ecclesiastical courts of the Catholic Church, in the Middle Ages it properly referred to a judicial process, not any organization. 

The term &quot;Inquisition&quot; comes from the Medieval Latin word , which described a court process based on Roman law, which came back into use during the Late Middle Ages. It was a new, less arbitrary form of trial that replaced the and process which required a denouncer or used an adversarial process, the most unjust being trial by ordeal and the secular Germanic trial by combat. Theoretically, the Inquisition, as a church court, had no jurisdiction over Muslims and Jews as such. Despite several exceptions, like the infamous example of the Holy Child of La Guardiathe Inquisition was concerned mainly with the heretical behaviour of Catholic adherents or converts (including forced converts).

Inquisitors &#x27;were called such because they applied a judicial technique known as &quot;inquisitio&quot;, which could be translated as &quot;inquiry&quot; or &quot;inquest&quot;. &quot;In this process, which was already widely used by secular rulers (Henry II used it extensively in England in the 12th century), an official inquirer called for information on a specific subject from anyone who felt he or she had something to offer.&quot; 
&quot;The Inquisition&quot; usually refers to specific regional tribunals authorized to concern themselves with the heretical behaviour of Catholic adherents or converts (including forced converts). As with sedition inquisitions, heresy inquisitions were supposed to use the standard inquisition procedures: these included that the defendant must be informed of the charges, has a right to a lawyer, and a right of appeal (to the Pope.) The inquisitor could only start a heresy proceeding if there was some broad public opinion of the &quot;infamy&quot; of the defendant (rather than a formal denunciation or accusation) to prevent fishing, or charging for private opinions. However, such inquisitions could proceed with minimal distraction by lawyers, the identity of witnesses was protected, tainted witness were allowed, and once found guilty of heresy there was no right to a lawyer. However, many inquisitors did not followed these rules scrupulously, notably from the late 1300s: many inquisitors had theological not legal training.

===Controversy and revisionism===

The opening of Spanish and Roman archives over the last 50 years has caused historians to revise their understanding of the Inquisition, some to the extent of viewing previous views as &quot;a body of legends and myths&quot;. This may mean that some older historical commentary, and sources relying on them, are not reliable sources to that extent.

==Sentences==
The overwhelming majority of guilty sentences with repentance seem to have consisted of penances like wearing a cross sewn on one&#x27;s clothes or going on pilgrimage. When a suspect was convicted of major, wilful, unrepentant heresy, canon law required the inquisitorial tribunal to hand the person over to secular authorities for final sentencing. A secular magistrate, the &quot;secular arm&quot;, would then determine the penalty based on local law. Those local laws included proscriptions against certain religious crimes, and the punishments included death by burning in regions where the secular law equated persistent heresy with sedition, although the penalty was more usually banishment or imprisonment for life, which was generally commuted after a few years. Thus the inquisitors generally knew the expected fate of anyone so remanded. The &quot;secular arm&quot; didn&#x27;t have access to the trial record of the defendants, only declared and executed the sentences and was obliged to do so on pain of heresy and excommunication.

While the notational purpose of the trial itself was for the salvation of the individual soul, allegedly by persuasion, according to the 1578 edition of the Directorium Inquisitorum (a standard manual for inquisitions) the penalties themselves were preventative not retributive, thought to spread an example by terror: &quot;... quoniam punitio non refertur primo &amp; per se in correctionem &amp; bonum eius qui punitur, sed in bonum publicum ut alij terreantur, &amp; a malis committendis avocentur&quot; (translation: &quot;... for punishment does not take place primarily and &quot;per se&quot; for the correction and good of the person punished, but for the public good in order that others may become terrified and weaned away from the evils they would commit&quot;). 

===Statistics===
Beginning in the 19th century, historians have gradually compiled statistics drawn from the surviving court records, from which estimates have been calculated by adjusting the recorded number of convictions by the average rate of document loss for each time period. Gustav Henningsen and Jaime Contreras studied the records of the Spanish Inquisition, which list 44,674 cases of which 826 resulted in executions in person and 778 in effigy (i.e. a straw dummy was burned in place of the person). William Monter estimated there were 1000 executions in Spain between 1530–1630 and 250 between 1630 and 1730. Jean-Pierre Dedieu studied the records of Toledo&#x27;s tribunal, which put 12,000 people on trial. For the period prior to 1530, Henry Kamen estimated there were about 2,000 executions in all of Spain&#x27;s tribunals.

Italian Renaissance history professor and Inquisition expert Carlo Ginzburg had his doubts about using statistics to reach a judgment about the period. &quot;In many cases, we don&#x27;t have the evidence, the evidence has been lost,&quot; said Ginzburg.

==Origin==
Before the 12th century, the Catholic Church suppressed what they believed to be heresy, usually through a system of ecclesiastical proscription or imprisonment, but without using torture, and seldom resorting to executions. Such punishments were opposed by a number of clergymen and theologians, although some countries punished heresy with the death penalty. Pope Siricius, Ambrose of Milan, and Martin of Tours protested against the execution of Priscillian, largely as an undue interference in ecclesiastical discipline by a civil tribunal. Though widely viewed as a heretic, Priscillian was executed as a sorcerer. Ambrose refused to give any recognition to Ithacius of Ossonuba, &quot;not wishing to have anything to do with bishops who had sent heretics to their death&quot;.

In the 12th century, to counter the spread of Catharism, and other heresies, prosecution of heretics became more frequent. The Church charged councils composed of bishops and archbishops with establishing inquisitions (the Episcopal Inquisition). Pope Lucius III issued the bull &quot;Ad Abolendam&quot; (1184), which condemned heresy as contumacy toward ecclesiastical authority. The bull &quot;Vergentis in Senium&quot; in 1199 stipulated that heresy would be considered, in terms of punishment, equal to treason (&quot;Lèse-majesté)&quot;, and the punishment would be imposed also on the descendants of the condemned. 

The first Inquisition was temporarily established in Languedoc (south of France) in 1184. The murder of Pope Innocent III&#x27;s papal legate Pierre de Castelnau by Cathars in 1208 sparked the Albigensian Crusade (1209–1229). The Inquisition was permanently established in 1229 (Council of Toulouse), run largely by the Dominicans in Rome and later at Carcassonne in Languedoc.

In 1252, the Papal Bull &quot;Ad extirpanda&quot;, following another assassination by Cathars, charged the head of state with funding and selecting inquisitors from monastic orders; this caused friction by establishing a competitive court to the Bishop&#x27;s courts.

==Medieval Inquisitions==

Historians use the term &quot;Medieval Inquisition&quot; to describe the various inquisitions that started around 1184, including the Episcopal Inquisitions (1184–1230s) and later the Papal Inquisitions (1230s). These inquisitions responded to large popular movements throughout Europe considered apostate or heretical to Christianity, in particular the Cathars in southern France and the Waldensians in both southern France and northern Italy. Other inquisitions followed after these first inquisition movements. The legal basis for some inquisitorial activity came from Pope Innocent IV&#x27;s papal bull &quot;Ad extirpanda&quot; of 1252, which authorized the use of tortures in certain circumstances by inquisitors for eliciting confessions and denunciations from heretics. By 1256 Alexander IV&#x27;s &quot;Ut negotium&quot; allowed the inquisitors to absolve each other if they used instruments of torture.

In the 13th century, Pope Gregory IX (reigned 1227–1241) assigned the duty of carrying out inquisitions to the Dominican Order and Franciscan Order. By the end of the Middle Ages, England and Castile were the only large western nations without a papal inquisition. Most inquisitors were friars who taught theology and/or law in the universities. They used inquisitorial procedures, a common legal practice adapted from the earlier Ancient Roman court procedures. They judged heresy along with bishops and groups of &quot;assessors&quot; (clergy serving in a role that was roughly analogous to a jury or legal advisers), using the local authorities to establish a tribunal and to prosecute heretics. After 1200, a Grand Inquisitor headed but did not control each regional Inquisition. Grand Inquisitions persisted until the mid 19th century.

=== Inquisitions in Italy ===
Only fragmentary data is available for the period before the Roman Inquisition of 1542. In 1276, some 170 Cathars were captured in Sirmione, who were then imprisoned in Verona, and there, after a two-year trial, on 13 February from 1278, more than a hundred of them were burned. In Orvieto, at the end of 1268/1269, 85 heretics were sentenced, none of whom were executed, but in 18 cases the sentence concerned people who had already died. In Tuscany, the inquisitor Ruggiero burned at least 11 people in about a year (1244/1245). Excluding the executions of the heretics at Sirmione in 1278, 36 Inquisition executions are documented in the March of Treviso between 1260 and 1308. Ten people were executed in Bologna between 1291 and 1310. In Piedmont, 22 heretics (mainly Waldensians) were burned in the years 1312–1395 out of 213 convicted. 22 Waldensians were burned in Cuneo around 1440 and another five in the Marquisate of Saluzzo in 1510. There are also fragmentary records of a good number of executions of people suspected of witchcraft in northern Italy in the 15th and early 16th centuries. Wolfgang Behringer estimates that there could have been as many as two thousand executions. This large number of witches executed was probably because some inquisitors took the view that the crime of witchcraft was exceptional, which meant that the usual rules for heresy trials did not apply to its perpetrators. Many alleged witches were executed even though they were first tried and pleaded guilty, which under normal rules would have meant only canonical sanctions, not death sentences. The episcopal inquisition was also active in suppressing alleged witches: in 1518, judges delegated by the Bishop of Brescia, Paolo Zane, sent some 70 witches from Val Camonica to the stake.

=== Inquisitions in France ===
The Albigensian Crusade (1209–1229) a crusade proclaimed by the Catholic Church against heresy, mainly Catharism, with many thousands of victims (men, women and children, some of them Catholics), had already paved the way for the later Inquisition.

France has the best preserved archives of medieval inquisitions (13th–14th centuries), although they are still very incomplete. The activity of the inquisition in this country was very diverse, both in terms of time and territory. In the first period (1233 to c. 1330), the courts of Languedoc (Toulouse, Carcassonne) are the most active. After 1330 the center of the persecution of heretics shifted to the Alpine regions, while in Languedoc they ceased almost entirely. In northern France, the activity of the inquisitors was irregular throughout this period and, except for the first few years, it was not very intense.

France&#x27;s first Dominican inquisitor, Robert le Bougre, working in the years 1233–1244, earned a particularly grim reputation. In 1236, Robert burned about 50 people in the area of Champagne and Flanders, and on 13 May 1239, in Montwimer, he burned 183 Cathars. Following Robert&#x27;s removal from office, Inquisition activity in northern France remained very low. One of the largest trials in the area took place in 1459–1460 at Arras; 34 people were then accused of witchcraft and satanism, 12 of them were burned at the stake.

The main center of the medieval inquisition was undoubtedly the Languedoc. The first inquisitors were appointed there in 1233, but due to strong resistance from local communities in the early years, most sentences concerned dead heretics, whose bodies were exhumed and burned. Actual executions occurred sporadically and, until the fall of the fortress of Montsegur (1244), probably accounted for no more than 1% of all sentences. In addition to the cremation of the remains of the dead, a large percentage were also sentences in absentia and penances imposed on heretics who voluntarily confessed their faults (for example, in the years 1241–1242 the inquisitor Pierre Ceila reconciled 724 heretics with the Church). Inquisitor Ferrier of Catalonia, investigating Montauban between 1242 and 1244, questioned about 800 people, of whom he sentenced 6 to death and 20 to prison. Between 1243 and 1245, Bernard de Caux handed down 25 sentences of imprisonment and confiscation of property in Agen and Cahors. After the fall of Montsegur and the seizure of power in Toulouse by Count Alfonso de Poitiers, the percentage of death sentences increased to around 7% and remained at this level until the end of the Languedoc Inquisition around from 1330.

Between 1245 and 1246, the inquisitor Bernard de Caux carried out a large-scale investigation in the area of Lauragais and Lavaur. He covered 39 villages, and probably all the adult inhabitants (5,471 people) were questioned, of whom 207 were found guilty of heresy. Of these 207, no one was sentenced to death, 23 were sentenced to prison and 184 to penance. Between 1246 and 1248, the inquisitors Bernard de Caux and Jean de Saint-Pierre handed down 192 sentences in Toulouse, of which 43 were sentences in absentia and 149 were prison sentences.

In Pamiers in 1246/1247 there were 7 prison sentences [201] and in Limoux in the county of Foix 156 people were sentenced to carry crosses. Between 1249 and 1257, in Toulouse, the inquisitors handed down 306 sentences, without counting the penitential sentences imposed during &quot;times of grace&quot;. 21 people were sentenced to death, 239 to prison, in addition, 30 people were sentenced in absentia and 11 posthumously; In another five cases the type of sanction is unknown, but since they all involve repeat offenders, only prison or burning is at stake. Between 1237 and 1279, at least 507 convictions were passed in Toulouse (most in absentia or posthumously) resulting in the confiscation of property; in Albi between 1240 and 1252 there were 60 sentences of this type.

The activities of Bernard Gui, inquisitor of Toulouse from 1307 to 1323, are better documented, as a complete record of his trials has been preserved. During the entire period of his inquisitorial activity, he handed down 633 sentences against 602 people (31 repeat offenders), including:

* 41 death sentences,
* 40 convictions of fugitive heretics (in absentia),
* 20 sentences against people who died before the end of the trial (3 of them Bernardo considered unrepentant, and his remains were burned at the stake),
* 69 exhumation orders for the remains of dead heretics (66 of whom were subsequently burned),
* 308 prison sentences, with confiscation of property,
* 136 orders to carry crosses,
* 18 mandates to make a pilgrimage (17) or participate in a crusade (1),
* in one case, sentencing was postponed.

In addition, Bernard Gui issued 274 more sentences involving the mitigation of sentences already served to convicted heretics; in 139 cases he exchanged prison for carrying crosses, and in 135 cases, carrying crosses for pilgrimage. To the full statistics, there are 22 orders to demolish houses used by heretics as meeting places and one condemnation and burning of Jewish writings (including commentaries on the Torah).

The episcopal inquisition was also active in Languedoc. In the years 1232–1234, the Bishop of Toulouse, Raymond, sentenced several dozen Cathars to death. In turn, Bishop Jacques Fournier of Pamiers (he was later Pope Benedict XII) in the years 1318–1325 conducted an investigation against 89 people, of whom 64 were found guilty and 5 were sentenced to death.

After 1330, the center of activity of the French inquisitions moved east, to the Alpine regions, where there were numerous Waldensian communities. The repression against them was not continuous and was very ineffective. Data on sentences issued by inquisitors are fragmentary. In 1348, 12 Waldensians were burned in Embrun, and in 1353/1354 as many as 168 received penances. In general, however, few Waldensians fell into the hands of the inquisitors, for they took refuge in hard-to-reach mountainous regions, where they formed close-knit communities. Inquisitors operating in this region, in order to be able to conduct trials, often had to resort to the armed assistance of local secular authorities (e.g. military expeditions in 1338–1339 and 1366). In the years 1375–1393 (with some breaks), the Dauphiné was the scene of the activities of the inquisitor Francois Borel, who gained an extremely gloomy reputation among the locals. It is known that on 1 July 1380, he pronounced death sentences in absentia against 169 people, including 108 from the Valpute valley, 32 from Argentiere and 29 from Freyssiniere. It is not known how many of them were actually carried out, only six people captured in 1382 are confirmed to be executed.

In the 15th and 16th centuries, major trials took place only sporadically, e.g. against the Waldensians in Delphinate in 1430–1432 (no numerical data) and 1532–1533 (7 executed out of about 150 tried) or the aforementioned trial in Arras 1459–1460 . In the 16th century, the jurisdiction of the inquisitors in the kingdom of France was effectively limited to clergymen, while local parliaments took over the jurisdiction of the laity. Between 1500 and 1560, 62 people were burned for heresy in the Languedoc, all of whom were convicted by the Parliament of Toulouse.

Between 1657 and 1659, twenty-two alleged witches were burned on the orders of the inquisitor Pierre Symard in the province of Franche-Comté, then part of the Empire.

The inquisitorial tribunal in papal Avignon, established in 1541, passed 855 death sentences, almost all of them (818) in the years 1566–1574, but the vast majority of them were pronounced in absentia.

=== Inquisitions in Germany ===

The Rhineland and Thuringia in the years 1231–1233 were the field of activity of the notorious inquisitor Konrad of Marburg. Unfortunately, the documentation of his trials has not been preserved, making it impossible to determine the number of his victims. The chronicles only mention &quot;many&quot; heretics that he burned. The only concrete information is about the burning of four people in Erfurt in May 1232.

After the murder of Konrad of Marburg, burning at the stake in Germany was virtually unknown for the next 80 years. It was not until the early fourteenth century that stronger measures were taken against heretics, largely at the initiative of bishops. In the years 1311–1315, numerous trials were held against the Waldensians in Austria, resulting in the burning of at least 39 people, according to incomplete records. In 1336, in Angermünde, in the diocese of Brandenburg, another 14 heretics were burned.

The number of those convicted by the papal inquisitors was smaller. Walter Kerlinger burned 10 begards in Erfurt and Nordhausen in 1368–1369. In turn, Eylard Schöneveld burned a total of four people in various Baltic cities in 1402–1403.

In the last decade of the 14th century, episcopal inquisitors carried out large-scale operations against heretics in eastern Germany, Pomerania, Austria, and Hungary. In Pomerania, of 443 sentenced in the years 1392–1394 by the inquisitor Peter Zwicker, the provincial of the Celestinians, none went to the stake, because they all submitted to the Church. Bloodier were the trials of the Waldensians in Austria in 1397, where more than a hundred Waldensians were burned at the stake. However, it seems that in these trials the death sentences represented only a small percentage of all the sentences, because according to the account of one of the inquisitors involved in these repressions, the number of heretics reconciled with the Church from Thuringia to Hungary amounted to about 2,000.

In 1414, the inquisitor Heinrich von Schöneveld arrested 84 flagellants in Sangerhausen, of whom he burned 3 leaders, and imposed penitential sentences on the rest. However, since this sect was associated with the peasant revolts in Thuringia from 1412, after the departure of the inquisitor, the local authorities organized a mass hunt for flagellants and, regardless of their previous verdicts, sent at least 168 to the stake (possibly up to 300) people. Inquisitor Friedrich Müller (d. 1460) sentenced to death 12 of the 13 heretics he had tried in 1446 at Nordhausen. In 1453 the same inquisitor burned 2 heretics in Göttingen.

Inquisitor Heinrich Kramer, author of the Malleus Maleficarum, in his own words, sentenced 48 people to the stake in five years (1481–1486). Jacob Hoogstraten, inquisitor of Cologne from 1508 to 1527, sentenced four people to be burned at the stake.

A duke of Brunswick in German was so shocked by the methods used by Inquisitors in his realm that he asked two famous Jesuit scholars to supervise. After careful study, the two &#x27;told the Duke, &quot;The Inquisitors are doing their duty. They are arresting only people who have been implicated by the confession of other witches.&quot;&#x27; The Duke then led the Jesuits to a woman being stretched on the rack and asked her, &quot;You are a confessed witch. I suspect these two men of being warlocks. What do you say? Another turn of the rack, executioners.&quot; &quot;No, no!&quot; screamed the woman. &quot;You are quite right. I have often seen .. . They can turn themselves into goats, wolves, and other animals. ... Several witches have had children by them. ... The children had heads like toads and legs like spiders.&quot; The Duke then asked the Jesuits. &quot;Shall I put you to the torture until you confess, my friends?&quot; One of the Jesuits was Friedrich Spee, who thanked God he had been led to this insight by a friend, not an enemy.

=== Inquisition in Hungary and the Balkans ===
Very little is known about the activities of inquisitors in Hungary and the countries under its influence (Bosnia, Croatia), as there are few sources about this activity. Numerous conversions and executions of Bosnian Cathars are known to have taken place around 1239/40, and in 1268 the Dominican inquisitor Andrew reconciled many heretics with the Church in the town of Skradin, but precise figures are unknown. The border areas with Bohemia and Austria were under major inquisitorial action against the Waldensians in the early 15th century. In addition, in the years 1436–1440 in the Kingdom of Hungary, the Franciscan Jacobo de la Marcha acted as an inquisitor... his mission was mixed, preaching and inquisitorial. The correspondence preserved between James, his collaborators, the Hungarian bishops and Pope Eugene IV shows that he reconciled up to 25,000 people with the Church. This correspondence also shows that he punished recalcitrant heretics with death, and in 1437 numerous executions were carried out in the diocese of Sirmium, although the number of those executed is also unknown.

=== Inquisitions in the Czech lands and Poland ===

In Bohemia and Poland, the inquisition was established permanently in 1318, although anti-heretical repressions were carried out as early as 1315 in the episcopal inquisition, when more than 50 Waldensians were burned in various Silesian cities. The fragmentary surviving protocols of the investigations carried out by the Prague inquisitor Gallus de Neuhaus in the years 1335 to around 1353 mention 14 heretics burned out of almost 300 interrogated, but it is estimated that the actual number executed could have been even more than 200, and the entire process was covered to varying degrees by some 4,400 people.

In the lands belonging to the Kingdom of Poland little is known of the activities of the Inquisition until the appearance of the Hussite heresy in the 15th century. Polish courts of the inquisition in the fight against this heresy issued at least 8 death sentences for some 200 trials carried out.

There are 558 court cases finished with conviction researched in Poland from the 15th to 18th centuries.

===Inquisition in Spain===
Portugal and Spain in the late Middle Ages consisted largely of multicultural territories of Muslim and Jewish influence, reconquered from Islamic control, and the new Christian authorities could not assume that all their subjects would suddenly become and remain orthodox Catholics. So the Inquisition in Iberia, in the lands of the Reconquista counties and kingdoms like León, Castile, and Aragon, had a special socio-political basis as well as more fundamental religious motives.

In some parts of Spain towards the end of the 14th century, there was a wave of violent anti-Judaism, encouraged by the preaching of Ferrand Martínez, Archdeacon of Écija. In the pogroms of June 1391 in Seville, hundreds of Jews were killed, and the synagogue was completely destroyed. The number of people killed was also high in other cities, such as Córdoba, Valencia, and Barcelona.

One of the consequences of these pogroms was the mass conversion of thousands of surviving Jews. Forced baptism was contrary to the law of the Catholic Church, and theoretically anybody who had been forcibly baptized could legally return to Judaism. However, this was very narrowly interpreted. Legal definitions of the time theoretically acknowledged that a forced baptism was not a valid sacrament, but confined this to cases where it was literally administered by physical force. A person who had consented to baptism under threat of death or serious injury was still regarded as a voluntary convert, and accordingly forbidden to revert to Judaism. After the public violence, many of the converted &quot;felt it safer to remain in their new religion&quot;. Thus, after 1391, a new social group appeared and were referred to as &quot;conversos&quot; or &quot;New Christians&quot;.
==Early modern European history==

With the sharpening of debate and of conflict between the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Counter-Reformation, Protestant societies came to see/use the Inquisition as a terrifying &quot;other&quot;, while staunch Catholics regarded the Holy Office as a necessary bulwark against the spread of reprehensible heresies. Since the beginning of the most serious heretic groups, like the Cathars or the Waldensians, they were soon accused of the most fantastic behavior, like having wild sexual orgies, eating babies, copulating with demons, worshipping the Devil.

===Spanish Inquisition===

King Ferdinand II of Aragon and Queen Isabella I of Castile established the Spanish Inquisition in 1478 to be overseen by 14 local Tribunals. In contrast to the previous inquisitions, it operated completely under royal Christian authority, though staffed by clergy and orders, and independently of the Holy See. It operated first in Spain, then in Portugal, and eventually in most Spanish colonies and territories, which included the Canary Islands, the Kingdom of Sicily, and all Spanish possessions in North, Central, and South America. It primarily focused upon forced converts from Islam (Moriscos, &quot;conversos&quot;, and &quot;secret Moors&quot;) and from Judaism (&quot;conversos&quot;, Crypto-Jews, and Marranos)—both groups which continued to reside in Spain and who came under suspicion of either continuing to adhere to their old religion or of having fallen back into it.

Under the Alhambra Decree of 1492, all Jews who had not converted were expelled from Spain in 1492. Tomás de Torquemada was chosen to be the first Grand Inquisitor, to oversee the Inquisition; and it is estimated that up to 2,000 Jews were burned at the stake during the reign of Queen Isabella.(See Jewish Encyclopedia). 

All Muslims were ordered to convert in different stages starting in 1507 and culminating in 1614, when Muslims who had previously converted were now expelled . Those who converted or simply remained after the relevant edict became nominally and legally Catholics, and thus subject to the Inquisition.
====Inquisition in the Spanish overseas empire====
In 1569, King Philip II of Spain set up three tribunals in the Americas (each formally titled &quot;Tribunal del Santo Oficio de la Inquisición&quot;): one in Mexico, one in Cartagena de Indias (in modern-day Colombia), and one in Peru. The Mexican office administered Mexico (central and southeastern Mexico), Nueva Galicia (northern and western Mexico), the Audiencias of Guatemala (Guatemala, Chiapas, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica), and the Spanish East Indies. The Peruvian Inquisition, based in Lima, administered all the Spanish territories in South America and Panama.

The Spanish Inquisition was formerly ended by proclamation on July 15, 1834, by Maria Cristina de Bourbon, then queen regent of Spain, also known as Maria Cristina of Naples and Sicily. 

===Portuguese Inquisition===

The Portuguese Inquisition formally started in Portugal in 1536 at the request of King João III. Manuel I had asked Pope Leo X for the installation of the Inquisition in 1515, but only after his death in 1521 did Pope Paul III acquiesce. At its head stood a &quot;Grande Inquisidor&quot;, or General Inquisitor, named by the Pope but selected by the Crown, and always from within the royal family. Jews who fled Spain and the Spanish Inquisition now found themselves subject to the Inquisition in Portugal. The Portuguese Inquisition principally focused upon the Jews from Spain, the Sephardi Jews, who had fled or whom the had state forced to convert to Christianity. 

The Portuguese Inquisition held its first &quot;auto-da-fé&quot; in 1540. The Portuguese inquisitors mostly focused upon the Jewish New Christians (i.e. &quot;conversos&quot; or &quot;marranos&quot;). The Portuguese Inquisition expanded its scope of operations from Portugal to its colonial possessions, including Brazil, Cape Verde, and Goa. In the colonies, it continued as a religious court, investigating and trying cases of breaches of the tenets of orthodox Catholicism until 1821. King João III (reigned 1521–57) extended the activity of the courts to cover censorship, divination, witchcraft, and bigamy. Originally oriented for a religious action, the Inquisition exerted an influence over almost every aspect of Portuguese society: political, cultural, and social.

According to Henry Charles Lea, between 1540 and 1794, tribunals in Lisbon, Porto, Coimbra, and Évora resulted in the burning of 1,175 persons, the burning of another 633 in effigy, and the penancing of 29,590. But documentation of 15 out of 689 autos-da-fé has disappeared, so these numbers may slightly understate the activity.

====Inquisition in the Portuguese overseas empire====

===== Goa Inquisition =====
The Goa Inquisition began in 1560 at the order of John III of Portugal. It had originally been requested in a letter in the 1540s by Jesuit priest Francis Xavier, because of the New Christians who had arrived in Goa and then reverted to Judaism. The Goa Inquisition also focused upon Catholic converts from Hinduism or Islam who were thought to have returned to their original ways. In addition, this inquisition prosecuted non-converts who broke prohibitions against the public observance of Hindu or Muslim rites or interfered with Portuguese attempts to convert non-Christians to Catholicism. Aleixo Dias Falcão and Francisco Marques set it up in the palace of the Sabaio Adil Khan.

===== Brazilian Inquisition =====
The inquisition was active in colonial Brazil. The religious mystic and formerly enslaved prostitute, Rosa Egipcíaca was arrested, interrogated and imprisoned, both in the colony and in Lisbon. Egipcíaca was the first black woman in Brazil to write a book – this work detailed her visions and was entitled &quot;Sagrada Teologia do Amor Divino das Almas Peregrinas.&quot;

===Roman Inquisition===
With the Protestant Reformation, Catholic authorities became much more ready to suspect heresy in any new ideas, including those of Renaissance humanism, previously strongly supported by many at the top of the Church hierarchy. The extirpation of heretics became a much broader and more complex enterprise, complicated by the politics of territorial Protestant powers, especially in northern Europe. The Catholic Church could no longer exercise direct influence in the politics and justice-systems of lands that officially adopted Protestantism. Thus war (the French Wars of Religion, the Thirty Years&#x27; War), massacre (the St. Bartholomew&#x27;s Day massacre) and the missional and propaganda work (by the &quot;Sacra congregatio de propaganda fide&quot;) of the catholic Counter-Reformation came to play larger roles in these circumstances, and the Roman law type of a &quot;judicial&quot; approach to heresy represented by the Inquisition became less important overall. In 1542 Pope Paul III established the Congregation of the Holy Office of the Inquisition as a permanent congregation staffed with cardinals and other officials. It had the tasks of maintaining and defending the integrity of the faith and of examining and proscribing errors and false doctrines; it thus became the supervisory body of local Inquisitions. A famous case tried by the Roman Inquisition was that of Galileo Galilei in 1633.

The penances and sentences for those who confessed or were found guilty were pronounced together in a public ceremony at the end of all the processes. This was the &quot;sermo generalis&quot; or &quot;auto-da-fé&quot;. Penances (not matters for the civil authorities) might consist of pilgrimages, a public scourging, a fine, or the wearing of a cross. The wearing of two tongues of red or other brightly colored cloth, sewn onto an outer garment in an &quot;X&quot; pattern, marked those who were under investigation. The penalties in serious cases were confiscation of property by the Inquisition or imprisonment. This led to the possibility of false charges to enable confiscation being made against those over a certain income, particularly rich &quot;marranos&quot;. Following the French invasion of 1798, the new authorities sent 3,000 chests containing over 100,000 Inquisition documents to France from Rome.

===Witch-hunts===
The fierce denunciation and persecution of supposed sorceresses that characterized the cruel witchhunts of a later age were not generally found in the first thirteen hundred years of the Christian era. While belief in witchcraft, and persecutions directed at or excused by it, were widespread in pre-Christian Europe, and reflected in old Germanic law, the growing influence of the Church in the early medieval era in pagan areas resulted in the revocation of these laws in many places, bringing an end to the traditional witch hunts. Throughout the medieval era, mainstream Christian teaching had disputed the existence of witches and denied any power to witchcraft, condemning it as pagan superstition. 

Black magic practitioners were generally dealt with through confession, repentance, and charitable work assigned as penance. In 1258, Pope Alexander IV ruled that inquisitors should limit their involvement to those cases in which there was some clear presumption of heretical belief but slowly this vision changed.

The prosecution of witchcraft generally became more prominent in the late medieval and Renaissance era, perhaps driven partly by the upheavals of the era – the Black Death, the Hundred Years War, and a gradual cooling of the climate that modern scientists call the Little Ice Age (between about the 15th and 19th centuries). Witches were sometimes blamed. Since the years of most intense witch-hunting largely coincide with the age of the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation, some historians point to the influence of the Reformation on the European witch-hunt. However, witch-hunting began almost one hundred years before Luther&#x27;s ninety-five theses.

== Manuals for Inquisitors ==
Over the centuries that it lasted, several procedure manuals for inquisitors were produced for dealing with different types of heresy. The primordial text was Pope Innocent IV&#x27;s bull, &quot;Ad Extirpanda&quot;, from 1252, which in its thirty-eight laws details in detail what must be done and authorizes the use of torture. Of the various manuals produced later, some stand out: by Nicholas Eymerich, &quot;Directorium Inquisitorum,&quot; written in 1376; by Bernardo Gui, &quot;Practica inquisitionis heretice pravitatis,&quot; written between 1319 and 1323. Witches were not forgotten: the book &quot;Malleus Maleficarum (&quot;the witches&#x27; hammer&quot;),&quot; written in 1486, by Heinrich Kramer, deals with the subject.

In Portugal, several &quot;Regimentos&quot; (four) were written for the use of the inquisitors, the first in 1552 at the behest of the inquisitor Cardinal D. Henrique and the last in 1774, this sponsored by the Marquis of Pombal. The Portuguese 1640 Regiment determined that each court of the Holy Office should have a Bible, a compendium of canon and civil law, Eymerich&#x27;s &quot;Directorium Inquisitorum,&quot; and Diego de Simancas&#x27; &quot;Catholicis institutionibus&quot;.

In 1484, Spanish inquisitor Torquemada, based in Nicholas Eymerich&#x27;s &quot;Directorium Inquisitorum&quot;, wrote his twenty eight articles code, &quot;Compilación de las instrucciones del oficio de la Santa Inquisición&quot; (i.e. Compilation of the instructions of the office of the Holy Inquisitio&quot;n).&quot; Later additions would be made, based on experience, many by the canonist Francisco Peña.
=== Malleus Maleficarum ===

Dominican priest Heinrich Kramer was assistant to the Archbishop of Salzburg, a sensational preacher, and an appointed local inquisitor. Historian Malcolm Gaskill calls Kramer a &quot;superstitious psychopath&quot;. 

In 1484 Kramer requested that Pope Innocent VIII clarify his authority to conduct inquisitions into witchcraft throughout Germany, where he had been refused assistance by the local ecclesiastical authorities. They maintained that Kramer could not legally function in their areas. Despite some support from Pope Innocent VIII, he was expelled from the city of Innsbruck by the local bishop, George Golzer, who ordered Kramer to stop making false accusations. 

Golzer described Kramer as senile in letters written shortly after the incident. This rebuke led Kramer to write a justification of his views on witchcraft in his 1486 book &quot;Malleus Maleficarum&quot; (&quot;Hammer against witches&quot;). The book distinguishes itself from other demonologies by its obsessive hate of women and sex, seemingly reflecting the twisted psyche of the author. Historian Brian Levack calls it &quot;scholastic pornography&quot;. 

Despite Kramer&#x27;s claim that the book gained acceptance from the clergy at the University of Cologne, it was in fact condemned by the clergy at Cologne for advocating views that violated Catholic doctrine and standard inquisitorial procedure. In 1538 the Spanish Inquisition cautioned its members not to believe everything the &quot;Malleus&quot; said. Despite this, Heinrich Kramer was never excommunicated and even enjoyed considerable prestige till his death.

== Inquisition Proceedings ==

=== Denunciations ===
The usual procedure began with the visitation by the inquisitors in a chosen location. The so-called heretics were then asked to be present and denounce themselves and others; it was not enough to denounce himself as a heretic.

Many confessed alleged heresies for fear that a friend or neighbor might do so later. The terror of the Inquisition provoked chain reactions and denunciations even of spouses, children and friends.

If they confessed within a &quot;grace period&quot; — usually 30 days — they could be accepted back into the church without punishment. In general, the benefits proposed by the &quot;edicts of grace&quot; to those who presented themselves spontaneously were the forgiveness of the death penalty or life imprisonment and the forgiveness of the penalty of confiscation of property.

Anyone suspected of knowing about another&#x27;s heresy and who did not make the obligatory denunciation would be excommunicated and then subject to prosecution as a &quot;promoter of heresy.&quot; If the denouncer named other potential heretics, they would also be summoned. All types of complaints were accepted by the Inquisition, regardless of the reputation or position of the complainant. Rumors, mere suppositions, and even anonymous letters were accepted, &quot;if the case were of such a nature that such action seemed appropriate to the service of God and the good of the Faith&quot;. It was foreseen that prison guards themselves could report and be witnesses against the accused.

This strategy transformed everyone into an Inquisition agent, reminding them that a simple word or deed could bring them before the tribunal. Denunciation was elevated to the status of a superior religious duty, filling the nation with spies and making every individual suspicious of his neighbor, family members, and any strangers he might met.

=== Methods of torture used ===
The primary method of torture was psychological: solitary confinement and indefinite incarceration. 

Defendants were interrogated under physical torture only in extreme cases. The view of historian Ron E. Hassner is &#x27;inquisitors knew that information obtained through torture often was not reliable. [So] They built their cases patiently, gathering information from a variety of sources, using a variety of methods. With any given subject, they used torture only intermittently, in sessions sometimes months apart. Their main goal was not to compel a confession or a profession of faith, but to extract factual information that would confirm or corroborate information already in hand.&#x27;

The summary of the &quot;Directorium Inquisitorum&quot;, by Nicolás Aymerich, made by Marchena, notes a comment by the Aragonese inquisitor: &quot;Quaestiones sunt fallaces et inefficaces&quot; (&quot;The interrogations are misleading and useless&quot;). 

Defendants were punished if found guilty, with their property being confiscated to cover legal and prison costs and to maintain the heavy machinery of persecution. The victims could also repent of their accusation and receive reconciliation with the Church. The execution of the tortures was attended by the inquisitor, the doctor, the secretary and the torturer, applying them on the nearly naked prisoner. In the year 1252, the bull &quot;Ad extirpanda&quot; allowed torture, but always with a doctor involved to avoid endangering life, and limited its use to non-bloody methods that did not break bones: 

* Strappado: the victim was lifted to the ceiling with his arms tied behind his back, and then dropped violently, but without touching the ground. This usually meant the dislocation of the victim&#x27;s arms.
* Rack or &quot;potro&quot;: the prisoner was tied to a frame and the executioner pressed, but stopping before or if the meat was pierced or blood flowed. In another version, the victim was stretched on a sort of table, usually with serious impact in later life. Many inquisitors believed the rack was not allowed. 
* Water cure, now known as water boarding: the prisoner was tied, a cloth was inserted through his mouth down to his throat, and one liter jugs of water were poured in to his mouth. The victim had the sensation of drowning, and the stomach swelled until near bursting.

According to Catholic apologists, the method of torture (which was socially accepted in the context of the time) was adopted only in exceptional cases, and the inquisitorial procedure was meticulously regulated in interrogation practices.

* Torture could not endanger the subject&#x27;s life. 
** However, at times torture was allowed when guilt was &quot;half proven&quot; or even not proven, or there existed a &quot;presumption of guilt&quot;, or confession was considered incomplete, as stated in Article XV of Torquemada&#x27;s &quot;instruciones&quot; and in Eymerich&#x27;s directions or Portuguese &quot;Regimentos.&quot;
* Torture could not cause the subject to lose a limb. 
** However, at time the defendant was informed that if he died, broke any limbs or lose consciousness during torment, it would be his fault, and not theirs, the inquisitors, because with &quot;such impudence&quot; he put himself in danger of life and health.
* Torture could only be applied once, and only if the subject appeared to be lying. 
** However, according to journalist Cullen Murphy, in practice torture was repeated or &quot;continued&quot;. The Portuguese instructions (&quot;Regimentos&quot;) stipulate that defendants may not appear at &quot;autos de fé&quot; showing marks of torture, so did not recommend using torture other than &quot;potro&quot; in the previous fortnight.

Despite the loss of thousands of documents over the years, many of the meticulous records of torture sessions have survived.

==== Fake instruments of torture ====
Despite what is popularly believed, the cases in which torture was used during the inquisitorial processes were rare, since it was considered (according to some authors) to be ineffective in obtaining evidence. Before torture, some inquisitors may have displayed the instruments mainly on the purpose of intimidation of the accused, so he could understand what to expect. If he wished to avoid punishment, he should only confess his faults.

In the words of historian Helen Mary Carrel: &quot;the common view of the medieval justice system as cruel and based on torture and execution is often unfair and inaccurate.&quot; As the historian Nigel Townson wrote: &quot;The sinister torture chambers equipped with cogwheels, bone crushing contraptions, shackles, and other terrifying mechanisms only existed in the imagination of their detractors.&quot;

In fact, it seems likely that the inquisitors favoured simpler and &quot;cleaner&quot; methods, which left few apparent marks. Aymerich points out that canon law does not prescribe either this or that particular torture, so judges can use whatever they see fit, as long as it&#x27;s not an unusual torture. Many types of torments have been chosen, but Eymerich think they seem more like the inventions of executioners than the works of theologians. &quot;It is true that it is a very praiseworthy practice to subject the accused to torture, but no less reprehensible are those bloodthirsty judges who base their vain glory on the invention of crude and exquisite torments&quot; – he adds.
Many torture instruments were designed by late 18th and early 19th century pranksters, entertainers, and con artists who wanted to profit from people&#x27;s morbid interest in the Dark Age myth by charging them to witness such instruments in Victorian-era circuses.

However, several torture instruments are accurately described in &quot;Foxe&#x27;s Book of Martyrs&quot;, including but not limited to the dry pan.

Some of the instruments that &quot;the Inquisition&quot; never used, but that are erroneously registered in various inquisition museums:

* The troublemaker&#x27;s flute: Created in the 17th century. Its first mention comes from the years 1680–90 of the Republic of Venice used against deserters from the war between the Ottoman Empire and the Republic of Venice.
* Head crusher: Created in the 14th century. Its first mention comes from 1340 in Germany. It was not used by the Inquisition but by the German courts against the enemies of some prince-electors.
* Judas&#x27;s cradle: Created in the fifteenth century. Its first mention comes from 1450 to 1480 in France. Used by the &quot;parlement&quot; and not by the Inquisition, it was abolished in 1430.
* The Spanish donkey: Created in the 16th century. The name connects the instrument to the Spanish Inquisition, although it was only used in certain regions, which were not primarily Spain nor as part of the Inquisition, but by Central European civil authorities (most notably Reformed Germany and the Bohemian Crown), New France, the Netherlands Antilles, the British Empire, and the United States. It is unclear exactly who invented this device, and it is likely that it was ascribed to Spain as &quot;Black Legend&quot; propaganda.
* The Spanish tickle: Created in 2005 as a false rumor on Wikipedia.
* The Thumbscrew: Created in the 16th century. It was used for the persecution of Catholics by William Cecil in England during the reign of Elizabeth I. It was not used by the Inquisition, but by the English courts against dissidents to the Protestant Reformation, later also for the torture of slaves.
* The saw: Created in the fifteenth century. Its first mention comes from 1450 to 1470. Used by the Hungarian court against Muslims in the context of the war between the Ottoman Empire, the Byzantine Empire and the Kingdom of Hungary.
* Pear of anguish: Created in the fifteenth century. Its first mention comes from 1450. Used by the French &quot;parlement&quot; and not by the Inquisition, it was abolished in 1430. The historian Chris Bishop came to postulate that it could have actually been a sock stretcher, since it has been proven that it was too weak to open into a body orifice.
* The Spanish Boot: Created in the 14th century. Its first mentions come from Scotland with the buskin. Used by the authorities in England to persecute Catholics in Ireland. Later the civil authorities of France and Venice would use it, but not by the Spanish Inquisition.
* The &quot;Cloak of Infamy&quot;. Created in the 17th century. It was first mentioned by Johann Philipp Siebenkees in 1790, and was used by the Nuremberg parliament (Protestant) against thieves and prostitutes.
* The Iron Maiden. The use of iron maidens in judicial proceedings or executions is doubted. Several replicas of the Iron Maiden existed, and the one of Nuremberg Castle was destroyed in 1944 as a result of bombing during World War II. It was probably based on the 17th century Cloak of Infamy.
* The Breast ripper. Created at the end of the 16th century. The first reference dates back to Bavaria (Germany) in 1599 and presumably it would have been used in France and Holy Roman Empire by civil authorities and not by the Inquisition. However, there are no reliable first-hand historical sources on the use of the devices, so, like the Iron Maiden, there is a possibility that the devices shown in the images are fakes of a later manufacture (such as from the 17th century) or assembled from small fragments that may have been parts of another device. Most likely, it was often mentioned to frighten and force the accused to confess, rather than such dubiously existent torture being inflicted on them.
* The Stocks. Created in the Middle Ages and used by the civil authorities of London, not the Inquisition, in order to publicly shame criminals, but not physically harm them or take life.
* The bronze bull. Created in the Ancient Age and never used in medieval Europe, much less in the Inquisition. In fact, there is a chance that it never existed at all and was just a popular legend of Greco-Latin culture.
* The Scold&#x27;s bridle. Created in the 16th century. It was never legalized and was only used unofficially by some civilians in Scotland and England, not by the Inquisition.
* The dungeon of rats. Created in the 16th century, its main reference is from John Lothrop Motley about some anecdotes of torture against the &quot;papists&quot; during the Dutch war of independence. It is also said that Catholics who resisted the Church of England under Elizabeth I were tortured in the Tower of London. Used by some Protestant governments and not by the Inquisition.
* Heretic&#x27;s Fork, Boots, Cat&#x27;s Paw, and Iron Cage. Created in the 15th–16th century. Used by the French &quot;parlement&quot; and not by the Inquisition.

=== Trials ===

The Inquisition&#x27;s trials were secret and there was no possibility of appealing the decisions. The defendant was constantly pressured to confess to the &quot;crimes&quot; assigned to him. The Inquisitors kept the accusations made and the evidence they possessed hidden, in order to achieve a confession without announcing the accusation. The main goal was to make the defendant confess.

Each court had its own staff (lawyers, prosecutors, notaries, etc.) and its own prison. The guards who served the inquisition spied the accused in their cells; if they refused to eat, for example, this action could be considered a fast, a Jewish custom.

In many cases, it was common for false accusations to be made against New Christians and it was difficult to prove their innocence. It was therefore more convenient for many to make a false confession to the inquisitors, including a list of imaginary accomplices, in the hope that they would not receive extreme penalties, such as the death penalty, but only the confiscation of property or lesser penalties.

In fact, there wasn&#x27;t a trial in the modern sense of the term, but an extensive interrogation; the prisoner was kept in the dark about the reasons for his arrest — often for months or even years. There was no precise accusation and therefore little chance of a plausible defence. The prisoner was simply advised &quot;to search his conscience, confess the truth, and trust to the mercy of the tribunal&#x27;&quot;.

Eventually, the prisoner was informed of the charges against him — omitting the names of the witnesses. Thus, the charade continued. After the interminable interrogations, hearings and waiting periods came to an end, the sentence could be pronounced.

The Inquisition trials had little to do with justice. Walter Ullmann, a historian, summarises his evaluation: &quot;There is hardly one item in the whole Inquisitorial procedure that could be squared with the demands of justice; on the contrary, every one of its items is the denial of justice or a hideous caricature of it [...] its principles are the very denial of the demands made by the most primitive concepts of natural justice [...] This kind of proceeding has no longer any semblance to a judicial trial but is rather its systematic and methodical perversion.&quot;

In one of his books, Portuguese author A. José Saraiva points out the analogy of the trials with the absurdity of the Kafka&#x27;s novel The Trial or the show trials of Stalin&#x27;s era in Moscow.

=== Punishments ===
The Inquisition&#x27;s sentences could be simple penances, for example private devotions, or heavy punishments. One of the Inquisition&#x27;s punishments was the forced wearing of distinctive clothing or signs such as the sambenito, sometimes for an entire life.

Other punishments were exile, compulsory pilgrimages, fines, the galleys, life imprisonment (in fact prison for some years) and in addition the confiscation of goods and property. The bull Ad Extirpanda determined that the houses of heretics should be completely razed to the ground. Furthermore, the impact of the Inquisition&#x27;s activity on the fabric of society was not limited to these penances or punishments. As under the terror of the Inquisition entire families denounced each other, they were soon reduced to misery, completed by the confiscation of property, public humiliation and ostracism.

Even dead people could be accused, and sentenced up to forty years after the death. When inquisitors considered proven that the deceased were heretics in their lifetime, their corpses were exhumed and burned, their property confiscated and the heirs disinherited.

== Legitimation by the texts ==
The Inquisition always referred to biblical passages, as well as to church fathers, like Augustine of Hippo, to legitimise his actuation.

The New Testament contains some sentences that the church could interpret for dealing with heretics. The excommunication of a deviant from the faith was equivalent to handing him over to the Devil: &quot;When you have gathered together, and my spirit with you, in the power of our Lord Jesus, hand this man over to Satan for destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved on the day of the Lord.&quot; (The Pauline letters: 1 Corinthians, B. Incest in Corinth, 5:4 and 5:5 )

The sentence of Paul could also be understood in this way: he handed over to the Devil those &quot;who have suffered shipwreck in the faith [...] so that they may be taught not to be blasphemous.&quot; (The Pastoral epistles: 1 Timothy – The first letter from Paul to Timothy—Timothy&#x27;s responsibility: 1:19 and 1:20)

Paul&#x27;s view reflects less the idea of punishment than the idea of isolation when he says: &quot; After a first and second warning have nothing to do with a disputatious person, since you may be sure that such a person is warped and is self-condemned as a sinner.&quot; (The Pastoral epistles : Titus – The letter from Paul to Titus—3:10 and 3:11)

In the Gospel of John, Jesus tells the apostates in a parable: &quot;I am the vine, you are the branches. Whoever remains in me, and I in that person, bears fruit in plenty; for apart from me you can do nothing. Anyone who does not remain in me is thrown away like a branch and withers. These branches are collected, thrown on the fire and burnt.&quot; This parable can be interpreted as the burning of stubborn heretics at the stake. (The Gospel according to John: The true vine—15:5 and 15:6)

The celebrated theologian Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) supplied the theoretical foundation for the medieval Inquisition in his &quot;Summa theologica&quot; II 2. 11. A heretic who repents, the first time, should be allowed penance and their life safeguarded by the church from the punishment of the secular authorities (who treated pernicious and public heresy as a kind of sedition.) A subsequent lapse into heresy would show insincerity that called for excommunication, leaving them to the secular authorities who could impose the death penalty on unprotected heretics: &quot;Accipere fidem est voluntatis, sed tenere fidem iam acceptam est necessitatis&quot; (i.e. &quot;The acceptance of faith is voluntary, maintaining the accepted faith is necessary. So heretics should be compelled to keep the faith.&quot;)

Luis de Páramo, theologian and Inquisitor of then Spanish-ruled Sicily from 1584 to 1605, asserted that Jesus Christ was &quot;the first Inquisitor under the Evangelical law&quot; and that John the Baptist and the apostles were also inquisitors.

However, another traditional stream of Catholic thought, for example championed by Erasmus, was that the Parable of the wheat and tares forebade any premature culling of heretics.

Saint Augustine (354–430) led a debate in Africa with the Donatist community, which had split from the Roman Church. In his works, he called for moderate severity or measures by secular power, including the death penalty, against heretics, however he did not consider it desirable: &quot;Corrigi eos volumus, non necari, nec disciplinam circa eos negligi volumus, nec suppliciis quibus digni sunt exerci&quot;, meaning &quot;We would like them to be improved, not killed; we desire the triumph of church discipline, not the death they deserve.&quot;

== Opposition and resistance ==
In many regions and times, there was opposition to the Inquisition. 
===Assassinations===
In some cases, heretics and other targets did not hesitate to attempt to murder the inquisitors, or destroy its voluminous archives, because they had much to lose in the face of an inquisitorial investigation: their freedom, their property, their lives.

The much hated Inquisitor Konrad von Marburg, who also initiated inquisition trials against nobles, was murdered in 1233 by six mounted men on an open country road on the way to Marburg.

In 1242, a Cathar group armed with axes entered the castle of the town of Avignonet (southern France) and murdered the inquisitors Guillaume Arnaud and Étienne de Saint-Thibéry.

In 1252, the inquisitor Peter of Verona was killed by Cathars. Eleven months after his assassination, he was made a Catholic saint, the quickest canonization in history. As Christine Caldwell Ames writes, &quot;Inquisition changed what it meant to be a martyr, to be holy, and to be an imitator of Christ.&quot;

In 1395 near Steyr, where the inquisitor Petrus Zwicker was quartered with associates, an assassination attempt on him failed: someone had tried to set fire to the place and burn him alive.

===Clergy opposition===
Opposition to Inquisition power and abuses sometimes came from within the clergy: including friars, priests and bishops.

During French Inquisition, a Franciscan friar, Bernard Délicieux, opposed the actions of the Inquisition in Languedoc. The infamous Bernard Gui presented him as the commander-in-chief of the &quot;iniquitous army&quot; against the Dominicans and the Inquisition. Délicieux alleged the Inquisitiors were pursuing innocent Catholics for heresy, trying to destroy their towns. He stated that the methods of the inquisition would have condemned even Peter and Paul as heretics if they appeared before the inquisitors. Délicieux later became one more victim of the Inquisition for his criticism. In 1317, Pope John XXII called him and other Franciscan Spirituals to Avignon, and he was arrested, questioned, and tortured by the Inquisition. In 1319, he was found guilty and sentenced to life in prison. Fragile and old, he died shortly thereafter.

In Spain, several bishops contended with inquisitorial tribunals. In 1532, the Archbishop of Toledo Alonso III Fonseca had to ransom &quot;converso&quot; Juan de Vergara (Cisneros&#x27; Latin secretary) from Spanish inquisitors. Fonseca had previously rescued Ignatius of Loyola from them. Far from being a monolithic institution, sometimes the tribunals threatened individuals protected by the Inquisitor-General, such as with the Inquisitor General Alonso Manrique de Lara and Erasmus.

In Portugal, Father António Vieira (1608–1697), himself a Jesuit, philosopher, writer and orator, was one of the most important opponents of the Inquisition. Arrested by the Inquisition for &quot;heretical, reckless, ill-sounding and scandalous propositions&quot; in October 1665, was imprisoned until December 1667. Under the Inquisitorial sentence, he was forbidden to teach, write or preach. Only perhaps Vieira&#x27;s prestige, his intelligence and his support among members of the royal family saved him from greater consequences. Father Vieira led an anti-inquisition movement in Rome, where he spent six years. In addition to his humanitarian objections, he also had others: he realised that a mercantile middle class was being attacked that would be sorely missed in the country&#x27;s economic development. He is believed to have been the author of the anonymous writing &quot;Notícias Recônditas do Modo de Proceder a Inquisição de Portugal com os seus Presos&quot;, which reveals a great deal about the inner workings of the Inquisitorial mechanism and which he delivered to Pope Clement X in favour of the cause of the persecuted of the Inquisition. The Inquisition was suspended by Clement X between 1674 and 1681. 

== Ending of the Inquisition in the 19th and 20th centuries ==
By decree of Napoleon&#x27;s government in 1797, the Inquisition in Venice was abolished in 1806.

In Portugal, in the wake of the Liberal Revolution of 1820, the &quot;General Extraordinary and Constituent Courts of the Portuguese Nation&quot; abolished the Portuguese Inquisition in 1821.

The wars of independence of the former Spanish colonies in the Americas concluded with the abolition of the Inquisition in every quarter of Hispanic America between 1813 and 1825.

The last execution of the Inquisition was in Spain in 1826. This was the execution by garroting of the Catalan school teacher Gaietà Ripoll for purportedly teaching Deism in his school. In Spain the practices of the Inquisition were finally outlawed in 1834.

In Italy, the restoration of the Pope as the ruler of the Papal States in 1814 brought back the Inquisition to the Papal States. It remained active there until the late-19th century, notably in the well-publicised Mortara affair (1858–1870).

In 1542, a putative governing institution, the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition was created.
This office survived as part of the Roman Curia, although it underwent a series of name changes. In 1908, it was renamed the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office. In 1965, it became the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. In 2022, this office was renamed the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith, as retained to the present day.

== See also ==
* &quot;Auto-da-fé&quot;
* Black Legend (Spain)
* Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition
* Cathars
* List of people executed in the Papal States
* Witch-cult hypothesis
* Witch trials in the early modern period
* Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith
* Historical revision of the Inquisition
* Marian Persecutions

===Documents and works===
* &quot;Directorium Inquisitorum&quot;
* &quot;Histoire de l&#x27;Inquisition en France&quot;
* &quot;Malleus Maleficarum&quot;

===Notable inquisitors===
* Grand Inquisitor
* Konrad von Marburg
* Tomás de Torquemada
* Bernard Gui

===Notable cases===
* Galileo affair
* Execution of Giordano Bruno
* Trial of Joan of Arc
* Edgardo Mortara
* Basque witch trials
* Caterina Tarongí
* Rosa Egipcíaca

===Repentance===
* List of apologies made by Pope John Paul II

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* Carroll, Warren H., &quot;Isabel: the Catholic Queen Front Royal&quot;, Virginia, 1991 (Christendom Press)
* 
* 
* Given, James B, &quot;Inquisition and Medieval Society&quot; (Cornell University Press, 2001)
* Kamen, Henry, &quot;The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision&quot;. (Yale University Press, 1999); . This revised edition of his 1965 original contributes to the understanding of the Spanish Inquisition in its local context.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Walsh, William Thomas, &quot;Characters of the Inquisition&quot; (TAN Books and Publishers, Inc, 1940/97); 

==External links==

* &quot;Malleus Maleficarum&quot; (a 1928 edition) in English and Latin – Publisher J. Rodker
* Frequently Asked Questions About the Inquisition by James Hannam
* Jewish Virtual Library on the Spanish Inquisition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="4" end="15" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31" end="49" title="Inquisitorial_system#History" label="judicial procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640717" start="60" end="81" title="Ecclesiastical_court" label="ecclesiastical judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="188" end="196" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="201" end="212" title="reformation" label="reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="267" end="273" title="Christian heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="275" end="283" title="apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="285" end="294" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="296" end="306" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="337" end="344" title="Deviance (sociology)" label="deviant"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="368" end="376" title="Violence" label="Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="389" end="396" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="598" end="605" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="760" end="777" title="life imprisonment" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="830" end="838" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="845" end="853" title="apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="857" end="863" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110587" start="888" end="900" title="Christianity in the 12th century" label="12th-century"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="901" end="918" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="943" end="950" title="Cathars" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="959" end="970" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553591" start="1065" end="1085" title="Medieval Inquisition" label="Medieval Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="1176" end="1182" title="france in the middle ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286938" start="1187" end="1192" title="Roman Inquisition" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="1206" end="1227" title="Fraticelli" label="Spiritual Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="1233" end="1241" title="Hussites" label="Hussites"/>
<link wikidata="Q147618" start="1251" end="1259" title="Beguines" label="Beguines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="1339" end="1354" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="1494" end="1513" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="1522" end="1544" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="1607" end="1621" title="New Christians" label="New Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="1625" end="1646" title="Converso" label="&amp;quot;Conversos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="1755" end="1763" title="Marranos" label="Marranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="1805" end="1812" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1877" end="1883" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1896" end="1907" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="2043" end="2057" title="armed uprising" label="armed uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="2095" end="2100" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="2105" end="2113" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2161" end="2167" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="2208" end="2223" title="Goa Inquisition" label="Goa Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171158" start="2229" end="2249" title="Peruvian Inquisition" label="Peruvian Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860021" start="2259" end="2278" title="Mexican Inquisition" label="Mexican Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="2324" end="2336" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286938" start="2355" end="2372" title="Roman Inquisition" label="Roman Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2444" end="2466" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="2484" end="2503" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="2552" end="2618" title="Dicastery_for_the_Doctrine_of_the_Faith" label="Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="2759" end="2774" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="2793" end="2830" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="Spanish American wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="2894" end="2905" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774410" start="3130" end="3170" title="Historical_revision_of_the_Inquisition" label="substantially revise their understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="3548" end="3556" title="Christian heresy" label="heretics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="3588" end="3620" title="canon law of the Catholic Church" label="canon law of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="3867" end="3881" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="3930" end="3939" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="3977" end="3993" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q40745" start="4149" end="4164" title="trial by ordeal" label="trial by ordeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q788874" start="4190" end="4205" title="trial by combat" label="trial by combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607269" start="4370" end="4394" title="Holy Child of La Guardia" label="Holy Child of La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="4779" end="4787" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774410" start="6134" end="6160" title="Historical_revision_of_the_Inquisition" label="revise their understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="6565" end="6575" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="6966" end="6982" title="death by burning" label="death by burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142427" start="7611" end="7635" title="Directorium Inquisitorum" label="Directorium Inquisitorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q548561" start="8854" end="8872" title="Jean-Pierre Dedieu" label="Jean-Pierre Dedieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q355251" start="9136" end="9150" title="Carlo Ginzburg" label="Carlo Ginzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="9423" end="9429" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="9688" end="9701" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q161443" start="9703" end="9716" title="Pope Siricius" label="Pope Siricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43689" start="9718" end="9734" title="Ambrose of Milan" label="Ambrose of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133704" start="9740" end="9755" title="Martin of Tours" label="Martin of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q347010" start="9791" end="9802" title="Priscillian" label="Priscillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="10172" end="10181" title="Catharism" label="Catharism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553591" start="10349" end="10370" title="Medieval Inquisition" label="Episcopal Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q182474" start="10378" end="10388" title="Pope Lucius III" label="Lucius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q345590" start="10411" end="10423" title="Ad abolendam" label="Ad Abolendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166035" start="10464" end="10473" title="contumacy" label="contumacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10522" end="10541" title="Vergentis in Senium" label="Vergentis in Senium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="10648" end="10660" title="Lèse-majesté" label="Lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="10802" end="10811" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q542518" start="10891" end="10910" title="Pierre de Castelnau" label="Pierre de Castelnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="10942" end="10961" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="Albigensian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992027" start="11028" end="11047" title="Council of Toulouse" label="Council of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="11101" end="11112" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q345664" start="11158" end="11171" title="Ad extirpanda" label="Ad extirpanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="11721" end="11729" title="apostasy" label="apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="11746" end="11758" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="11778" end="11785" title="Cathars" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="11813" end="11824" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="11996" end="12012" title="Pope Innocent IV" label="Pope Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="12020" end="12030" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q345664" start="12037" end="12050" title="Ad extirpanda" label="Ad extirpanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="12094" end="12102" title="tortures" label="tortures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12236" end="12247" title="Ut negotium" label="Ut negotium"/>
<link wikidata="Q164361" start="12281" end="12288" title="Absolution" label="absolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="12359" end="12374" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="12449" end="12464" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="12469" end="12485" title="Franciscan Order" label="Franciscan Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="12518" end="12525" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="12530" end="12537" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q25669" start="12694" end="12718" title="Inquisitorial system" label="inquisitorial procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q24349070" start="13051" end="13067" title="Grand Inquisitor" label="Grand Inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286938" start="13271" end="13288" title="Roman Inquisition" label="Roman Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="13316" end="13323" title="Catharism" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q112019" start="13341" end="13349" title="Sirmione" label="Sirmione"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="13379" end="13385" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="13492" end="13499" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="13653" end="13660" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="13919" end="13926" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="13953" end="13961" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="13983" end="13994" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968" start="14083" end="14088" title="Cuneo" label="Cuneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q681348" start="14125" end="14146" title="Marquisate of Saluzzo" label="Marquisate of Saluzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q867347" start="14911" end="14928" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Brescia" label="Bishop of Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q734317" start="14968" end="14980" title="Val Camonica" label="Val Camonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="15031" end="15050" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="Albigensian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="15130" end="15139" title="Catharism" label="Catharism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="15561" end="15570" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="15572" end="15580" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="15582" end="15593" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644550" start="15684" end="15697" title="Alpine region" label="Alpine region"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15942" end="15958" title=":fr:Robert le Bougre" label="Robert le Bougre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="16335" end="16340" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q17709185" start="17336" end="17351" title="Bernard de Caux" label="Bernard de Caux"/>
<link wikidata="Q343969" start="17516" end="17535" title="Alphonse, Count of Poitiers" label="Alfonso de Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500011" start="17792" end="17801" title="Lauragais" label="Lauragais"/>
<link wikidata="Q514994" start="17806" end="17812" title="Lavaur, Tarn" label="Lavaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q559219" start="19842" end="19853" title="Bernard Gui" label="Bernard Gui"/>
<link wikidata="Q170389" start="20423" end="20439" title="Jacques Fournier" label="Jacques Fournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q209834" start="20443" end="20450" title="Pamiers" label="Pamiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207610" start="20930" end="20936" title="Embrun, Hautes-Alpes" label="Embrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q490066" start="23673" end="23683" title="Angermünde" label="Angermünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729" start="23856" end="23862" title="Erfurt" label="Erfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033" start="23867" end="23877" title="Nordhausen, Thuringia" label="Nordhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="23960" end="23973" title="Baltic Germans" label="Baltic cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q502434" start="24857" end="24869" title="Sangerhausen" label="Sangerhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="25403" end="25412" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61019" start="25426" end="25441" title="Heinrich Kramer" label="Heinrich Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208556" start="25457" end="25476" title="Malleus Maleficarum" label="Malleus Maleficarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q77283" start="26633" end="26647" title="Friedrich Spee" label="Friedrich Spee"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="29112" end="29127" title="Al-Andalus" label="Islamic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="29279" end="29285" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="29307" end="29318" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="29346" end="29350" title="Kingdom of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="29352" end="29359" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="29365" end="29371" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q575970" start="29545" end="29557" title="anti-Judaism" label="anti-Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445232" start="29590" end="29606" title="Ferrand Martínez" label="Ferrand Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q633730" start="29608" end="29618" title="Archdeacon" label="Archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q273413" start="29622" end="29627" title="Écija" label="Écija"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="29636" end="29642" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890987" start="29652" end="29656" title="Massacre of 1391" label="1391"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="29660" end="29667" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="29707" end="29716" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="29810" end="29817" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="29819" end="29827" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="30681" end="30689" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="30821" end="30843" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="30861" end="30880" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="30957" end="30962" title="Other (philosophy)" label="other"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="31153" end="31160" title="Catharism" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="31168" end="31179" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="31363" end="31385" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="31396" end="31417" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="31434" end="31453" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="31660" end="31668" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="31792" end="31806" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="31812" end="31829" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="31951" end="31958" title="Morisco" label="Morisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="31967" end="31975" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="32023" end="32030" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468229" start="32055" end="32066" title="Crypto-Judaism" label="Crypto-Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="32072" end="32079" title="Marrano" label="Marrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="32256" end="32271" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Alhambra Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424558" start="32317" end="32344" title="Expulsion of Jews from Spain" label="expelled from Spain in 1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q210735" start="32346" end="32365" title="Tomás de Torquemada" label="Tomás de Torquemada"/>
<link wikidata="Q24349070" start="32393" end="32409" title="Grand Inquisitor" label="Grand Inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29045045" start="32574" end="32581" title="Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="32931" end="32954" title="King Philip II of Spain" label="King Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860021" start="33081" end="33087" title="Mexican Inquisition" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="33096" end="33115" title="Cartagena de Indias" label="Cartagena de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="33153" end="33157" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747501" start="33191" end="33197" title="Real Audiencia of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437292" start="33233" end="33246" title="Nueva Galicia" label="Nueva Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="33282" end="33291" title="Audiencia Real" label="Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="33296" end="33305" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="33382" end="33401" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171158" start="33407" end="33427" title="Peruvian Inquisition" label="Peruvian Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="33506" end="33512" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q235513" start="33664" end="33699" title="Maria Cristina of Naples and Sicily" label="Maria Cristina of Naples and Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="33820" end="33828" title="João III" label="João III"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="33830" end="33838" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="33849" end="33859" title="Pope Leo X" label="Pope Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="33946" end="33959" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34313" end="34330" title="the Sephardi Jews" label="the Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q209966" start="34452" end="34462" title="auto-da-fé" label="auto-da-fé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="34529" end="34532" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="34536" end="34550" title="New Christians" label="New Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="34563" end="34572" title="conversos" label="conversos"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="34588" end="34596" title="marranos" label="marranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="34726" end="34736" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="34742" end="34745" title="Goa Inquisition" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="34897" end="34905" title="John III of Portugal" label="João III"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="34969" end="34979" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="34981" end="34991" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="34993" end="35003" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q720243" start="35009" end="35015" title="bigamy" label="bigamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q325867" start="35193" end="35210" title="Henry Charles Lea" label="Henry Charles Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="35248" end="35254" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="35256" end="35261" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q45412" start="35263" end="35270" title="Coimbra" label="Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q179948" start="35276" end="35281" title="Évora" label="Évora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="35598" end="35613" title="Goa Inquisition" label="Goa Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="35644" end="35664" title="John III of Portugal" label="John III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="35727" end="35733" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="35741" end="35755" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="35772" end="35785" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="35831" end="35838" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="35901" end="35909" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="35913" end="35918" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="36087" end="36092" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="36096" end="36102" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36262" end="36268" title="Sabaio" label="Sabaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="36319" end="36330" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="36345" end="36360" title="colonial Brazil" label="colonial Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294672" start="36417" end="36431" title="Rosa Egipcíaca" label="Rosa Egipcíaca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36627" end="36679" title="Sagrada Teologia do Amor Divino das Almas Peregrinas" label="Sagrada Teologia do Amor Divino das Almas Peregrinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="36721" end="36743" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="36844" end="36864" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Renaissance humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="37272" end="37295" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="37301" end="37323" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q163891" start="37340" end="37375" title="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day massacre" label="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q386359" start="37429" end="37465" title="Sacra congregatio de propaganda fide" label="Sacra congregatio de propaganda fide"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="37489" end="37508" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="37567" end="37576" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="37697" end="37710" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="37819" end="37828" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517983" start="38100" end="38123" title="Galileo affair" label="Galileo Galilei in 1633"/>
<link wikidata="Q209966" start="38327" end="38337" title="auto-da-fé" label="auto-da-fé"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="38345" end="38352" title="Penance" label="Penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="38882" end="38890" title="marranos" label="marranos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38912" end="38935" title="Papal States#Napoleonic era" label="French invasion of 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="39279" end="39289" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078683" start="39400" end="39412" title="Germanic law" label="Germanic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q169915" start="39902" end="39919" title="Pope Alexander IV" label="Pope Alexander IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="40244" end="40255" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="40261" end="40278" title="Hundred Years War" label="Hundred Years War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="40349" end="40363" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="40523" end="40545" title="Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="40550" end="40569" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="40718" end="40724" title="Martin Luther" label="Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q222123" start="41665" end="41685" title="Henry, King of Portugal" label="Cardinal D. Henrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q319511" start="41730" end="41747" title="Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo, 1st Marquis of Pombal" label="Marquis of Pombal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409006" start="41940" end="41957" title="Diego de Simancas" label="Diego de Simancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61019" start="42460" end="42475" title="Heinrich Kramer" label="Heinrich Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161351" start="42691" end="42709" title="Pope Innocent VIII" label="Pope Innocent VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q46613" start="42783" end="42790" title="North Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064618" start="42949" end="42961" title="Summis desiderantes affectibus" label="some support"/>
<link wikidata="Q161351" start="42967" end="42985" title="Pope Innocent VIII" label="Pope Innocent VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q208556" start="43300" end="43319" title="Malleus Maleficarum" label="Malleus Maleficarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q54096" start="43666" end="43687" title="University of Cologne" label="University of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q718567" start="46744" end="46760" title="Nicholas Eymerich" label="Nicolás Aymerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q345664" start="47382" end="47395" title="Ad extirpanda" label="Ad extirpanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545625" start="47552" end="47561" title="Strappado" label="Strappado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351382" start="47761" end="47765" title="Rack (torture)" label="Rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604851" start="48077" end="48087" title="Water cure (torture)" label="Water cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552748" start="48102" end="48116" title="Waterboarding" label="water boarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347288" start="50064" end="50097" title="Interrogational torture" label="ineffective in obtaining evidence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50356" end="50373" title="Helen Mary Carrel" label="Helen Mary Carrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="51608" end="51621" title="Dark Ages (historiography)" label="Dark Age myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="51670" end="51683" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740670" start="51766" end="51793" title="Foxe&amp;#x27;s Book of Martyrs" label="Foxe&amp;#x27;s Book of Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="52098" end="52116" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420791" start="52149" end="52206" title="Ottoman–Venetian wars" label="war between the Ottoman Empire and the Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689290" start="52210" end="52222" title="Head crusher" label="Head crusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="52290" end="52297" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="52387" end="52401" title="prince-elector" label="prince-elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="52532" end="52541" title="parlement" label="parlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639393" start="52608" end="52622" title="Wooden horse (device)" label="Spanish donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="52693" end="52712" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="52830" end="52844" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968279" start="52879" end="52895" title="Protestantism in Germany" label="Reformed Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="52904" end="52918" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Bohemian Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="52921" end="52931" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="52937" end="52957" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="52963" end="52977" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="52987" end="53000" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="53100" end="53135" title="Spanish Black Legend" label="&amp;quot;Black Legend&amp;quot; propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172972" start="53212" end="53222" title="Thumbscrew (torture)" label="Thumbscrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="53301" end="53314" title="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley" label="William Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="53318" end="53325" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="53346" end="53357" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="53447" end="53469" title="Protestant reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="53501" end="53507" title="Slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q196753" start="53511" end="53518" title="Death by sawing" label="The saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="53679" end="53693" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="53699" end="53715" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="53724" end="53742" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815517" start="53746" end="53761" title="Pear of anguish" label="Pear of anguish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53941" end="53953" title="Chris Bishop (historian)" label="Chris Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q653096" start="54104" end="54116" title="Boot (torture)" label="Spanish Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="54176" end="54184" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="54263" end="54270" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="54303" end="54309" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q97432" start="54461" end="54486" title="Johann Philipp Siebenkees" label="Johann Philipp Siebenkees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54516" end="54536" title="Nuremberg parliament" label="Nuremberg parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q685366" start="54589" end="54600" title="Iron maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q994476" start="54884" end="54897" title="Breast ripper" label="Breast ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="54973" end="54980" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="55052" end="55069" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484064" start="55593" end="55599" title="Stocks" label="Stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="55665" end="55671" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q874538" start="55781" end="55792" title="Brazen bull" label="bronze bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="55809" end="55820" title="Ancient history" label="Ancient Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230940" start="56002" end="56021" title="Scold&amp;#x27;s bridle" label="Scold&amp;#x27;s bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295415" start="56179" end="56194" title="Rat torture" label="dungeon of rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q689281" start="56252" end="56271" title="John Lothrop Motley" label="John Lothrop Motley"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="56347" end="56372" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Dutch war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="56422" end="56439" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="56446" end="56457" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="56479" end="56494" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q653096" start="56583" end="56588" title="Boot (torture)" label="Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q877119" start="58525" end="58539" title="Walter Ullmann" label="Walter Ullmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59086" end="59101" title="António José Saraiva" label="A. José Saraiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q36097" start="59184" end="59193" title="The Trial" label="The Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="59201" end="59211" title="show trial" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447014" start="59488" end="59497" title="Sanbenito" label="sambenito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="59571" end="59581" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="59595" end="59601" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q345664" start="59719" end="59732" title="Ad extirpanda" label="Ad Extirpanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q186240" start="60125" end="60134" title="ostracism" label="ostracism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="60502" end="60516" title="Church Fathers" label="church fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="60577" end="60590" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="61076" end="61080" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="62258" end="62272" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="62363" end="62379" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa theologica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63046" end="63060" title="Luis de Páramo" label="Luis de Páramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="63150" end="63162" title="Jesus" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="63235" end="63251" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="63260" end="63268" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="63376" end="63383" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261345" start="63398" end="63428" title="Parable of the wheat and tares" label="Parable of the wheat and tares"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="63474" end="63489" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q203204" start="63532" end="63540" title="Donatism" label="Donatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q63393" start="64428" end="64446" title="Konrad von Marburg" label="Konrad von Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869" start="64580" end="64587" title="Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15818579" start="64721" end="64737" title="William Arnaud (inquisitor)" label="Guillaume Arnaud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64742" end="64766" title="Étienne de Saint-Thibéry" label="Étienne de Saint-Thibéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q238744" start="64793" end="64808" title="Peter of Verona" label="Peter of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64942" end="64965" title="Christine Caldwell Ames" label="Christine Caldwell Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q260320" start="65095" end="65100" title="Steyr" label="Steyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q800104" start="65123" end="65137" title="Petrus Zwicker" label="Petrus Zwicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759654" start="65466" end="65483" title="Bernard Délicieux" label="Bernard Délicieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="65527" end="65536" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="65865" end="65870" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="65875" end="65879" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="66019" end="66033" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320905" start="66363" end="66381" title="Alonso III Fonseca" label="Alonso III Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="66402" end="66410" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187847" start="66417" end="66432" title="Juan de Vergara" label="Juan de Vergara"/>
<link wikidata="Q342392" start="66434" end="66442" title="Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros" label="Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="66523" end="66541" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q954676" start="66714" end="66737" title="Alonso Manrique de Lara" label="Alonso Manrique de Lara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66742" end="66749" title="Erasmus#Fates_of_friends" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q458650" start="66772" end="66786" title="António Vieira" label="António Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q155956" start="67843" end="67852" title="Pope Clement X" label="Clement X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822923" start="68176" end="68202" title="Liberal Revolution of 1820" label="Liberal Revolution of 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="68252" end="68257" title="Court" label="Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="68341" end="68361" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="68477" end="68493" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="Q840649" start="68604" end="68613" title="garroting" label="garroting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="68621" end="68628" title="Catalonia" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773239" start="68644" end="68657" title="Cayetano Ripoll" label="Gaietà Ripoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="68683" end="68688" title="Deism" label="Deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="68836" end="68848" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q108126419" start="68992" end="69006" title="Mortara affair" label="Mortara affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="69068" end="69134" title="Dicastery_for_the_Doctrine_of_the_Faith" label="Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="69184" end="69195" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="69273" end="69319" title="Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office" label="Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="69344" end="69386" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="69425" end="69464" title="Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q209966" start="69522" end="69532" title="Auto-da-fé" label="Auto-da-fé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="69541" end="69561" title="Black Legend (Spain)" label="Black Legend (Spain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624412" start="69564" end="69603" title="Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition" label="Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="69606" end="69613" title="Cathars" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632197" start="69616" end="69659" title="List of people executed in the Papal States" label="List of people executed in the Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457005" start="69662" end="69683" title="Witch-cult hypothesis" label="Witch-cult hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147871" start="69686" end="69725" title="Witch trials in the early modern period" label="Witch trials in the early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="69728" end="69767" title="Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774410" start="69770" end="69808" title="Historical revision of the Inquisition" label="Historical revision of the Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117930" start="69811" end="69830" title="Marian Persecutions" label="Marian Persecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142427" start="69866" end="69890" title="Directorium Inquisitorum" label="Directorium Inquisitorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136898" start="69905" end="69945" title="Histoire de l&amp;#x27;Inquisition en France" label="Histoire de l&amp;#x27;Inquisition en France"/>
<link wikidata="Q208556" start="69960" end="69979" title="Malleus Maleficarum" label="Malleus Maleficarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24349070" start="70015" end="70031" title="Grand Inquisitor" label="Grand Inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q63393" start="70034" end="70052" title="Konrad von Marburg" label="Konrad von Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q210735" start="70055" end="70074" title="Tomás de Torquemada" label="Tomás de Torquemada"/>
<link wikidata="Q559219" start="70077" end="70088" title="Bernard Gui" label="Bernard Gui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517983" start="70112" end="70126" title="Galileo affair" label="Galileo affair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70129" end="70156" title="Giordano Bruno#Imprisonment, trial and execution, 1593–1600" label="Execution of Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201115" start="70159" end="70179" title="Trial of Joan of Arc" label="Trial of Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q108126419" start="70182" end="70197" title="Edgardo Mortara" label="Edgardo Mortara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822327" start="70200" end="70219" title="Basque witch trials" label="Basque witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q9639998" start="70222" end="70238" title="Caterina Tarongí" label="Caterina Tarongí"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294672" start="70241" end="70255" title="Rosa Egipcíaca" label="Rosa Egipcíaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606040" start="70276" end="70319" title="List of apologies made by Pope John Paul II" label="List of apologies made by Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371081" start="70361" end="70379" title="Warren H. Carroll" label="Carroll, Warren H."/>
<link wikidata="Q1341781" start="70572" end="70584" title="Henry Kamen" label="Kamen, Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019355" start="70838" end="70859" title="William Thomas Walsh" label="Walsh, William Thomas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15192" wikidata="Q671872" url="?curid=15192" title="Isaac">
<text>Isaac is one of the three patriarchs of the Israelites and an important figure in the Abrahamic religions, including Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Isaac first appears in the Torah, in which he is the son of Abraham and Sarah, the father of Jacob and Esau, and the grandfather of the twelve tribes of Israel. 

Isaac&#x27;s name means &quot;he will laugh&quot;, reflecting the laughter, in disbelief, of Abraham and Sarah, when told by God that they would have a child. He is the only patriarch whose name was not changed, and the only one who did not move out of Canaan. According to the narrative, he died aged 180, the longest-lived of the three patriarchs.

Recent scholarship has discussed the possibility that Isaac could have originally been an ancestor from the Beersheba region who was venerated at a sanctuary.

==Etymology==
The anglicized name &quot;Isaac&quot; is a transliteration of the Hebrew name () which literally means &quot;He laughs/will laugh&quot;. Ugaritic texts dating from the 13th century BCE refer to the benevolent smile of the Canaanite deity El. &quot; Genesis&quot; ascribes the laughter to Isaac&#x27;s parents, Abraham and Sarah, instead. According to the biblical narrative, Abraham fell on his face and laughed when God (Hebrew, ) imparted the news of their son&#x27;s eventual birth. He laughed because Sarah was past the age of childbearing; both she and Abraham were advanced in age. Later, when Sarah overheard three messengers of the Lord renew the promise, she laughed inwardly for the same reason. Sarah denied laughing when God questioned Abraham about it.

==Genesis narrative==

===Birth===
After God changes Abram and Sarai&#x27;s names to &quot;Abraham&quot; and &quot;Sarah&quot;, he tells Abraham that he will bear a second son by Sarah named Isaac, with whom a new covenant would be established. In response, Abraham began to laugh, as both he and Sarah were well beyond natural child-bearing age. Some time later, three men who Abraham identifies as messengers of God visit him and Sarah, and Abraham treats them to food and niceties. They repeat the prophecy that Sarah would bear a child, promising Isaac&#x27;s birth within a year&#x27;s time, at which point Sarah laughs in disbelief. God questions why the pair laughed in disbelief at his words, and if it is because they believe such things were not within his power. Now afraid, they futilely deny ever having laughed at God&#x27;s words.

Time passes as Isaac is born. Isaac was Abraham&#x27;s second son and firstborn of Sarah who was then Sarai. Sarai had been barren for a long time and sought a way to fulfill God&#x27;s promise that Abram would be father of many nations, especially since they had grown old, so she offered Hagar to Abram to be his concubine.

On the eighth day from his birth, Isaac was circumcised, as was necessary for all males of Abraham&#x27;s household, in order to be in compliance with the Jewish covenant.

After Isaac had been weaned, Sarah saw Ishmael playing with or mocking him (the Hebrew term is ambiguous), and urged her husband to cast out Hagar the bondservant and her son, so that Isaac would be Abraham&#x27;s sole heir. Abraham was hesitant, but at God&#x27;s order he listened to his wife&#x27;s request.

===Binding===

At some point in Isaac&#x27;s youth, his father Abraham took him to Mount Moriah. At God&#x27;s command as the last of ten trials to test his faith, Abraham was to build a sacrificial altar and sacrifice his son Isaac upon it. After he had bound his son to the altar and drawn his knife to kill him, at the last moment an angel of God prevented Abraham from proceeding. Instead, he was directed to sacrifice a nearby ram that was stuck in thickets.

===Family life===
Before Isaac was 40 (Genesis 25:20), Abraham sent Eliezer, his steward, into Mesopotamia to find a wife for Isaac, from his nephew Bethuel&#x27;s family. Eliezer chose the Aramean Rebekah for Isaac. After many years of marriage to Isaac, Rebekah had still not given birth to a child and was believed to be barren. Isaac prayed for her and she conceived. Rebekah gave birth to twin boys, Esau and Jacob. Isaac was 60 years old when his two sons were born. Isaac favored Esau, and Rebekah favored Jacob.

The narratives about Isaac do not mention his having concubines.

===Migration===
Isaac moved to &quot;Beer-lahai-roi&quot; after his father died. When the land experienced famine, he moved to the Philistine land of Gerar where his father once lived. This land was still under the control of King Abimelech as it was in the days of Abraham. Like his father, Isaac also pretended that Rebekah was his sister due to fear that Abimelech would kill him in order to take her. He had gone back to all of the wells that his father dug and saw that they were all stopped up with earth. The Philistines did this after Abraham died. So, Isaac unearthed them and began to dig for more wells all the way to Beersheba, where he made a pact with Abimelech, just like in the day of his father.

===Birthright===
Isaac grew old and became blind. He called his son Esau and directed him to procure some venison for him, in order to receive Isaac&#x27;s blessing. While Esau was hunting, Jacob, after listening to his mother&#x27;s advice, deceived his blind father by misrepresenting himself as Esau and thereby obtained his father&#x27;s blessing, such that Jacob became Isaac&#x27;s primary heir and Esau was left in an inferior position. According to Genesis 25:29–34, Esau had previously sold his birthright to Jacob for &quot;bread and stew of lentils&quot;. Thereafter, Isaac sent Jacob into Mesopotamia to take a wife of his mother&#x27;s brother&#x27;s house. After 20 years working for his uncle Laban, Jacob returned home. He reconciled with his twin brother Esau, then he and Esau buried their father, Isaac, in Hebron after he died at the age of 180.

==Burial site==
According to local tradition, the graves of Isaac and Rebekah, along with the graves of Abraham and Sarah and Jacob and Leah, are in the Cave of the Patriarchs.

==Jewish views==
In rabbinical tradition, the age of Isaac at the time of binding is taken to be 37, which contrasts with common portrayals of Isaac as a child. The rabbis also thought that the reason for the death of Sarah was the news of the intended sacrifice of Isaac. The sacrifice of Isaac is cited in appeals for the mercy of God in later Jewish traditions. The post-biblical Jewish interpretations often elaborate the role of Isaac beyond the biblical description and primarily focus on Abraham&#x27;s intended sacrifice of Isaac, called the (&quot;binding&quot;). According to a version of these interpretations, Isaac died in the sacrifice and was revived. According to many accounts of Aggadah, unlike the Bible, it is Satan who is testing Isaac as an agent of God. Isaac&#x27;s willingness to follow God&#x27;s command at the cost of his death has been a model for many Jews who preferred martyrdom to violation of the Jewish law.

According to the Jewish tradition, Isaac instituted the afternoon prayer. This tradition is based on Genesis chapter 24, verse 63 (&quot;Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide&quot;).

Isaac was the only patriarch who stayed in Canaan during his whole life and though once he tried to leave, God told him not to do so. Rabbinic tradition gave the explanation that Isaac was almost sacrificed and anything dedicated as a sacrifice may not leave the Land of Israel. Isaac was the oldest of the biblical patriarchs at the time of his death, and the only patriarch whose name was not changed.

Rabbinic literature also linked Isaac&#x27;s blindness in old age, as stated in the Bible, to the sacrificial binding: Isaac&#x27;s eyes went blind because the tears of angels present at the time of his sacrifice fell on Isaac&#x27;s eyes.

==Christian views==
The early Christian church continued and developed the New Testament theme of Isaac as a type of Christ and the Church being both &quot;the son of the promise&quot; and the &quot;father of the faithful&quot;. Tertullian draws a parallel between Isaac&#x27;s bearing the wood for the sacrificial fire with Christ&#x27;s carrying his cross. and there was a general agreement that, while all the sacrifices of the Old Law were anticipations of that on Calvary, the sacrifice of Isaac was so &quot;in a pre-eminent way&quot;.

The Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church consider Isaac as a saint along with other biblical patriarchs. Along with those of other patriarchs and the Old Testament Righteous, his feast day is celebrated in the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Byzantine rite of the Catholic Church on the Second Sunday before Christmas (December 11–17), under the title &quot;the Sunday of the Forefathers&quot;.

Isaac is commemorated in the Catholic Church on 25 March or on 17 December.

===New Testament===
The New Testament states Isaac was &quot;offered up&quot; by his father Abraham, and that Isaac blessed his sons. Paul contrasted Isaac, symbolizing Christian liberty, with the rejected older son Ishmael, symbolizing slavery; Hagar is associated with the Sinai covenant, while Sarah is associated with the covenant of grace, into which her son Isaac enters. The Epistle of James chapter 2, verses 21–24, states that the sacrifice of Isaac shows that justification (in the Johannine sense) requires both faith and works.

In the Epistle to the Hebrews, Abraham&#x27;s willingness to follow God&#x27;s command to sacrifice Isaac is used as an example of faith as is Isaac&#x27;s action in blessing Jacob and Esau with reference to the future promised by God to Abraham. In verse 19, the author views the release of Isaac from sacrifice as analogous to the resurrection of Jesus, the idea of the sacrifice of Isaac being a prefigurement of the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross.

==Islamic views==

Isaac is mentioned seventeen times by name in the Quran, often with his father and his son, Jacob. The Quran states that Abraham received &quot;good tidings of Isaac, a prophet, of the righteous&quot;, and that God blessed them both (). In a fuller description, when angels came to Abraham to tell him of the future punishment to be imposed on Sodom and Gomorrah, his wife, Sarah, &quot;laughed, and We gave her good tidings of Isaac, and after Isaac of (a grandson) Jacob&quot; (); and it is further explained that this event will take place despite Abraham and Sarah&#x27;s old age. Several verses speak of Isaac as a &quot;gift&quot; to Abraham (6:84; 14:49–50), and 24:26–27 adds that God made &quot;prophethood and the Book to be among his offspring&quot;, which has been interpreted to refer to Abraham&#x27;s two prophetic sons, his prophetic grandson Jacob, and his prophetic great-grandson Joseph. In the Quran, it later narrates that Abraham also praised God for giving him Ishmael and Isaac in his old age ().

Elsewhere in the Quran, Isaac is mentioned in lists: Joseph follows the religion of his forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob () and speaks of God&#x27;s favor to them (); Jacob&#x27;s sons all testify their faith and promise to worship the God that their forefathers, &quot;Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac&quot;, worshiped (); and the Quran commands Muslims to believe in the revelations that were given to &quot;Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Patriarchs&quot; (; ). In the Quran&#x27;s narrative of Abraham&#x27;s near-sacrifice of his son (), the name of the son is not mentioned and debate has continued over the son&#x27;s identity, though many feel that the identity is the least important element in a story which is given to show the courage that one develops through faith.

===Quran===
The Quran mentions Isaac as a prophet and a righteous man of God. Isaac and Jacob are mentioned as being bestowed upon Abraham as gifts of God, who then worshipped God only and were righteous leaders in the way of God:


==Academic views==
Some scholars have described Isaac as &quot;a legendary figure&quot; or &quot;as a figure representing tribal history, or &quot;as a seminomadic leader&quot;. The stories of Isaac, like other patriarchal stories of Genesis, are generally believed to have &quot;their origin in folk memories and oral traditions of the early Hebrew pastoralist experience&quot;. &quot;The Cambridge Companion to the Bible&quot; makes the following comment on the biblical stories of the patriarchs:

According to Martin Noth, a scholar of the Hebrew Bible, the narratives of Isaac date back to an older cultural stage than that of the West-Jordanian Jacob. At that era, the Israelite tribes were not yet sedentary. In the course of looking for grazing areas, they had come in contact in southern Philistia with the inhabitants of the settled countryside. It has also been argued that the form of Isaac&#x27;s name as found in the Hebrew Bible is most frequently attested in the early 2nd millennium BCE rather than in later periods. In the Amorite language, a cognate form of his name is attested as &quot;ia-aṣ-ḫa-qí?-im&quot;. The biblical historian A. Jopsen believes in the connection between the Isaac traditions and the north, and in support of this theory adduces Amos 7:9 (&quot;the high places of Isaac&quot;).

Albrecht Alt and Martin Noth hold that, &quot;The figure of Isaac was enhanced when the theme of promise, previously bound to the cults of the &#x27;God the Fathers&#x27; was incorporated into the Israelite creed during the southern-Palestinian stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition.&quot; According to Martin Noth, at the Southern Palestinian stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition, Isaac became established as one of the biblical patriarchs, but his traditions were receded in the favor of Abraham.

Israel Finkelstein and Thomas Römer have proposed that Isaac might be the ancestor worshipped in Beersheba and the oldest tradition about him might be an ancestor myth dating back to at least 8th century BCE as shown in Amos 7:9, while proposing that the story about him conflicting with Abimelech, king of Gerar, and Philistines, which is the story that has possibility that Abraham cycle could have vampirized or vice versa, could have been originated and have background in 7th century BCE, and could be made to aim at justifying and legitimizing the claim of Judah over the Judahite territories that are transferred to the Philistine cities by Sennacherib because of several reasons: it was time when Gerar (Tel Haror) had the special importance and fortified Assyrian administration center; there was king of Ashdod, Ahimilki, whose name is similar to that of Abimelech; the Kingdom of Judah could have gotten back parts of Judahite territories while Judah was a compliant vassal of Assyria under Manasseh. In addition, Finkelstein and Römer proposed that Abraham might be the ancestor worshipped in Hebron, and Jacob might be the ancestor worshipped in Israel, but the earliest tradition of Jacob, the tradition about him and his uncle Laban the Aramean establishing the border between them, might be originated in Gilead.

==In art==
The earliest Christian portrayal of Isaac is found in the Roman catacomb frescoes. Excluding the fragments, Alison Moore Smith classifies these artistic works in three categories:

==See also==

* Biblical and Quranic narratives
* Testament of Isaac
* Wife–sister narratives in the Book of Genesis – three such narratives, involving Abraham (two) and Isaac (one)

==Notes==
==Citations==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Isaac in &quot;The Jewish Encyclopedia&quot;
* &quot;Abraham&#x27;s son as the intended sacrifice (Al-Dhabih, Qur&#x27;an 37:99, Qur&#x27;an 37:99–113): Issues in qur&#x27;anic exegesis&quot;, &quot;Journal of Semitic Studies&quot; XXX1V/ Spring 1989
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q671872" start="0" end="5" title="Isaac" label="Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189541" start="26" end="36" title="patriarchs (Bible)" label="patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="44" end="54" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="86" end="105" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="117" end="124" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="126" end="138" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="144" end="149" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="178" end="183" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="211" end="218" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q194808" start="223" end="228" title="Sarah" label="Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="244" end="249" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q220822" start="254" end="258" title="Esau" label="Esau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605404" start="287" end="310" title="Twelve Tribes of Israel" label="twelve tribes of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="567" end="573" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="773" end="782" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q29553" start="813" end="822" title="sanctuary" label="sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="843" end="853" title="anglicized" label="anglicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="905" end="911" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q36928" start="976" end="984" title="Ugaritic language" label="Ugaritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914567" start="1061" end="1070" title="Canaanite religion" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316633" start="1077" end="1079" title="El (deity)" label="El"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="1088" end="1095" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="1149" end="1156" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q194808" start="1161" end="1166" title="Sarah" label="Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="1743" end="1750" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q194808" start="1785" end="1790" title="Sarah" label="Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q214617" start="2743" end="2748" title="Hagar" label="Hagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311376" start="2824" end="2835" title="Religious male circumcision" label="circumcised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2935" end="2941" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q183403" start="2992" end="2999" title="Ishmael" label="Ishmael"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978866" start="3354" end="3360" title="Moriah" label="Moriah"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="3602" end="3607" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26885680" start="3798" end="3805" title="Eliezer" label="Eliezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="3825" end="3836" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579827" start="3879" end="3886" title="Bethuel" label="Bethuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151255" start="3920" end="3927" title="Aramean" label="Aramean"/>
<link wikidata="Q40520" start="3928" end="3935" title="Rebecca" label="Rebekah"/>
<link wikidata="Q220822" start="4135" end="4139" title="Esau" label="Esau"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="4144" end="4149" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4354" end="4368" title="Abraham#Hagar" label="Beer-lahai-roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193776" start="4448" end="4458" title="Philistines" label="Philistine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510126" start="4467" end="4472" title="Gerar" label="Gerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343803" start="4543" end="4557" title="Abimelech" label="King Abimelech"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="4946" end="4955" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q840401" start="5739" end="5744" title="Laban (Bible)" label="Laban"/>
<link wikidata="Q40520" start="5968" end="5975" title="Rebecca" label="Rebekah"/>
<link wikidata="Q128847" start="6034" end="6038" title="Leah" label="Leah"/>
<link wikidata="Q204200" start="6051" end="6073" title="Cave of the Patriarchs" label="Cave of the Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="6096" end="6116" title="Rabbinic literature" label="rabbinical tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="6241" end="6246" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q124256052" start="6400" end="6412" title="Atonement in Judaism" label="mercy of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6422" end="6428" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q393148" start="6773" end="6780" title="Aggadah" label="Aggadah"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="6806" end="6811" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155501" start="6848" end="6851" title="God in Judaism" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="6977" end="6983" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="7007" end="7017" title="halakha" label="Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="7241" end="7250" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="7485" end="7499" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="7892" end="7914" title="Early Christianity" label="early Christian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="8097" end="8107" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="8415" end="8438" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="8489" end="8494" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189541" start="8512" end="8531" title="biblical patriarchs" label="biblical patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8853" end="8868" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="8925" end="8938" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9070" end="9087" title="Adiaphora#Christianity" label="Christian liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="9176" end="9181" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q131097" start="9283" end="9299" title="Epistle of James" label="Epistle of James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329596" start="9393" end="9402" title="Johannine" label="Johannine"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="9449" end="9471" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="9775" end="9796" title="resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="9888" end="9893" title="Christian cross" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="9965" end="9970" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="10182" end="10187" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="10259" end="10277" title="Sodom and Gomorrah" label="Sodom and Gomorrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q194808" start="10289" end="10294" title="Sarah" label="Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="10604" end="10607" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q563644" start="10814" end="10820" title="Joseph in Islam" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="10829" end="10834" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="11282" end="11288" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="11796" end="11799" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="12021" end="12027" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="12078" end="12084" title="tribe" label="tribal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="12108" end="12119" title="nomad" label="seminomadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="12306" end="12317" title="Pastoralism" label="pastoralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q64966" start="12470" end="12481" title="Martin Noth" label="Martin Noth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="12631" end="12640" title="Israelite" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185566" start="12753" end="12762" title="Philistia" label="Philistia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35941" start="12997" end="13013" title="Amorite language" label="Amorite language"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="13017" end="13024" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q174677" start="13228" end="13232" title="Book of Amos" label="Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q84895" start="13278" end="13290" title="Albrecht Alt" label="Albrecht Alt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="13550" end="13560" title="Torah" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q726264" start="13799" end="13817" title="Israel Finkelstein" label="Israel Finkelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525535" start="13822" end="13834" title="Thomas Römer" label="Thomas Römer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="13896" end="13905" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q207140" start="14447" end="14458" title="Sennacherib" label="Sennacherib"/>
<link wikidata="Q770842" start="14511" end="14520" title="Tel Haror" label="Tel Haror"/>
<link wikidata="Q171639" start="14613" end="14619" title="Ashdod" label="Ashdod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156328" start="14801" end="14809" title="Manasseh of Judah" label="Manasseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="15198" end="15212" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Roman catacomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="15213" end="15219" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q112035179" start="15337" end="15368" title="Biblical and Quranic narratives" label="Biblical and Quranic narratives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985200" start="15371" end="15389" title="Testament of Isaac" label="Testament of Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999491" start="15392" end="15437" title="Wife–sister narratives in the Book of Genesis" label="Wife–sister narratives in the Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q653922" start="15596" end="15619" title="The Jewish Encyclopedia" label="The Jewish Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15193" wikidata="Q980206" url="?curid=15193" title="Italian Football League">
<text>Italian Football League (IFL; the name is in English) is the top level American football league in Italy first established in 1978. The first recognized league champion was crowned in 1980.

The annual final playoff game to determine the league champion is called the Italian Bowl, that awards, for American football, the title of &quot;champion of Italy&quot; and the &quot;scudetto&quot;.

==Background==
In Italy, the first American football game took place in Genoa on 27 November 1913 when the teams of the USS Connecticut and USS Kansas faced each other, two of the 14 ships of the American Great White Fleet temporarily docked in the Ligurian port during an exercise cruise in the Mediterranean Sea. USS Connecticut won 17–6.

After this sporadic appearance, American football returned to Italy with the Allied troops during World War II. American football followed the advance of the US units from the south to the north of the Italian peninsula. On 23 November 1944, a touch football match was played at the Stadio della Vittoria in Bari, between the Playboys and the Technical School. The trophy, called the &quot;Bambino Bowl&quot;, was won by the Technical School 13–0 in front of an audience of 5,000.

A little over a month later, the Spaghetti Bowl was held in Florence in front of 25,000 people on New Year&#x27;s Day 1945 between the Bridgebusters (representatives of the Twelfth Air Force) and the Mudders (United States Army North); the Mudders won 20–0. Although probably other matches were played in those years of which no documentation remains, the first in peacetime, took place in Trieste, the last territory liberated from the Nazi-Fascists, in January 1948. The match was organized by the Trieste United States Troops and saw the SP&#x27;S prevail over D Company by &quot;three touchdowns&quot; (then 21–0).

==History==
In the 1970s teams formed and played in Italy. The first American football championship organized in Italy, which was never recognized by the federation, took place in 1977 and was won by the . 

Among the games played in the 1970s there was the first official match played between Italian American football teams in preparation for the first championship officially recognized by the federation; played on 24 June 1978 at the Stadio Carlo Speroni in Busto Arsizio, it was won 36–0 by the Rhinos Milano over the Gallarate Frogs.

In 1980 the first official American football league in Italy was established and crowned a champion. This championship did not include a final and was won by . However, the title of first champions of Italy was recognized to the Lupi only in 2016.
The Italian league (Series A) in the late 1970s and early 1980s, was one of the first leagues in Europe to sign professional import players and coaches from the USA. The league had good popularity in the early years especially the late 1980s and early 1990s with reported attendance of nearly 20,000 fans for a Series A league final championship game in that time period. American Football in Italy has had ups and downs since that time but has always had a competitive league with different lower levels playing below the Italian Football League (IFL). 
The new IFL was founded in 2007, taking over previous league&#x27;s significance called (National Football League Italy). The league was born as a result of the escape of several of the best clubs of the old championship organized by the Italian federation, such as Milano Rhinos, Parma Panthers, Bologna Doves and Bolzano Giants. However some of the historic Italian clubs have not joined the new league and continue to participate in different tournaments organized by other federations. 

In the following years a lot of teams moved to the (the federation the IFL belongs to) and most of the biggest teams are now again part of the IFL that is the First Division or in the other two divisions. 

The Bergamo Lions have won the most Italian Super Bowl league championships winning 12 finals.

On Saturday, July 1, 2023, Italian Bowl XLII was played at the Glass Bowl Stadium on the campus of The University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA. This marked the first Italian Football League Championship held outside of Europe. The Parma Panthers won the game played in front of nearly 10,000 fans, and was televised in the United States.

== IFL teams ==

*Ancona Dolphins (2008–present) 
*Bergamo Lions (2008–10, 2012, 2014–2019) 
*Bologna Doves (2008–09, 2011–12) (now in III Division)
*Bologna Warriors (2009–present)
*Bolzano Giants (2008–2020)
*Catania Elephants (2008–12) (now in II Division)
*Deamons Cernusco (2012)
*Ferrara Aquile (2014–2017, 2025) 
*Firenze Guelfi (2016–present)
*Lazio Marines (2018–present)
*Legnano Frogs (2023–present) 
*Martesana Daemons (2012) (now in II Division)
*Mastini Verona (2022-2023)
*Milano Rhinos (2008–2018, 2020–present)
*Milano Seamen (2011–2022) (now in II division)
*Napoli Briganti (2014–?) (now in III Division) 
*Palermo Corsari (2008 †) 
*Palermo Sharks (2008) (now in II Division)
*Parma Panthers (2008–present)
*Reggio Emilia Hogs (2009–13) (now in II Division)
*Roma Grizzlies (2015–2018) (now in II division)
*Torino Giaguari (2014–2020, 2023–present)
*UTA Pesaro (2018)
*Varese Skorpions (2023–present) 

† defunct
♦ due to league expansion the Napoli team can play the 2015 IFL season and is not relegated to the second division
‡ Roma Grizzlies won the second division championship and earned the right to play the 2015 IFL season

==Italian Bowl==
Italian Bowl is the annual final play-off game of the Italian Football League (IFL) to determine the league champion. It is the game that awards, for American football, the title of &quot;champion of Italy&quot; and the &quot;scudetto&quot;. Until 2014 the championship game was called &quot;Italian Super Bowl&quot;.

=== Number of Italian Bowl victories ===


===Geographical distribution of Italian Bowl winners===

==See also==

*American football
*Scudetto
*Spaghetti Bowl (American football)
*Sport in Italy
==References==
==External links==

*American Football International
*American Football International Italy
*Italian Superbowl history</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q980206" start="0" end="23" title="Italian Football League" label="Italian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q980206" start="25" end="28" title="Italian Football League" label="IFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="71" end="88" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="99" end="104" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q868291" start="208" end="215" title="playoff" label="playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718511" start="375" end="383" title="scudetto" label="scudetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="410" end="415" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="464" end="469" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116640" start="512" end="527" title="USS Connecticut (BB-18)" label="USS Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384667" start="532" end="542" title="USS Kansas (BB-21)" label="USS Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q782583" start="597" end="614" title="Great White Fleet" label="Great White Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="641" end="648" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="688" end="705" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="811" end="824" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="832" end="844" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="936" end="953" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q970584" start="978" end="992" title="Touch football (American)" label="touch football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967945" start="1017" end="1038" title="Stadio della Vittoria" label="Stadio della Vittoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="1042" end="1046" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062255" start="1249" end="1263" title="Spaghetti Bowl (American football)" label="Spaghetti Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1276" end="1284" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="1314" end="1333" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807513" start="1389" end="1406" title="Twelfth Air Force" label="Twelfth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q203491" start="1425" end="1449" title="United States Army North" label="United States Army North"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="1606" end="1613" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841454" start="1716" end="1744" title="Trieste United States Troops" label="Trieste United States Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q650807" start="1805" end="1814" title="touchdown" label="touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163939" start="2275" end="2295" title="Stadio Carlo Speroni" label="Stadio Carlo Speroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155" start="2299" end="2312" title="Busto Arsizio" label="Busto Arsizio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429480" start="2337" end="2350" title="Rhinos Milano" label="Rhinos Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q918688" start="2360" end="2375" title="Gallarate Frogs" label="Gallarate Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q819341" start="3884" end="3897" title="Bergamo Lions" label="Bergamo Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567033" start="4039" end="4049" title="Glass Bowl" label="Glass Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302319" start="4079" end="4099" title="University of Toledo" label="University of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="4101" end="4113" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4333" end="4348" title="Ancona Dolphins" label="Ancona Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q819341" start="4366" end="4379" title="Bergamo Lions" label="Bergamo Lions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4409" end="4422" title="Bologna Doves" label="Bologna Doves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4465" end="4481" title="Bologna Warriors" label="Bologna Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4498" end="4512" title="Bolzano Giants" label="Bolzano Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721860" start="4526" end="4543" title="Catania Elephants" label="Catania Elephants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4576" end="4592" title="Deamons Cernusco" label="Deamons Cernusco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4601" end="4615" title="Ferrara Aquile" label="Ferrara Aquile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4636" end="4650" title="Firenze Guelfi" label="Firenze Guelfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q118947216" start="4667" end="4680" title="Lazio Ducks" label="Lazio Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q918688" start="4697" end="4710" title="Legnano Frogs" label="Legnano Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4728" end="4745" title="Martesana Daemons" label="Martesana Daemons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4775" end="4789" title="Mastini Verona" label="Mastini Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429480" start="4803" end="4816" title="Rhinos Milano" label="Milano Rhinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953550" start="4844" end="4857" title="Milano Seamen" label="Milano Seamen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4892" end="4907" title="Napoli Briganti" label="Napoli Briganti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4941" end="4956" title="Palermo Corsari" label="Palermo Corsari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4968" end="4982" title="Palermo Sharks" label="Palermo Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091152" start="5012" end="5026" title="Parma Panthers" label="Parma Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5043" end="5061" title="Reggio Emilia Hogs" label="Reggio Emilia Hogs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5094" end="5108" title="Roma Grizzlies" label="Roma Grizzlies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5143" end="5158" title="Torino Giaguari" label="Torino Giaguari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5186" end="5196" title="UTA Pesaro" label="UTA Pesaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5205" end="5221" title="Varese Skorpions" label="Varese Skorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="5279" end="5285" title="Napoli" label="Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q868291" start="5518" end="5526" title="playoff" label="play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718511" start="5711" end="5719" title="scudetto" label="scudetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="5919" end="5936" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718511" start="5938" end="5946" title="Scudetto" label="Scudetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062255" start="5948" end="5982" title="Spaghetti Bowl (American football)" label="Spaghetti Bowl (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q514220" start="5984" end="5998" title="Sport in Italy" label="Sport in Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15195" wikidata="Q238353" url="?curid=15195" title="Iduna">
<text>Iduna may refer to:
* One of several modern anglicizations of the name of the Norse goddess Iðunn
* 176 Iduna, an asteroid named after the goddess
* &quot;Iduna&quot; (bird), a genus of tree warblers
* Iduna (literature society)
* Iduna, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community, United States
* Iduna language, spoken in Papua New Guinea
* The journal of the Swedish Geatish Society
* Iduna, a character from Disney&#x27;s animated films of &quot;Frozen&quot;

==See also==
* Izuna (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q238353" start="0" end="5" title="Iduna" label="Iduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q204691" start="92" end="97" title="Iðunn" label="Iðunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q143342" start="100" end="109" title="176 Iduna" label="176 Iduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q508829" start="149" end="173" title="Iduna (bird)" label="&amp;quot;Iduna&amp;quot; (bird)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94040" start="202" end="228" title="Iduna (literature society)" label="Iduna (literature society)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8843716" start="231" end="247" title="Iduna, Wisconsin" label="Iduna, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989839" start="294" end="308" title="Iduna language" label="Iduna language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457130" start="366" end="381" title="Geatish Society" label="Geatish Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148065" start="446" end="452" title="Frozen (franchise)" label="Frozen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127901" start="475" end="497" title="Izuna (disambiguation)" label="Izuna (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15198" wikidata="Q6024375" url="?curid=15198" title="Indic">
<text>Indic may refer to:

* Indic languages (disambiguation)
* Indo-Aryan peoples
* Various scripts:
** Brahmic scripts, a family of scripts used to write Indian and other Asian languages
** Kharosthi (extinct)
* Indian numerals
* Indian religions, also known as the Dharmic religions
* Other things related to the Indian subcontinent

==See also==
* Inđić, a Serbian surname
* Indica (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6024375" start="0" end="5" title="Indic" label="Indic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125699753" start="23" end="55" title="Indic languages (disambiguation)" label="Indic languages (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267849" start="58" end="76" title="Indo-Aryan peoples" label="Indo-Aryan peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q467037" start="99" end="114" title="Brahmic scripts" label="Brahmic scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161266" start="186" end="195" title="Kharosthi" label="Kharosthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="208" end="223" title="Indian numerals" label="Indian numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="226" end="242" title="Indian religions" label="Indian religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="310" end="329" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55644011" start="346" end="351" title="Inđić" label="Inđić"/>
<link wikidata="Q361571" start="373" end="396" title="Indica (disambiguation)" label="Indica (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15199" wikidata="Q5095" url="?curid=15199" title="Papua (province)">
<text>Papua is a province of Indonesia, comprising the northern coast of Western New Guinea together with island groups in Cenderawasih Bay to the west. It roughly follows the borders of Papuan customary region of Tabi Saireri, and is divided into eight regencies () and one city (&quot;kota&quot;), the latter being the provincial capital of Jayapura.

It is bordered by nation of Papua New Guinea to the east, the Pacific Ocean to the north, Cenderawasih Bay to the west, and the provinces of Central Papua and Highland Papua to the south. The province also shares maritime boundaries with Palau in the Pacific. Papua, along with the five other Papuan provinces, has a higher degree of autonomy level compared to other Indonesian provinces.

Prior to 2003, the province (known as Irian Barat from 1962 to 1973 and Irian Jaya from 1973 to 2002) covered the entirety of Western New Guinea, a region also known as &quot;Papua&quot;. In 2002, Papua adopted its current name and was granted a special autonomous status under Indonesian legislation. In 2003, the western end of the province was split off into a new province of West Papua, and in 2022 the provinces of Central Papua, Highland Papua, and South Papua were also split off, leaving the current province covering a much smaller northern area around Jayapura. 

The official estimate of the population in mid 2023 of the province under its current borders was 1,047,098 (comprising 548,505 males and 498,593 females). 

== Politics ==
=== Government ===

The province of Papua is governed by a directly elected governor and a regional legislature, People&#x27;s Representative Council of Papua (&quot;Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Papua&quot;, abbreviated as DPRP or DPR Papua). A unique government organization in the province is the Papuan People&#x27;s Assembly (&quot;Majelis Rakyat Papua&quot;), which was formed by the Indonesian government in 2005, as mandated by the Papua Special Autonomy Law, as a coalition of Papuan tribal chiefs, Papuan religious leaders, and Papuan women representatives, tasked with arbitration and speaking on behalf of Papuan tribal customs.

Since 2014, the DPRP has 55 members who are elected through General elections every five years and 14 people who are appointed through the special autonomy, bringing the total number of DPRP members to 69 people. The DPRP leadership consists of 1 Chairperson and 3 Deputy Chairmen who come from political parties that have the most seats and votes. The current DPRP members are the results of the 2019 General Election which was sworn in on 31 October 2019 by the Chairperson of the Jayapura High Court at the Papua DPR Building. The composition of DPRP members for the 2019–2024 period consists of 13 political parties where the Nasdem Party is the political party with the most seats, with 8 seats, followed by the Democratic Party which also won 8 seats and the Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle which won 7 seats.

The province of Papua is one of seven provinces to have obtained special autonomy status, the others being Aceh, West Papua, Southwest Papua, Central Papua, Highland Papua and South Papua (the Special Regions of Jakarta and Yogyakarta have a similar province-level special status). According to Law 21/2001 on Special Autonomy Status &quot;(UU Nomor 21 Tahun 2001 tentang Otonomi khusus Papua),&quot; the provincial government of Papua is provided with authority within all sectors of administration, except for the five strategic areas of foreign affairs, security and defense, monetary and fiscal affairs, religion and justice. The provincial government is authorized to issue local regulations to further stipulate the implementation of the special autonomy, including regulating the authority of districts and municipalities within the province. Due to its special autonomy status, Papua province is provided with significant amount of special autonomy funds, which can be used to benefit its indigenous peoples. But the province has low fiscal capacity and it is highly dependent on unconditional transfers and the above-mentioned special autonomy fund, which accounted for about 55% of total revenues in 2008.

After obtaining its special autonomy status, to allow the local population access to timber production benefits, the Papuan provincial government issued a number of decrees, enabling:
* a Timber Logging Permit for Customary Communities, which enabled local people to carry out timber extraction in small concessions (250 to 1,000 hectares) for one year through a community-based or participatory community cooperative;
* a Permit to Manage Customary Forests, which was a timber extraction permit for larger concessions (up to 2,000 hectares) for a maximum of 20 years;
* logging companies had to pay compensations to local communities in addition to all other fees and taxes collected by the national government.

=== Administrative divisions ===

As of 2022 (following the separation of Central Papua, Highland Papua, and South Papua province), the residual Papua Province consisted of 8 regencies () and one city (&quot;kota&quot;); on the map below, these regencies comprise the northern belt from Waropen Regency to Keerom Regency, plus the island groups to their northwest. Initially the area now forming the present Papua Province contained three regencies - Jayapura, Yapen Waropen and Biak Numfor. The City of Jayapura was separated on 2 August 1993 from Jayapura Regency and formed into a province-level administration. On 11 December 2002 three new regencies were created - Keerom and Sarmi from parts of Jayapura Regency, and Waropen from part of Yapen Waropen Regency (the rest of this regency was renamed as Yapen Islands). On 18 December 2003 a further regency - Supiori - was created from part of Biak Numfor Regency, and on 15 March 2007 a further regency - Mamberamo Raya - was created from the western part of Sarmi Regency. These regencies and the city are together subdivided as into districts (&quot;distrik&quot;), and thence into &quot;villages&quot; (&quot;kelurahan&quot; and &quot;desa&quot;). With the release of the Act Number 21 of 2001 concerning the Special Autonomous Region of Papua Province, the term &quot;distrik&quot; was used instead of &quot;kecamatan&quot; in the entire Western New Guinea. The difference between the two is merely the terminology, with &quot;kepala distrik&quot; being the district head.

The regencies () and the city (&quot;kota&quot;) are listed below with their areas and their populations at the 2020 census and subsequent official estimates for mid 2023, together with the 2020 Human Development Index of each administrative divisions.
The province now forms one of Indonesia&#x27;s 84 national electoral districts to elect members to the People&#x27;s Representative Council. The Papua Electoral District consists of all of the 8 regencies in the province, together with the city of Jayapura, and elects 3 members to the People&#x27;s Representative Council.

== Geography ==

The province of Papua is located between 2 ° 25&#x27; – 9 ° S and 130 ° – 141 ° East. The total area of Papua is now . Until its division in 2022 into four provinces, Papua province was the province that had the largest area in Indonesia, with a total area of 312,816.35 km2, or 19.33% of the total area of the Indonesian archipelago. The boundaries of Papua are: Pacific Ocean (north), Highland Papua (south), Central Papua (Southwest) and Papua New Guinea (east).

== Demographics ==

While the Papuan branch of the Central Agency on Statistics had earlier projected the 2020 population of the province (as constituted at that time) to be 3,435,430 people the actual census in 2020 revealed a total population of 4,303,707, of which the majority were Christian. The official estimate for mid 2022 was 4,418,581 prior to the division of the province into four separate provinces. , spread throughout 28 regencies and one administrative city. Following the division of the province into 4 separate provinces, the city of Jayapura is the most populated administrative division in the province, with a total of 414,860 people in mid 2023, while Supiori Regency, which comprises mainly the island of Supiori, one of the Schouten Islands within Cenderawasih Bay off the north coast of Papua, is the least populated administrative division in the province, with just 24,010 people. Most of the population in the province are concentrated in coastal regions, especially around the city of Jayapura and its suburbs.
===Religion===
According to Indonesian Citizenship and Civil Registry in 2022, 70.15% of the Papuans identified themselves as Christians, with 64.68% being Protestants and 5.47% being Catholics. 29.56% of the population are Muslims and less than 1% were Buddhists or Hindus.

==See also==
* Districts of Papua
* List of earthquakes in Indonesia
* List of rivers of Papua

== References ==
== Cited works==
* 

==External links==
* Languages and ethnic groups of Papua Province SIL Ethnologue</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5095" start="0" end="5" title="Papua (province)" label="Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098" start="11" end="19" title="provinces of Indonesia" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="23" end="32" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="67" end="85" title="Western New Guinea" label="Western New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053381" start="117" end="133" title="Cenderawasih Bay" label="Cenderawasih Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095" start="208" end="220" title="Papua (province)" label="Tabi Saireri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191695" start="248" end="257" title="regency (Indonesia)" label="regencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27860" start="337" end="345" title="Jayapura" label="Jayapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="376" end="392" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="410" end="423" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053381" start="438" end="454" title="Cenderawasih Bay" label="Cenderawasih Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486766" start="489" end="502" title="Central Papua" label="Central Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q112810104" start="507" end="521" title="Highland Papua" label="Highland Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="561" end="580" title="Maritime boundary" label="maritime boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="586" end="591" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="641" end="657" title="Western New Guinea#Administration" label="Papuan provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098" start="715" end="735" title="Provinces of Indonesia" label="Indonesian provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095" start="776" end="787" title="Papua (province)" label="Irian Barat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095" start="810" end="820" title="Papua (province)" label="Irian Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="864" end="882" title="Western New Guinea" label="Western New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="992" end="1002" title="Autonomous administrative division" label="autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503397" start="1016" end="1038" title="Law of Indonesia" label="Indonesian legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096" start="1118" end="1128" title="West Papua (province)" label="West Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486766" start="1159" end="1172" title="Central Papua" label="Central Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q112810104" start="1174" end="1188" title="Highland Papua" label="Highland Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q61439296" start="1194" end="1205" title="South Papua" label="South Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670027" start="1599" end="1635" title="People&amp;#x27;s Representative Council" label="People&amp;#x27;s Representative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716634" start="1870" end="1891" title="Government of Indonesia" label="Indonesian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q57445374" start="2519" end="2540" title="2019 Indonesian general election" label="2019 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207219" start="2752" end="2764" title="Nasdem Party" label="Nasdem Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186227" start="2839" end="2855" title="Democratic Party (Indonesia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186306" start="2887" end="2926" title="Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle" label="Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823" start="3054" end="3058" title="Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096" start="3060" end="3070" title="West Papua (province)" label="West Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q115253263" start="3072" end="3087" title="Southwest Papua" label="Southwest Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486766" start="3089" end="3102" title="Central Papua" label="Central Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q112810104" start="3104" end="3118" title="Highland Papua" label="Highland Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q61439296" start="3123" end="3134" title="South Papua" label="South Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="3159" end="3166" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741" start="3171" end="3181" title="Yogyakarta Special Region" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q424129" start="3944" end="3962" title="Indigenous people of New Guinea" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191695" start="5053" end="5062" title="Regencies of Indonesia" label="regencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700011" start="5968" end="5977" title="Districts of Indonesia" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="6275" end="6293" title="Western New Guinea" label="Western New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="6606" end="6629" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q818711" start="6767" end="6803" title="Indonesian Parliament" label="People&amp;#x27;s Representative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142361" start="7317" end="7339" title="List of islands of Indonesia" label="Indonesian archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="7370" end="7383" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q112810104" start="7393" end="7407" title="Highland Papua" label="Highland Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486766" start="7417" end="7430" title="Central Papua" label="Central Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="7447" end="7463" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449895" start="7524" end="7552" title="Statistics Indonesia" label="Central Agency on Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27860" start="8027" end="8035" title="Jayapura" label="Jayapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q27793" start="8149" end="8164" title="Supiori Regency" label="Supiori Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084780" start="8203" end="8210" title="Supiori Island" label="Supiori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424581" start="8223" end="8239" title="Schouten Islands" label="Schouten Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053381" start="8247" end="8263" title="Cenderawasih Bay" label="Cenderawasih Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="8671" end="8682" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8699" end="8708" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="8739" end="8746" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8769" end="8778" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="8782" end="8788" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56394398" start="8806" end="8824" title="Districts of Papua" label="Districts of Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146796" start="8827" end="8859" title="List of earthquakes in Indonesia" label="List of earthquakes in Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39091213" start="8862" end="8885" title="List of rivers of Papua" label="List of rivers of Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="8992" end="9006" title="SIL Ethnologue" label="SIL Ethnologue"/>
</links>
</doc>
