<doc id="1266144" wikidata="Q782093" url="?curid=1266144" title="California High-Speed Rail">
<text>California High-Speed Rail (CAHSR) is a publicly funded high-speed rail system being developed in California by the California High-Speed Rail Authority. Phase 1, about long, is planned to run from San Francisco to Los Angeles and Anaheim via the Central Valley, and is partially funded and under construction. A proposed Phase 2 would extend the system north to Sacramento and south to San Diego, for a total of . The project was authorized by a 2008 statewide ballot to connect the state&#x27;s major urban areas and reduce intercity travel times. Phase 1 targets a nonstop travel time of 2 hours and 40 minutes from San Francisco to Los Angeles, compared to about nine hours on the existing Amtrak &quot;San Joaquins&quot;. California legislative overseers do not expect the 2 hr 40 min target will be achieved.

Construction of Phase 1 began in the Central Valley in 2015. Due to limited funding, the project is being built in sections. The state prioritizes completion of the &quot;Initial Operating Segment (IOS)&quot; connecting Merced and Bakersfield. This Central Valley segment is long and thus spans 35% of the total San Francisco–Los Angeles route. The IOS is projected to commence revenue service as a self-contained high-speed rail system between 2030 and 2033, at a cost of $28–35 billion, and will replace current &quot;San Joaquins&quot; service south of Merced. With a top speed of , CAHSR trains running along this section would be the fastest in the Americas.

From January 2015 to December 2023, a total of $11.2 billion had been spent on the IOS – which has under active construction – and on upgrades to existing rail lines in the San Francisco Bay Area and Greater Los Angeles, where Phase 1 is planned to share tracks with conventional passenger trains. Regulatory clearance has been obtained for the full route connecting San Francisco and Los Angeles, which includes the IOS. However, the Authority has not yet received sufficient funding to construct the segments from the IOS westwards to the Bay Area or southwards to Los Angeles, both of which would require tunneling through major mountain passes. As of 2024, the entirety of Phase 1 was projected to cost $106.2 billion.

Supporters of the project state that it would alleviate air traffic and highway congestion, reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, and provide economic benefits by linking the state&#x27;s inland regions to coastal cities. Opponents argue that it is too expensive, and that the funds should be spent on other transportation or infrastructure projects. The route choice has been controversial, along with the decision to construct the first high-speed segment in the Central Valley rather than in more heavily populated parts of the state. The project has experienced significant delays and cost overruns caused by management issues, legal challenges, and lack of a complete funding commitment.

== Background ==
=== Legislative context ===

High-speed rail in California was first proposed in 1979 by Governor Jerry Brown. In 1982 Brown signed a bill authorizing $1.25 billion in bonds for a high-speed rail line between Los Angeles and San Diego. This law failed due to concerns over its economic viability and environmental impact, and Caltrans&#x27; objection to the handling of the project by a private company. In 1993, the state created the Intercity High-Speed Rail Commission. In 1996, the California Legislature and Governor Pete Wilson passed the High-Speed Rail Act, which formed the California High-Speed Rail Authority (the &quot;Authority&quot;) to plan, design, construct and operate a statewide high-speed rail system.

In 2008, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger championed a ballot measure, Proposition 1A, which authorized $9 billion in bonds to begin the planning and construction of high-speed rail and a further $950 million to upgrade commuter rail systems in Northern and Southern California that would connect with the high-speed rail system. Proposition 1A, which passed with about 53 percent of the vote, set several requirements for the high-speed rail system, including that the nonstop travel time from the Salesforce Transit Center in San Francisco to Los Angeles Union Station should be no more than 2 hours and 40 minutes. Including Prop 1A, the project has received about $23 billion in combined state and federal funding through the end of 2023. As of February 2024, the entire Phase 1 was projected to cost between $89–128 billion, with allowance for future inflation.

Proposition 1A specified several corridors for high-speed rail investment. It outlined four corridors in Northern California (Sacramento–Stockton–Fresno; San Francisco–San Jose–Fresno via the Pacheco Pass; Oakland–San Jose; and Merced/Stockton–Oakland/San Francisco via the Altamont Pass). The Northern California sections were to be connected to Southern California on a route serving Fresno, Bakersfield, and Palmdale before reaching Los Angeles. In Southern California, two corridors were specified – Los Angeles–Riverside–San Diego, and Los Angeles–Anaheim–Irvine. The only specific requirement set by Proposition 1A was to complete a link between San Francisco and Los Angeles, and that any high-speed rail routes constructed should follow these corridors. It did not require that all the corridors must be built, indicate the order in which they should be constructed, or specify precise station locations other than in San Francisco or Los Angeles.

=== Statewide objectives ===

The planned high-speed rail system would reduce travel times between the northern and southern parts of the state. Driving or taking an intercity bus between San Francisco and Los Angeles takes six to eight hours. Since the &quot;Coast Daylight&quot; was discontinued in 1974, there has been no direct rail connection between San Francisco and Los Angeles, with the closest Amtrak service now in Oakland. The only direct rail service from Oakland to Los Angeles – the Amtrak &quot;Coast Starlight&quot; – takes eleven hours and runs once daily. While the &quot;San Joaquins&quot; takes about nine hours, a bus transfer is required for part of the route. High-speed rail is intended to be competitive with air travel; while the actual station-to-station time would be slower than flying, reduced waiting and boarding times and fewer security checks would make total travel times competitive, with other potential benefits including passenger comfort and greater reliability. San Francisco–Los Angeles is the busiest domestic air route in the US, averaging 132 scheduled flights daily.

The high-speed rail system may relieve housing pressure in major urban areas, especially the Bay Area, by providing access to cheaper housing in the Central Valley, which would be particularly beneficial for business travelers and hybrid remote workers who only commute a few times a week. While the rail project may incentivize denser housing and job growth around stations, with cities such as Fresno and Bakersfield planning for major real estate investments in their downtowns, the urban policy advocacy group SPUR noted the risk of urban sprawl as a result of increased housing demand in the Central Valley, and that the state should consider mitigating this in its planning approach. Phase 1 of high-speed rail is projected to reduce annual statewide CO2 emissions by about 0.6 million tons by replacing highway trips and flights; however, the &quot;Orange County Register&quot; has noted this would only account for 0.2 percent of the state&#x27;s total emissions from all sectors.

In 2023, Caltrans issued the 2023 California State Rail Plan, which is a comprehensive plan to upgrade and modernize the state&#x27;s intercity passenger and freight rail systems through 2050. Provisions of the plan include increasing the capacity of existing railways, establishing new services, improving service frequencies and train speeds, and integrating ticketing between transit agencies so ticketing through all rail systems can be done statewide. The state rail plan outlines the integration of high-speed rail into the statewide system as its primary north-south passenger link. Although the California High-Speed Rail Authority has not indicated completion dates for the full system, the 2023 version of the state rail plan used 2050 for the completion of both Phase 1 and Phase 2.

== Plans, construction and project status ==

The project is split into two major phases: Phase 1 is to connect from San Francisco via the Central Valley to Los Angeles; Phase 2 is an extension of that system both to the north from Merced to Sacramento and to the south from Los Angeles via the Inland Empire to San Diego. As of 2024, the High-Speed Rail Authority is targeting completion of the &quot;Initial Operating Segment&quot; (IOS), a -Central Valley section within the Phase 1 route, with under active construction. It has not obtained full funding for the IOS, and no high-speed rail segments outside the IOS have so far been funded. The funding situation is discussed in .

=== Phase 1 ===

Phase 1 of the planned route, about long, runs from the Salesforce Transit Center in San Francisco to the Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center in Anaheim, with intermediate stops planned for Millbrae, San Jose, Gilroy, Merced, Madera, Fresno, Kings/Tulare (Hanford), Bakersfield, Palmdale, Burbank and Los Angeles. An additional station between Los Angeles and Anaheim, at Norwalk or Fullerton, is being considered. The existing 4th and King Caltrain station in San Francisco is expected to be the northern terminus of Phase 1 until the future completion of the Downtown Rail Extension (now known as The Portal) to the Salesforce Transit Center.

From San Francisco, the planned route runs south to Gilroy before crossing the Diablo Range eastward over Pacheco Pass into the Central Valley. The route branches north to Merced via a flying wye which is intended to serve as the connection for a future Phase 2 extension to Sacramento. As part of Phase 1, Merced is planned to serve as a transfer point to the Amtrak San Joaquins and Altamont Corridor Express (ACE) trains continuing towards Stockton, Sacramento and other destinations. South of there, Madera through Bakersfield stations are located along the main line in the Central Valley. From Bakersfield, the high-speed rail route crosses the Tehachapi Mountains via Tehachapi Pass to Palmdale in the Mojave Desert. It then tunnels under the San Gabriel Mountains to reach Los Angeles and Anaheim.

In the urbanized areas from San Francisco to Gilroy and from Burbank to Anaheim, the Phase 1 route follows existing railroad right-of-ways. In 2012, the Authority adopted a &quot;blended&quot; approach to construction, which would involve high-speed trains sharing track with Amtrak and local commuter trains (Caltrain in the Bay Area and Metrolink in Southern California) in these sections. This approach was adopted to reduce costs and mitigate the impact of construction on surrounding communities, but also limits train speed in these sections to a maximum of . Between Gilroy and Burbank, the planned route will run on dedicated high-speed tracks.

==== Initial Operating Segment (IOS) ====

As there has never been funding commitment for full construction of Phase 1, the Authority is advancing work in sections, first targeting full completion of a &quot;Initial Operating Segment&quot; (IOS). It is intended to begin carrying passengers along a limited portion of the route before the full Phase 1 is completed. This initial service would span from Merced via Madera, Fresno, Hanford to Bakersfield. High-speed trains would fully replace existing, slower Amtrak &quot;San Joaquins&quot; service south of Merced to Bakersfield. &quot;San Joaquins&quot; passengers continuing to Southern California currently transfer to Amtrak Thruway buses at Bakersfield. This bus connection will remain necessary until Phase 1 of high-speed rail reaches Los Angeles.

As of January 2025, of the were under active construction. of contiguous guideway were declared complete, making that section ready for track-laying. The remainder of the is expected to complete their guideway by the end of 2026. of extensions to the North and South that would complete the IOS were under engineering design.

The scope of the IOS has changed several times in the project&#x27;s history. In 2012 it was planned to run from Merced through Bakersfield to Burbank (just north of Los Angeles), a distance of about . This would have closed a major gap in California intercity rail services, as the existing &quot;San Joaquins&quot; terminates at Bakersfield and does not continue on to Los Angeles. In 2016, due to changes in funding and financing plans, the Authority changed the IOS to a northern segment between San Jose and Bakersfield, the &quot;Silicon Valley to Central Valley line&quot;. As of 2023, the IOS had been determined as the current definition of from Merced to Bakersfield in the Central Valley, with under active construction. If additional funding becomes available, the Authority still intends to construct the northern Bay Area connection before the southern connection to Los Angeles.

Construction on the IOS began with a groundbreaking in Fresno on January 6, 2015. The first 119 miles, stretching from Madera south to Shafter (about northwest of Bakersfield), are being constructed under four design-build contracts (titled &quot;construction packages&quot;). These include constructing the railroad grade, viaducts, road overpasses and underpasses — including for private citizens — and other structures along the route, but not the track itself. In August 2022, the Authority approved design contracts for the remaining of the IOS connecting Madera to Merced and Shafter to Bakersfield, with construction contracts expected in 2025-2026.

In October 2022, the Authority approved a design contract for the Merced, Fresno, Kings/Tulare and Bakersfield stations. Planning for the Madera station is occurring under a separate agreement with the San Joaquin Joint Powers Authority. The construction contract for track and electrical power systems on the IOS is expected in 2024-2025. As of February 2024, Construction Packages 1–3 were more than 70 percent complete and Construction Package 4 was at 98 percent. The full Merced–Bakersfield line was expected to be complete in 2029, with passenger service starting around 2031–2033.

==== Blended corridor investments ====


Concurrently with Central Valley construction, the Authority has worked with other California transportation agencies and rail operators to prepare the northern and southern blended segments for high-speed rail operations. In the Bay Area, the electrification of Caltrain will enable electric high-speed trains to run on the existing Caltrain commuter rail corridor from San Francisco to San Jose. Work began in 2017 and was completed in September 2024.

The corridor from San Jose to Gilroy will also require electrification; as of February 2024, the Authority was still in negotiations with Union Pacific Railroad over proposed alterations to the tracks. Several grade separations and passing tracks have been completed or are planned along the route from San Francisco to Gilroy, in order to improve track capacity, speed and safety for combined Caltrain/high-speed rail operations. Since many at-grade crossings will remain, other safety improvements such as quad gates are being considered.

In Southern California, the Link US project plans to reconfigure Los Angeles Union Station from a terminal to a run-through station, and add two dedicated high-speed rail platforms. The shared Amtrak and Metrolink tracks from Burbank to Anaheim will require electrification. Between Los Angeles and Fullerton, the rail corridor is also heavily used by BNSF freight trains coming from the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, requiring further separation to prevent congestion. As of November 2023, the Authority proposed to build a fourth track on the existing three-track corridor, with two electrified tracks to be used for passenger trains (including high-speed rail) and two non-electrified tracks for freight, in addition to grade separations and crossing safety improvements. Some freight trains may be allowed to use the passenger tracks during off-peak hours.

The Authority has also funded other projects such as the installation of positive train control systems along the shared commuter rail lines, and upgrades to existing stations and railyards to accommodate both future high-speed rail and other passenger rail services.

==== Remainder of Phase 1 ====

Construction of the remaining Phase 1 route is still on hold due to budget constraints. As of June 2024, the environmental impact statements for of the route had been certified, which specifies the alignment from San Francisco to Los Angeles and clears it for detailed engineering design and construction. The remaining segment to be certified is the Los Angeles–Anaheim section.

The Merced to San Jose section would cross the Pacheco Pass roughly along the route of SR 152. It would include several tunnels, the longest of which would be , making it the longest intercity rail tunnel in the US. Engineering challenges along this section include &quot;poor-quality rock formations, faults and shear zones, and potentially high groundwater inflows that can affect tunnel stability.&quot; The Authority expects to start design work on this section in 2024, and begin pre-construction work such as land acquisition in about 2026-2028, funds permitting.
The Bakersfield–Palmdale section of the line will cross Tehachapi Pass, roughly parallelling the Union Pacific Railroad&#x27;s Mojave Subdivision. Due to its heavy freight traffic and sharp curves (including the famous Tehachapi Loop), there is no current passenger service through the pass. While the proposed high-speed rail alignment will not include any long tunnels comparable to those in Pacheco Pass, it has nine shorter tunnels and several viaducts more than high. The maximum grade through the pass would be 2.8 percent, making it the steepest portion of the Phase 1 route.&lt;ref name=&quot;Bakersfield to Palmdale Draft EIR/EIS&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; At a press conference in January 2025 in Kern County, state and CHSRA leaders reiterated the importance of this section and promoted the vision of a combined CAHSR-High Desert Corridor-Brightline West rail corridor.

From Palmdale to Burbank the proposed route crosses the San Gabriel Mountains on an alignment roughly along State Route 14. It would require the most tunneling of any of the mountain crossings, with four separate tunnels totaling in length. One of the major challenges along this section is the crossing of the San Andreas Fault and several parallel, smaller fault zones, where a large earthquake could significantly deform the tracks. To compensate for this, the rail beds and tunnel diameters will be constructed wider at fault crossings to allow for any needed track realignment in the future. The tracks will cross the San Andreas Fault itself above ground.

In total, the southern extension from Bakersfield to Los Angeles may require 36 miles of tunnels. In 2018, the Authority estimated that the tunneling may cost between $26 and $45 billion.

==== Operations infrastructure ====

The high-speed rail system is planned to run entirely on renewable energy. Due to the large energy demand of high-speed trains, the system is being planned to generate much of its own power. Solar arrays and battery backup systems are to be installed at traction power substations along the route; however, they will still be tied into the California power grid, allowing them to share energy as needed. The Authority plans to install solar panels capable of producing 44 megawatts, and batteries to store 124 megawatt hours. The on-site generation of solar power is estimated to cut future electricity costs by 75 percent compared to purchasing it from the state grid, and will keep the system operational if the grid suffers a blackout.

There are plans for a heavy maintenance facility, serving as the location for major train inspections and repairs, in the Central Valley. It will also serve to receive and test high-speed trainsets along the IOS track currently being constructed. Also planned along the Phase 1 route are three light maintenance facilities for routine train inspections and cleaning, with locations in the Bay Area, Central Valley and greater Los Angeles, as well as four maintenance of way facilities spaced throughout the route. The exact siting for these facilities has yet to be determined. As of 2019, both Fresno and Kern Counties had expressed interest in hosting the heavy maintenance facility.

=== Phase 2 ===

Phase 2 would construct two major extensions to the system. The northern extension would stretch from Merced to Sacramento, with intermediate stops at Modesto and Stockton. It would largely parallel the existing &quot;San Joaquins&quot; route through the Central Valley. In the south, the system would be extended from Los Angeles to San Diego. Instead of continuing south from Anaheim, it would split off from the Phase 1 route at Los Angeles Union Station and travel east along I-10 before turning south, following an inland route along I-15 or I-215. This would enable high-speed trains to serve the Inland Empire and inland parts of San Diego County, with stops at Ontario International Airport and Escondido. One or more additional stations may be built, in either El Monte, West Covina, Pomona, San Bernardino, Corona, March ARB, or Murrieta.

If the entire Phase 2 is completed, it would bring the total length of the high-speed rail system to . Phase 2 is still early in the planning stages, and would not be constructed until after the completion of Phase 1.

== Rolling stock ==

=== Train design ===

Proposition 1A sets an explicit requirement for a sustained operating speed of at least . The Authority plans to operate trains at ; with a conventional 10% buffer for testing, this requires a top speed of at least 242 mph (389 km/h).
To minimize project risks, the Authority plans to acquire electric multiple units (EMUs) of service-proven design, for which there are no domestic rolling stock manufacturers. Many specifications are hence similar to those of trainsets being operated in Europe, such as: a lifespan of at least 30 years, the ability to operate two coupled trainsets as a single consist (&quot;double heading&quot;), a capacity of at least 450 seats and eight bicycle spots, and a length no longer than about 680 feet (210 m). Some requirements reflect American legislation or standards corresponding to the local environment, including full ADA-compliance, Tier III FRA safety standards, earthquake safety systems for safe stopping and exiting, and a floor height of 50.5 in (128 cm) above the rails to enable level boarding.

=== Acquisition process ===

The Authority intends to procure a first batch of six trainsets for deployment on the Initial Operating Segment (IOS) as well as a &quot;driving simulator&quot;. Included will be services for maintenance for 30 years, a mid-life overhaul, and a variety of support services.
In January 2024, the Authority chose Alstom  and Siemens Mobility as qualified train suppliers.

The Authority released a &quot;request for proposals&quot; (RFP) in mid-April 2024, with a procurement contract planned for summer 2025. The chosen contractor will have to deliver two prototype trainsets for testing by the end of 2028 and four further trainsets by 2030 for revenue service on the IOS. There is also an option for a further 15 trainsets. In 2023, it was projected that for the full Phase 1 system, 66 trainsets would be needed.

Because the trainset purchase is funded by an FRA grant program authorized under the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, manufacturing and sourcing for the trainsets fall under provisions of the Buy America Act. Both qualified bidders have local manufacturing capacities: Alstom in Hornell, New York and Siemens Mobility in Horseheads, New York. The Authority was granted a Buy America-waiver by the FRA for the two prototype trainsets, allowing those to be manufactured abroad.

== Stations and service ==

=== Stations and stop patterns ===

Proposition 1A specifies up to 24 stations to be constructed on the full network. Thirteen stations are planned as part of Phase 1, of which the five on the IOS are (partially) funded. The table below lists all Phase 1 stations and their transfer connections:

Phase 1 is planned to include several types of service – nonstop trains traveling directly between San Francisco and Los Angeles; express and limited trains making a few intermediate stops at major cities; and local trains making all stops. Proposition 1A requires that the system must be designed for operating headways of five minutes or less (12 trains per hour), and that intermediate stations must be designed so nonstop trains can bypass them without slowing down. In addition, it indicates the following nonstop travel times:

*San Francisco–Los Angeles: 2 hours, 40 minutes
*San Francisco–San Jose: 30 minutes
*San Jose–Los Angeles: 2 hours, 10 minutes
*San Diego–Los Angeles: 1 hour, 20 minutes
*Inland Empire–Los Angeles: 30 minutes
*Sacramento–Los Angeles: 2 hours, 20 minutes



 Initial Operating Segment (IOS)

 Silicon Valley–Central Valley Segment



=== Operations and ridership forecast ===

In October 2017, the California High-Speed Rail Authority announced that DB E.C.O. North America, a subsidiary of German national rail operator Deutsche Bahn (DB), had been chosen as the early train operator. Its main service is consulting the Authority in matters leading up to passenger operations, such as ridership forecasts, service scheduling, and operations cost forecasting.

Ridership estimates for 2040 based on a 2023 forecast would total about 12.2 million riders annually for a Silicon Valley to Bakersfield service. For the entire Phase 1 system it projected 28.4 million riders annually, more than twice the number of annual passengers on the Northeast Corridor Amtrak services (12.1 million) in 2023.

=== Connection with other major transit projects ===

==== Brightline West and High Desert Corridor====

Brightline West (formerly Desert Xpress and XpressWest) is a project that has been planning to build a high-speed rail line from Las Vegas, Nevada to Victorville, California – about northeast of Los Angeles – since 2007. The line is intended to cross the Mojave Desert using the I-15 freeway median for most of its length. The separate High Desert Corridor rail line has been proposed between Victorville to Palmdale, extending the Las Vegas line to connect with CAHSR and Metrolink. This project is managed by the High Desert Corridor Joint Powers Agency (HDC JPA). The High Desert Corridor is in a preliminary planning and project development stage with construction currently being unfunded. The HDC JPA signed two labor agreements in July 2024.

After Brightline took over the project in 2018, a separate extension was proposed to run from Victorville and terminate in Rancho Cucamonga, California, where it would connect with Metrolink but not CAHSR. In December 2023, the award of $3 billion in federal funding via the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, concurrent with the $3.1 billion funding for CAHSR, enabled the project to advance. Construction of the Las Vegas to Rancho Cucamonga route began in 2024 and is projected to take approximately four years to construct.

==== Valley Rail ====

Valley Rail is a program to jointly improve rail service on the Altamont Corridor Express (ACE) and the Amtrak San Joaquins for the Central Valley, Sacramento, and the Bay Area. When the IOS goes into operation, the Amtrak San Joaquins segment currently overlapping with the IOS (Merced to Bakersfield) will be discontinued and replaced by CAHSR service. Passengers will be able to transfer at the future Merced Multi-Modal Transit Station, the northern terminus of the IOS. The remaining service will be expanded under the Valley Rail project, providing passengers with continuing transportation north and west to the Bay Area and north towards/to Sacramento. Valley Rail is currently in implementation and has an estimated completion date of 2030. The ACEforward project is further proposed to improve service in the ACE corridor.

==== Cross Valley Corridor ====

The Cross Valley Corridor (CVC) is a proposed transit line connecting Naval Air Station Lemoore and the cities Hanford, Visalia, and Porterville with the future Kings-Tulare high-speed rail station. Its route runs east–west for a total of about , perpendicular to the high-speed rail alignment and mostly along existing rail tracks. During a first phase of up to ten years within opening of the IOS, the CVC will be implemented as a coordinated bus service by local transit agencies. In later phases, the Corridor is proposed to operate as passenger rail. The plans to activate the rail line are currently unfunded.

== Finances and setbacks ==

=== Overview of project finances ===

The 2008 California voter approval required the project to be financed with matching funds from other sources, including private and federal. The government of Japan offered long-term, low-interest financing if California employed Shinkansen bullet-train technology.

The project is now financed mainly by the state of California, supplemented by federal grants. By the end of 2023, the share of committed funding borne by the state was 76%. The Authority has only one source of persistent cash flow: a fixed share of revenue from California cap-and-trade auctions set to expire in 2030. All other funding had been granted as a fixed nominal sum. This implies that if expenditures are delayed, funding does not increase to offset inflation. Headline numbers for cost estimates also depend on an assumed schedule due to inflation; compared to initial funding in Q4 2008, by Q4 2023 the national price level had increased by 39.1%.

By the end of 2023, the Authority had been granted funding of $22.9 billion and expended $11.2 billion. To bring the IOS into revenue service (including trainsets, stations, and maintenance facilities) along with ongoing project development for Phase 1 and statewide connectivity programs (blended corridor investments, such as the Caltrain electrification), it estimates nominal expenditures ranging between $28.5 and $35.3 billion, adjusted for schedule. Except for environmental clearance and investments into the blended corridors, no funding had been obtained for engineering and construction of segments outside the IOS.

=== Funding ===

The 2008 statewide ballot Proposition 1A was the authorization by voters for the CAHSR project itself and for the sale of $9.95 billion in state bonds, to be made available to the Authority. Out of this sum, $950 million were earmarked for other passenger rail services, such as the Caltrain Electrification, to improve connection to the future high-speed rail system. Formally, bond proceeds have to be appropriated to the Authority in the California state budget. By the end of 2023, $8.516 billion out of $9.950 billion had been appropriated.

The second major funding infusion was a combination of federal grants in 2009, financed mainly under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) for a total of $3.5 billion. However, the federal funding agreement entailed a tight schedule, targeting construction start of the Merced-Bakersfield section by 2012 and its completion by 2017. In particular, the Authority had to spend the funds in the Central Valley and expend them by September 2017 for risk of losing them. To adhere to the deadline, the Authority signed construction contracts before design, land acquisition, and utility relocations were completed. This would lead to severe disruptions during construction and delays persisting to date (see subsection ).

In 2014, the California State Legislature voted to appropriate $250 million in state cap-and-trade revenue for the Authority, along with 25% of all future revenue until the end of 2030. By December 2023, it had received $11.7 billion through the cap-and-trade appropriation. Unlike all other funding, this is the only persistent income stream for the Authority. With a conservative projection of $750 million in annual revenue, the Authority expects this source to yield $5.3 billion before expiration.

In May 2019, the FRA under the Trump-Pence administration announced that $929 million in funding that were awarded under ARRA/FY10 in 2009 but had not yet been paid out would be withheld and cancelled. The reasons given were that the Authority had not made reasonable progress, and that the State of California under Governor Gavin Newsom abandoned the original goal of connecting San Francisco with Los Angeles, both being in violation of the federal funding agreement. In June 2021, the Biden-Harris Administration reinstated the funding.

In September 2023, the Authority obtained a $202 million FRA grant to design and construct six grade separations in Shafter, California, part of the southward extension from the initial towards Bakersfield.
In December 2023, the Biden-Harris administration awarded the CAHSR project $3.1 billion of federal funding under another FRA grant program, making it the largest federal commitment since the ARRA-grant in 2009. The same grant also approved $3 billion for Brightline West, a similar but privately-run high speed rail project aiming to connect Los Angeles with Las Vegas. Both FRA grant programs were funded under the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA).

As of December 2023, full completion of the IOS along with the ongoing investments into blended corridors for Phase 1 and program-wide costs (such as administration, project development, trainsets, and maintenance facilities) is expected to entail a funding shortfall of between $200 million and $7 billion. This broad range stems from uncertainty both on the cost side (upcoming contract bids; IOS construction schedule combined with inflation and general cost increases in the construction sector), and on the funding side with uncertain amounts of future cap-and-trade revenue.

The Authority seeks further federal grants to ensure completion of the IOS, thereby increasing the current 23% federal share in project contributions. It further strives to obtain an extension of the 25% cap-and-trade appropriation from the state until 2050, which would provide additional funds that are hedged against inflation-related cost increases from delays in schedule.

The following table provides a summary over funding firmly granted and realized expenditure by the end of 2023, as well as expected future funding and expenditure:

=== Past cost estimates ===
Cost estimates have increased significantly since program inception. In the first business plan of 2008, the cost estimate for civil construction of the Merced-Bakersfield section, now termed the IOS, was $6.2 billion ($8.6 billion in 2023 dollars). The same scope of work was projected to be $30.5 billion in 2024. The initial 2008 total cost estimate for Phase 1, developed by consultants WSP USA for the Authority and presented to voters, was $33 billion ($46.2 billion in 2023 dollars), and the project would be completed in 2020. At that time, when the project was voted on in Proposition 1A, the alignment was not specified yet and no major engineering had been undertaken to inform those estimates. By 2024, this forecast had risen to $106.2 billion.

Regular public controversy about project cost increases is centered around the latter headline number for the total cost of Phase 1. Up until 2016, cost estimates were reported as nominal prices, only subject to overall inflation. Since 2018, these estimates have been reported in terms of &quot;years-of-expenditure&quot;. This means that total expenditure is calculated as a sum of expense flows, with each expense being inflated forward to the year in which the expense is expected to occur. Hence, since 2018, the commonly discussed increase in headline costs reflects a combination of increases in real costs, overall inflation, and push-backs in the expense schedule. The table below hints at the difference between current-year prices and year-of-expenditure prices by showing the estimates in 2018 for both.

The table shows the evolution of cost estimates made by the Authority over a period spanning project inception in 2008 up to 2024. These numbers are reported in biannual business plans, which the Authority is mandated to report to the California legislature. Each row states cost estimates of civil construction for one section. For most years, this includes grade separations, guideway, tracks, and systems. The bottom row sums over all sections and additionally includes program-wide non-construction capital costs, such as trainsets and maintenance facilities.
 substantially funded and underway

Although price levels for projects around the world are not directly comparable due to differing topographies, required mitigations measures, and construction prices, high-speed rail projects in the Western hemisphere with similar timelines have also experienced significant cost increases since those were proposed: A high-speed line in Southern Germany that opened in 2022 saw its budget nearly double, from €2.03 billion in 2009 to €3.99 billion by 2022. High Speed 2, a high-speed line currently under construction in the United Kingdom that will connect London with Birmingham, has seen its headline cost almost quadruple, from £15.8-17.4 billion in 2010&lt;ref name=&quot;BBC 11/3/10&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; up to possibly £66 billion by January 2024. Construction inflation was cited as the main reason for recent cost increases, with prices for steel, rebar, and concrete having risen by 47%, 53%, and 48% respectively during the period since the COVID-19 pandemic.

Similar cost increases have occurred on major California infrastructure projects in the 21st century when faced with similar challenges like the CAHSR project. The Bay Bridge replacement span increased from an initial $1 billion in 1996 to $6.5 billion by 2013, due to initial estimates being made before detailed engineering studies, and due to inflation in the cost of labor and building materials. The cost of widening a section of I-405 in Sepulveda Pass rose from $1 billion in 2010 to $1.6 billion in 2016, due to &quot;repeated changes to the project’s design and failure to identify and relocate utilities.&quot; The cost of the planned long third phase of the Silicon Valley BART extension rose from $4.7 billion in 2014 to $12.2 billion in 2024, due to years of delays and inflation, and to design changes following complaints from property owners along the route.

=== Setbacks on the IOS ===

==== Land acquisition issues ====

The major factor contributing to delays and cost overruns has been the difficulty in acquiring land parcels necessary for construction. In order for actual construction of structures such as grade separations, trenches, and viaducts to start, land for both the structures themselves and for access and logistics have to be secured; utilities (electric, telecommunications, gas, and wet) moved; and impact on existing traffic mitigated, such as by temporarily or permanently relocating busy roads or freight rail tracks. In 2012, the Authority decided to issue construction contracts, even though design was only 15% complete, partially to comply with spending deadlines for the ARRA funding. However, this implied that the final sizes of bridges, overpasses and track beds were unknown, leading to incomplete identification of land rights to be secured.

By January 2013, the state had not acquired a single parcel, delaying overall construction start to 2015. By 2019, less than 310 parcels out of 1859 required had been acquired. The number of parcels necessary was underestimated due to the extent of utility conflicts being larger than the Authority anticipated. Land conveyance processes were further complicated due to incomplete records kept by utility companies like PG&amp;E on precise utility locations and easement rights. In hundreds of cases, the Authority was forced to buy entire plots of land, even though only a portion of its right-of-way was required.

By 2021, the targeted completion date as communicated by the Authority to the legislature had been pushed back to 2023, but land acquisition issues were still holding up construction. As part of renegotiations about delay-induced costs, the general contractor for &quot;Construction Package 1&quot; (CP1), American construction firm Tutor Perini, wrote a letter to the Authority complaining that &quot;[it] is beyond comprehension [...] that the authority has not obtained all of the right of way&quot;. That letter cited further problems such as rapid turnover of state officials and the state’s failure to secure agreements with outside parties, including utilities and freight railroads – the latter of which were in turn criticized for their “preferential and unreasonable demands”.

The initial bid for CP1 of just under $1 billion had ballooned to $2.2 billion in the meanwhile, mostly due to delay claims and change orders. The Authority disputed assertions made in the letter, with then-CEO Brian Kelly responding that those were &quot;attempts to set out why project challenges are everybody else’s fault&quot;. A similar letter was sent by the main contractor for &quot;Construction Package 2-3&quot; (CP2-3), Spanish construction firm Dragados, warning of further delays to at least 2025 due to land conveyance issues.

By December 2023, 2,258 out of 2,295 required parcels (98%) on the under active construction had been acquired, shifting the major source of hold-up risk to outstanding utility relocations. On CP1, 18% of utility relocations had not yet been started, and 20% for CP2-3. Both construction packages have a scheduled completion date at the end of 2026. The southernmost active segment, &quot;Construction Package 4&quot; (CP4) under Spanish infrastructure firm Ferrovial as main contractor, has almost finished civil construction, barring a single outstanding canal relocation.
For the remaining segments of the IOS not yet under construction then, which are of extensions into Merced and Bakersfield, the Authority plans to initiate construction only after fully completing design and land acquisition.

==== Underestimates ====

By 2012, one year before planned groundbreaking in 2013, later delayed to January 2015, construction cost estimates for the IOS had been revised from $8.6 billion in 2008 to $16.1 billion (in 2024 dollars). Unlike the estimates at project inception, this cost revision considered necessary construction of viaducts to cross multiple freight railroads (owned by BNSF and UPRR), floodplains, and irrigation canals. Even at this point, design was only at 15% and environmental clearance incomplete, leaving final community and environmental mitigation measures unspecified.

As land acquisition progressed during construction, it emerged that the Authority had underestimated the quantity of parcels needed for its right-of-way and associated utility relocations, as well as their prices.

In 2013, the contract for &quot;Construction Package 1&quot; (CP1), the northernmost section of the under active construction covering from Madera to south of Fresno, was awarded to a joint venture between the firms Tutor Perini, Zachry, and Parsons for a winning bid of $985 million, below the second-lowest bid of $1.09 billion and below Authority staff estimates of $1.2–1.8 billion. Allegations were raised about deliberate lowballing practices by the lead firm Tutor Perini, which would subsequently lead to predictable cost overruns.

Media reports cited that 11 major projects completed by the firm in the past 12 years ended up with costs 40% above initial bids. CEO Ron Tutor disputed the allegations, claiming that cost overruns were caused by owner-initiated change orders. He anticipated that potential change orders for the CAHSR project in case of land conveyance issues could cause construction delays and cost increases, but that &quot;[t]hese aren’t huge. They are not major. They are nothing extensive. [...] and it never spirals out of control.”

The Tutor Perini bid was initially eliminated as it received the lowest technical score from Authority staff for safety, design, engineering, and scheduling. A mid-evaluation rule change allowed the bid to proceed. Concerns about the contract award prompted a congressional hearing. As of December 2023, the CP1 contract had $2.4 billion in approved invoices, those being 67% of total expected expenses.

In 2014, the contract for &quot;Construction Package 2-3&quot; (CP2-3), a section leading from south of Fresno to near the Kings and Tulare county border, was awarded to a joint venture between Spanish construction firm Dragados and Hochtief subsidiary Flatiron Construction with a winning bid of $1.2 billion. This number came significantly below the $1.5–2.0 billion as expected by Authority staff and the second-lowest bid by Tutor Perini with $1.7 billion.

A 2021 report by Ralph Vartabedian for the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; documented severe underestimation on the part of the contractor: Authority staff and their consultants had prepared environmental reports prior to contract award, noting challenges with a complicated landscape of creek beds and wildlife habitats in Kings County. They proposed solutions such as an elevated platform for the future Hanford station or a 2-mile viaduct over several Kings River waterways crossing the alignment.

In their bid submission, lead firm Dragados suggested cost-saving measures such as replacing the viaduct with 13 box culverts or replacing the elevated platform at Hanford with a ground-level guideway. During construction, it became clear that the contractor had underestimated the complexity of their proposals: A planned freight railroad relocation could not be undertaken as no agreement with UPRR was reached, a planned freeway relocation into a trench was not feasible, the California Department of Fish and Wildlife dismissed the alternative designs for the Kings River Viaduct, and the Kings–Tulare Regional Station at Hanford had to be elevated onto a lengthy viaduct after all.

By 2021, the Authority had approved 273 change orders for CP2-3 and agreed to pay $800 million in additional costs, marking an increase of 62% over the initial bid. During the bidding process, the Authority decided that prospective bidders may disregard a pending geotechnical report on land subsidence due to groundwater pumping. The report was finished in 2017 and noted increased flooding risks. Of the cost increases by 2021, $101 million were change orders for elevated embankments. By December 2023, the CP2-3 contract had $2.4 billion in approved invoices, those being expected to be 72% of total expenditure.

==== Freight railroad companies ====

The high-speed rail alignment shares substantial parts of its corridor with existing freight railroads. Construction activity that affects them are subject to their approval. These third-party hold-ups can cause disruptions to Authority contractors&#x27; work sequence, which are exacerbated by any Authority-initiated design changes. For example, the construction of a road underpass in downtown Fresno required also building a bridge for existing Union Pacific tracks and their temporary relocation (&quot;shoo-fly&quot;). According to CHSRA officials, it took nine iterations of design reviews to obtain approval, with each step taking about 45 days. Freight railway companies are further able to order construction stops at or near their railroads during peak shipping season in the fourth quarter of each year, thus narrowing the window for construction.

In places where the CAHSR alignment runs close to freight rail lines, such as in downtown Fresno for substantial lengths, safety measures are mandated to protect both lines from a derailment in the other. This resulted in a requirement for the Authority to construct costly intrusion protection barriers – thick walls made out of steel reinforced concrete – to separate its guideway from freight lines. According to the Authority, a final agreement with the FRA and the affected freight rail companies BNSF and Union Pacific on technical specifications for such barriers was reached only in December 2016, well after construction contracts had been issued. The Authority is required to pay all costs for intrusion protection barriers, causing 20 change orders totaling about half a billion dollars in additional costs.

==== Legal challenges ====

Hanford-based farmers John Tos and Aaron Fukuda, leading a protest group called &quot;Citizens for California High Speed Rail Accountability&quot;, began a decade-long series of legal challenges alongside the Kings County Board of Supervisors against the California High-Speed Rail Authority when they jointly filed a lawsuit in 2011, alleging that the project violated Proposition 1A funding requirements. They oppose the rail project because the alignment would run through their fields, requiring them to sell some of their land for construction and causing a lengthy detour to access other parts. According to Fukuda, “it’s not about the money, it’s about the crops and the land that are our livelihood.” City officials and residents from the nearby city of Visalia on the other hand were welcoming of the high-speed rail project, seeing it as a much needed economic opportunity.

In 2013, the group achieved temporary success, when Sacramento County Superior Court Judge Michael Kinney ruled partially in favor of one of their lawsuits that was trying to block the Authority from accessing bond funds authorized via Proposition 1A. The Authority&#x27;s funding plan was deemed flawed due to insufficiently identifying funding needed for construction, thus violating requirements set in the ballot measure. Stuart Flashman, the lawyer who would represent this group in their series of lawsuits against the Authority, stated that “the point of this [lawsuit] was to prevent the state from moving forward and starting construction on a project they couldn’t finish”.

In 2014, Kings County refused the Authority access to county-owned property, where it intended to drill for soil samples as part of a study on land subsidence. A court ordered the county to grant access, but the dispute nonetheless caused delays in obtaining environmental clearance, which was still outstanding at the time. In the same year, seven lawsuits were filed against the Authority by various cities, businesses and associations, stating that its environmental statement finalized in May 2014 violated the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). All these would eventually be dropped or settled, with Kings County being the last one in 2019. In July 2014, the 3rd District Court of Appeal reversed the 2013 decision of the Sacramento County Superior Court. In 2016, the remaining part of the lawsuit that argued via Proposition 1A requirements was dismissed. Kings County Supervisor Doug Verboon, one of the plaintiffs, stated that &quot;it&#x27;s all about making them accountable, and not being a waste of taxpayer dollars.&quot;

In 2017, the California Supreme Court ruled in another case that federal regulations of the Surface Transportation Board do not categorically preempt projects such as CAHSR from compliance with stricter state environmental laws. This decision meant that the Authority is not exempt from having legal injunctions filed against it based on CEQA; these could force a halt to construction while such CEQA claims are being resolved.

In 2018, Sacramento County Superior Court Judge Richard K. Sueyoshi issued a ruling dismissing another lawsuit by the group. It had asserted that Assembly Bill 1889, passed in 2016 to further specify requirements previously laid out in Proposition 1A, was an unconstitutional modification of a voter-approved act. In 2021, a state appeals court affirmed the prior ruling. In 2022, the State Supreme Court denied hearing an appeal, ending John Tos&#x27; decade-long series of lawsuits.

In February 2022, Hollywood Burbank Airport sued the Authority over its then upcoming environmental statement for the unfunded Burbank to Los Angeles segment. Those plans called for an underground high-speed rail station connecting to the airport. Airport officials were worried about impacts on their operations and safety during construction, arguing that the report did not analyze these potential impacts and hence violated CEQA. The lawsuit delayed environmental clearance, and if successful could have required a costly new environmental process to determine a different rail alignment. In November 2023, both parties reached a settlement that included dismissal of the lawsuit and compensation to the airport for its legal expenses.

==== Other ====

The Central Valley with its agricultural focus relies on irrigation canals. These are usually dry from March to September, providing the Authority with a time window of six months per year to conduct work on canal relocations or bridging structures.
In the spring of 2023, the Central Valley around the city of Corcoran was flooded due to unusual amounts of rain and melting snow. Some major work sites were completely flooded and unreachable, causing work to halt. The structures themselves are designed to withstand 100-year floods. Further delays were caused due to emergency measures to support affected communities: A road that had been dug up to be replaced with an overcrossing was repaved to provide access to cut-off residents.

In 2023, the Authority published a major cost revision for putting the IOS into revenue service, significantly increasing estimates from $23.4 billion in its 2022 business plan to a range of $26.2–33 billion, depending on the degree of confidence. Including past and future expenses outside the IOS, total expenditure of the California High-Speed Rail Authority would increase from $25.7 billion to a range of $28.5–35.3 billion. This increase of potentially up to $9.7 billion (or 37%) was explained with the following major factors: $2.1 billion, or 21% of the increase, were attributable to delays in schedule combined with inflation; $3.9 billion, or 40% of the increase, were supposedly due to changes in scope, such as building stations in downtown Merced and Bakersfield upon stakeholder agreement, rather than stopping trains further outside the city centers; and the remaining $3.7 billion, or 39% of the increase, were added as risk contingencies for the higher risk scenario, along with other unspecified elements related to the first two factors.

=== Current cost estimates ===

The table below shows capital cost estimates as of 2024 for the active project scope of the Authority: putting the IOS into revenue service by 2030–2033, investments into blended corridors, and project development such as environmental clearance of Phase 1. Unfunded segments are listed in the next table. Estimates are provided for three risk scenarios and were reported by the Authority as part of legally mandated updates to the California legislature in 2024.

The next table displays capital cost estimates for the full Phase 1. Cost uncertainty for unfunded segments remains high, as preparatory work that can inform cost estimates have not yet been undertaken. Major steps for those would be: environmental clearance to determine the final alignment and necessary mitigation measures, preliminary engineering and geotechnical studies, and advanced design. However, the estimated ranges below do not factor in cost revisions that are expected to occur upon environmental clearance for two sections in Southern California (Palmdale to Burbank, and Los Angeles to Anaheim), planned for the end of 2025. Similarly, the extensive tunnels on the Northern and Southern California segments require geotechnical studies and engineering to inform more precise cost estimates, but those have not yet been funded.
 partially funded and underway

== Political perspectives ==

=== Support ===
Since the project&#x27;s inception, multiple California governors have supported the project. Jerry Brown stated in 2012: &quot;During the 1930&#x27;s, the Central Valley Water Project was called a ‘fantastic dream’ that ‘will not work.’ The Master Plan for the Interstate Highway System in 1939 was derided as ‘New Deal jitterbug economics... The critics were wrong then and they’re wrong now.&quot; In a 2022 interview, Arnold Schwarzenegger criticized the &quot;political provincialism&quot; affecting the project, &quot;You look at the world and very rarely is any system very profitable... When we build schools, we don’t look like, ‘How do we make a big buck out of this whole thing?&quot;

Current California Governor Gavin Newsom, in his February 2019 State of the State address, said: &quot;Let&#x27;s be real... The project, as currently planned, would cost too much and take too long . . . Right now, there simply isn’t a path to get from Sacramento to San Diego, let alone from San Francisco to L.A. I wish there were.&quot; While Newsom said he supported completing the IOS between Merced and Bakersfield and continuing planning for the rest of the route, work beyond that scope would be put on hold until funding issues could be resolved. He then stated, &quot;The project can still be achieved... But let’s be honest about the trade-offs and let’s be honest about the cost.&quot;

Ray LaHood, former United States Secretary of Transportation and Republican Congressman who oversaw federal grants to CAHSR under the Obama administration, stated that &quot;When California is finished, it will end up being a good investment. People will use it... For politicians to turn a blind eye to what the people want, it’s just not right.&quot; Congressman Jim Costa (D-Fresno), one of the original authors of Prop 1A and who continues to seek project funding, wrote: &quot;High-speed rail is a modern solution to California&#x27;s transportation needs, and dismissing it as a pipe dream, or as a romantic concept, will only lead to continued congestion on our roads and delays in our skies.&quot;

Other supporters include local governments along the route, business groups, and labor unions. In 2024, Fresno mayor Jerry Dyer described high-speed rail as &quot;a game-changer for the Valley and for Fresno,&quot; while Merced deputy city manager Frank Quintero called it &quot;a major economic catalyst.&quot; Jeremy Smith, of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, said, &quot;We should not forget that this type of project is exactly what workers in the construction industry need from their government in times of recession, like times we find ourselves in now.&quot;

=== Opposition ===

California Republicans have generally opposed the project. Congressman Kevin McCarthy (R-Bakersfield), a native of Bakersfield, stated that he would &quot;do whatever I can to ensure that not one dollar of federal funds is directed to this project&quot;, a few days before becoming House majority leader. McCarthy has often pushed for redirecting high-speed rail funding to water projects in the Central Valley. In the wake of economic difficulties brought by the COVID-19 pandemic, State Senator Brian Dahle (R-Bieber) remarked, &quot;The project is way underfunded and we’re never going to be able to finish it... Sometimes you’ve got to cut your losses, and it’s time to cut our losses.&quot; Vince Fong (R-Bakersfield) has also been a vocal opponent, stating in 2020, &quot;We need to seriously reevaluate High Speed Rail funding, especially when this state is asking Californians to make real sacrifices,&quot; in regard to &quot;[proposed] cuts to education, healthcare programs, and diverting road funds to address our budget deficit.&quot;

A number of California Democrats have also expressed doubts about the project. In 2012, State Senator Joe Simitian (D-Palo Alto) asked, &quot;Is there additional commitment of federal funds? There is not. Is there additional commitment of private funding? There is not. Is there a dedicated funding source that we can look to in the coming years? There is not.&quot; In 2020, Toni Atkins (D-San Diego) stated, &quot;I want to see high-speed rail move forward only in a way that is responsible and in keeping with what we told the voters we would do.&quot;

Many advocacy groups have also opposed the project or criticized its management and implementation. The libertarian Reason Foundation wrote in 2008: &quot;It is possible that HSR can serve legitimate public and environmental purposes and be a financial success in California. However, the current CHSRA proposal cannot achieve such objectives,&quot; calling attention to issues such as &quot;questionable ridership projections and cost assumptions&quot; and &quot;virtually no objective analysis about risks and uncertainties.&quot; In 2015, the Train Riders Association of California described the high-speed rail project as &quot;throwing good money after bad&quot; and argued that upgrading the existing &quot;Pacific Surfliner&quot; and &quot;San Joaquins&quot; services would provide more benefits per dollar.

While the environmentalist organization Sierra Club initially supported the project, they shifted to opposing it in 2014, arguing that California should prioritize spending on other efforts to fight climate change, as high-speed rail&#x27;s benefits would take decades to realize. Many agricultural interests along the proposed route have also opposed the project due to its potential impact on farming operations and the use of eminent domain.

In February 2025, President Donald Trump stated he would investigate California&#x27;s High-Speed Rail Authority, suggesting possible issues in its management and oversight. In response, state officials dismissed his comments as unhelpful, labeling them as &#x27;noise&#x27;.

=== Legislative oversight ===

In 2011 the California Legislative Analyst&#x27;s Office (LAO) published a report regarding management issues with the project, citing that plans to obtain future funding were inadequate and were a risk to the project&#x27;s future viability. The LAO recommended that the state seek flexibility with the use of federal funds, most of which was required to be used on the Merced–Bakersfield segment, and recommended the state pursue other corridors in the Bay Area and Los Angeles that could provide more immediate benefits. They also criticized the Authority&#x27;s heavy reliance on private consultants, which increased costs and complicated management.

In 2012, the California High-Speed Rail Peer Review Group – an independent panel established by the California Legislature to provide oversight of the high-speed rail project – advised the state not to sell bonds funding the project unless funding issues were addressed. The group wrote that continuing the high-speed rail project without a solid plan to secure future funding represented a financial risk to California. The peer review group published an updated analysis in 2022, noting that the project had made significant progress on environmental clearance and addressed many of its management issues; however, &quot;overall project funding remains inadequate and unstable making effective management extremely difficult&quot;. It called future cost estimates into question as those sections had not yet been bid on, and that the Authority lacked contract management experiences with key portions of those sections (such as tunneling). The peer group said the target 2 hr 40 min trip time won&#x27;t be achieved.

In 2022, in order to improve legislative oversight, Governor Newsom and the California legislature agreed to appoint an inspector general to the California High-Speed Rail Authority, a position equipped with its own staffing and endowed with more extensive authorities such as full access to project records and contracts, as well as the ability to issue subpoenas for witnesses and records. However, the inspector general will not be able to directly control spending. In 2023, the governor appointed Benjamin Belnap to the position.

===Public opinion polls===

Public approval of the project among California residents has remained relatively steady since 2008, when Proposition 1A passed with 53 percent of the vote. In April 2022, UC Berkeley&#x27;s Institute of Government Studies released a survey of registered voters that found 56% supporting continuation of the high-speed rail project, even if &quot;its operations only extend from Bakersfield to Merced in the Central Valley by the year 2030 and to the Bay Area by the year 2033&quot;, and 35% remaining opposed. Approval varied by political affiliation, with 73% of Democrats backing the project versus 25% of Republicans.

A poll commissioned by Newsweek in June 2024 confronted eligible voters across the US with the missed 2020 deadline for completion of Phase 1 stipulated in Proposition 1A, as well as with the increase of its initial cost estimate of $33 billion to $128 billion. Still, more respondents deemed the project worthwhile (40%) than not worthwhile (33%), the rest (27%) being undecided.

A poll commissioned by KTLA parent company Nexstar and conducted by Emerson College Polling was published in February 2025, which found that among a sample of 1000 Californians 56% of respondents deemed the high-speed rail project a good use of state funds. The margin of error of the poll was given at three percentage points.

An older statewide survey, conducted in March 2016 by the Public Policy Institute of California (PPIC), indicated that 52% of Californians supported the project, while 63% of Californians thought the project is either &quot;very important&quot; or &quot;somewhat important&quot; for California&#x27;s economy and quality of life. Support varied by location (with the San Francisco Bay Area the highest at 63%, and lowest in Orange/San Diego at 47%), by race (Asians 66%, Latinos 58%, Whites 44%, and Blacks 42%), by age (declining sharply with increasing age), and by political orientation (Democrats 59%, independents 47%, and Republicans 29%).

== Economic, environmental and community debates ==

=== Construction sequencing ===

Concerns have been raised with the plan to start service on only the IOS in the Central Valley. As &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote in 2022, because the IOS would not reach the major urban centers of the Bay Area and Los Angeles, initial ridership potential could be severely limited. While previous iterations of the IOS would have connected to at least one of these metro areas, they were scaled back due to lack of funding. While Gavin Newsom has supported completing the line from Merced to Bakersfield, other California lawmakers such as Anthony Rendon (D-Lakewood) have argued that the limited funds should be directed to other segments of the line, such as Burbank to Anaheim, which run through more densely populated areas and could see higher initial ridership even without the rest of the system being complete. Rendon described the approach as &quot;not the end of high-speed rail, but a way to save it.&quot; The Authority countered that the Central Valley was the easiest location to start due to the flat terrain, and was the most suitable location for a test track once the first trainsets are delivered. In addition, federal funding granted in 2010–11 was required to be used in the Central Valley segment.

A 2024 opinion piece published in the &quot;Times of San Diego&quot; compared the California project to high-speed rail in Indonesia, which opened its initial section in 2023. The Indonesian rail project only reaches the outskirts of the cities it serves, requiring a long trip on local transit to reach the city centers. Similarly, the California IOS would require a transfer on both ends to reach the Bay Area and Los Angeles. High-speed rail in Indonesia was reporting an operational loss and lower ridership than forecast. However, the Lowy Institute notes that the Indonesian corridor is short (less than half of the California IOS) and already served by frequent rail service while its tickets are twice as expensive, limiting the line&#x27;s attractiveness to passengers. The &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote: &quot;fares will be one of the most important factors in the decisions that millions of travelers will make when choosing to fly, drive or ride the bullet train.&quot;

=== Transport mode and ridership ===

The sections from San Francisco to Gilroy and from Burbank to Anaheim are intended to be operated as &quot;blended&quot; sections, in which high-speed trains would share the rail corridor and tracks with slower commuter rail and possibly freight trains, in order to avoid a costly dedicated right-of-way in dense urban areas. This has been the subject of criticism, as it would limit both train speeds and frequencies on the shared corridors. A 2015 report prepared by Eric Eidlin of the U.S Department of Transportation noted that while these were downsides of blended operation (as is the case for high-speed rail in Germany), there were also potential benefits, such as improved transit connectivity from sharing existing stations, and reduced noise and environmental impacts.

Some Bay Area residents have questioned the safety of allowing high-speed trains to use grade crossings, and pushed for more grade separations along the route. City governments such as Palo Alto have expressed concern that future rail operations would cause traffic congestion at grade crossings, due to the high frequency of combined high-speed rail and Caltrain service.

Because most California cities have less public transit coverage compared to cities abroad served by high-speed rail, some critics have expressed concern that a lack of local transit connectivity may discourage potential riders. Assemblywoman Laura Friedman (D-Glendale) asked: &quot;How (do) we turn California car culture into a California culture of transit of all sorts? ... That is the big question — and how does high-speed rail interact with that?&quot; The urban policy think tank SPUR highlighted that to improve the usability of high-speed rail, cities should focus future development and density around stations, integrate them into surrounding communities and public spaces, prevent displacement through gentrification, and provide robust alternatives for station access besides driving. Large investments in public transit are currently underway or planned in the state&#x27;s major cities, with the Bay Area expanding BART, commuter rail, light rail and bus rapid transit, while Los Angeles is spending $120 billion through Measure M to build out its Metro Rail and bus network.

In a 2013 analysis, the libertarian Reason Foundation argued that California&#x27;s ridership projections could be overly optimistic. They noted that California expected 73 percent of its total ridership to be captured from existing highway travel, while in Europe, high-speed rail ridership was mostly captured from airlines and conventional rail, with only 11-16 percent from highways. High-speed rail tends to capture significantly more riders from airlines and conventional rail than from highways, due to the comparable nature of the trips requiring travel to a station or airport.

In 2023, about 4.8 million passengers flew between the Bay Area and greater Los Angeles, while total 2022 Amtrak ridership in the state was about 6.4 million. In comparison, the Authority projected 28.4 million high-speed rail riders on Phase 1 by 2040. The Reason Foundation did not account for induced demand, or new trips generated by high-speed rail rather than those replacing existing car, airline and transit trips. A study by the Transportation Research Board found that among high-speed rail projects worldwide, induced demand accounted for anywhere from 0 to 80 percent of total ridership, which represents a major uncertainty in ridership projections.

In the early 2000s, forecasters expected California&#x27;s population to hit 59 million by 2040, but updated forecasts in 2023 expect it to remain around 40 million, only a slight increase from the population at that time. With the rate of population growth slowing, particularly after the COVID-19 pandemic, some critics have questioned the need for additional transportation capacity in the state. In 2023, the &quot;Times-Standard&quot; wrote, &quot;...It’s time for local and state government officials to recalibrate. Projects that were conceived based on the assumption of an expanding California population will no longer make sense.&quot; The Authority has revised its Phase 1 ridership projections downward, from 38.6 million in 2020 to 31.5 million in 2023. The major exception to California population trends is in the Central Valley, which is expected to add up to 5 million new residents by 2060. This could significantly increase transportation demand in the state&#x27;s interior, even with a lack of growth in coastal cities.

====Hyperloop====

There was significant press coverage around the Hyperloop concept first promoted by Elon Musk in 2013 as an alternative to high-speed rail. Musk proposed that the system of pods carried within vacuum-sealed tubes would be faster than rail and cheaper to construct. Although the hyperloop concept became publicly popular and numerous media outlets such as &quot;The New York Times&quot; and the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; initially published favorable coverage of the concept, physicists questioned the viability of the technology and the projected $6 billion cost was criticized as implausibly low. Hyperloop construction would have encountered the same planning and land-use hurdles faced by high-speed rail. In a 2019 interview, Musk admitted that the Hyperloop was never a serious proposal. Rather, he had promoted it because of his personal distaste for the high-speed rail project. Hyperloop One, the only company to have built a working prototype, shut down in 2023 after failing to find a buyer for the technology.

=== Choice of route ===
A route between the Bay Area and the Central Valley via Altamont Pass – which was among the corridor options listed in Proposition 1A – has been suggested as an alternative to the Pacheco Pass route. Critics such as the California Rail Foundation and Samer Madanat, director of the Institute of Transportation Studies at UC Berkeley, have noted that Altamont would provide a more direct link from the Stockton and Modesto areas to San Francisco, compared to Pacheco which requires a long detour to the south.

As of 2020, the Sierra Club also opposed the Pacheco route in favor of Altamont, citing the greater impacts of the former on Coast Range wildlife and its potential to induce urban sprawl in the countryside surrounding Gilroy. Sprawl has been a general concern since the early planning of the project; a station in Los Banos – which the Pacheco route passes between Gilroy and Merced – was specifically prohibited by Prop 1A as a compromise for the Sierra Club and other environmental groups to endorse the ballot.

The Authority has intended to build the Pacheco route since 2007, and as of 2024 its plans remained unchanged. Because of its more northerly location, the alternative Altamont route would bypass downtown San Jose and require either a tunnel under San Francisco Bay or the reconstruction of the Dumbarton Rail Bridge. The Altamont route would also pass through more heavily urbanized areas than the Pacheco route, potentially leading to more opposition from property owners. Planned upgrades to other existing Northern California rail lines are expected to improve service and increase speeds through Altamont Pass, as well as from Sacramento to the Bay Area.

Routing high-speed rail along Interstate 5, which would have provided a shorter trip between the Bay Area and Southern California but bypassed Fresno and Bakersfield, was also discussed in the 2000s. SNCF, the French national high-speed rail operator, proposed an I-5 alignment to the Authority and offered to build it with the help of foreign investment,&lt;ref name=&quot;nytimes/rail-politics&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; although in 2009 they also expressed their interest in building the state&#x27;s official proposed alignment. The Authority turned down SNCF&#x27;s involvement in 2011, in part due to &quot;Buy America&quot; requirements that mandate transportation projects using federal funds to use domestically produced trains and materials, and due to political considerations as Proposition 1A outlined a route through Fresno and Bakersfield.

A route from the Central Valley to Southern California through Tejon Pass (the Grapevine along I-5), which would be shorter than the route through Tehachapi Pass and Palmdale, was initially disconsidered because initial studies expected Tejon would require more tunneling. In 2012, the Authority reopened a study of the Tejon route after it was found that the Palmdale route would need more tunneling than anticipated. The study was canceled after the city of Palmdale threatened to sue, citing that Proposition 1A specifies a route through there. The owners of Tejon Ranch, which has large land holdings in Tejon Pass, also opposed the Tejon route and pressured the Authority to drop the study. Although the Tejon route would provide a faster north-south trip, it would miss the opportunity to connect with Brightline West in Palmdale.

=== Construction impact on communities ===

Construction work in the Central Valley has caused disruptions, such as noise and air quality impacts to residents along the route, and road closures at overpass construction sites. The city of Wasco raised concerns about neglect of properties purchased by the Authority along the rail alignment, which had become blighted and attracted squatters for several years. In November 2021 the city reached a resolution with the Authority to clean up the site. Properties were taken by eminent domain in Fresno, Bakersfield and smaller cities along the route. Assemblyman Vince Fong (R-Bakersfield) said that &quot;the high-speed rail authority is trying to sugar coat the impacts it is having on communities... It impacts significantly part of Bakersfield that is socioeconomically disadvantaged.&quot;

The project has impacted agriculture along its route in the Central Valley, with portions of several large properties being cut off from access, disruption of irrigation systems, and a reduction in the acreage available for farming. While the state is legally required to compensate farmers for financial setbacks and the use of their land, some payments have been significantly delayed, sometimes by up to a year.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

*California High-Speed Rail Authority official website
*California High-Speed Rail Peer Review Group official website of an independent, state-appointed body that reviews the California High-Speed Rail Authority</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q782093" start="0" end="26" title="California High-Speed Rail" label="California High-Speed Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q782093" start="28" end="33" title="California High-Speed Rail" label="CAHSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="56" end="71" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="98" end="108" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020545" start="116" end="152" title="California High-Speed Rail Authority" label="California High-Speed Rail Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="198" end="211" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="215" end="226" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="231" end="238" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="247" end="261" title="Central Valley (California)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="363" end="373" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="387" end="396" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020792" start="447" end="468" title="2008 California Proposition 1A" label="2008 statewide ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="694" end="700" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q287167" start="707" end="719" title="San Joaquins" label="San Joaquins"/>
<link wikidata="Q499189" start="1036" end="1042" title="Merced, California" label="Merced"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="1047" end="1058" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="1065" end="1079" title="Central Valley (California)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152451" start="3023" end="3034" title="Jerry Brown" label="Jerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="3251" end="3259" title="Caltrans" label="Caltrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q714909" start="3447" end="3458" title="Pete Wilson" label="Pete Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="3667" end="3688" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020792" start="3718" end="3732" title="2008 California Proposition 1A" label="Proposition 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="3867" end="3880" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833806" start="4146" end="4171" title="Salesforce Transit Center" label="Salesforce Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q198019" start="4192" end="4217" title="Los Angeles Union Station" label="Los Angeles Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="4652" end="4660" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="4661" end="4667" title="Fresno, California" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="4683" end="4691" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122002" start="4707" end="4719" title="Pacheco Pass" label="Pacheco Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="4721" end="4728" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q499189" start="4743" end="4749" title="Merced, California" label="Merced"/>
<link wikidata="Q434305" start="4789" end="4802" title="Altamont Pass" label="Altamont Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="4909" end="4920" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q488940" start="4926" end="4934" title="Palmdale, California" label="Palmdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49243" start="5031" end="5040" title="Riverside, California" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="5076" end="5082" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138091" start="5732" end="5746" title="Coast Daylight" label="Coast Daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="5876" end="5882" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q225313" start="5983" end="5998" title="Coast Starlight" label="Coast Starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q287167" start="6063" end="6075" title="San Joaquins" label="San Joaquins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135326" start="6825" end="6836" title="remote work" label="remote work"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414084" start="7101" end="7105" title="SPUR (San Francisco organization)" label="SPUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="7124" end="7136" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413231" start="7443" end="7465" title="Orange County Register" label="Orange County Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="7586" end="7594" title="Caltrans" label="Caltrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="8489" end="8502" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="8511" end="8525" title="Central Valley, California" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="8529" end="8540" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148552" start="8667" end="8680" title="Inland Empire" label="Inland Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="8684" end="8693" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833806" start="9130" end="9155" title="Salesforce Transit Center" label="Salesforce Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750891" start="9180" end="9229" title="Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center" label="Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858585" start="9278" end="9286" title="Millbrae station" label="Millbrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096377" start="9288" end="9296" title="San Jose Diridon Station" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562580" start="9298" end="9304" title="Gilroy station" label="Gilroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078019" start="9306" end="9312" title="Merced station (California High-Speed Rail)" label="Merced"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842350" start="9314" end="9320" title="Madera station (California High-Speed Rail)" label="Madera"/>
<link wikidata="Q22077981" start="9322" end="9328" title="Fresno station (California High-Speed Rail)" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078009" start="9330" end="9352" title="Kings–Tulare Regional Station" label="Kings/Tulare (Hanford)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22077971" start="9354" end="9365" title="Bakersfield station (California High-Speed Rail)" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128176" start="9367" end="9375" title="Palmdale Transportation Center" label="Palmdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q110128056" start="9377" end="9384" title="Burbank Airport station (California High-Speed Rail)" label="Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q198019" start="9389" end="9400" title="Los Angeles Union Station" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060773" start="9460" end="9467" title="Norwalk/Santa Fe Springs station" label="Norwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096498" start="9471" end="9480" title="Fullerton Transportation Center" label="Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413912" start="9516" end="9545" title="San Francisco 4th and King Street station" label="4th and King Caltrain station"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053210" start="9687" end="9697" title="The Portal (San Francisco)" label="The Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833806" start="9706" end="9731" title="Salesforce Transit Center" label="Salesforce Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241223" start="9813" end="9825" title="Diablo Range" label="Diablo Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122002" start="9840" end="9852" title="Pacheco Pass" label="Pacheco Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q334533" start="9919" end="9925" title="Flying junction" label="flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q579440" start="9926" end="9929" title="Wye (rail)" label="wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="10095" end="10101" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q287167" start="10102" end="10114" title="San Joaquins" label="San Joaquins"/>
<link wikidata="Q434302" start="10119" end="10150" title="Altamont Corridor Express" label="Altamont Corridor Express (ACE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="10177" end="10185" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559442" start="10385" end="10404" title="Tehachapi Mountains" label="Tehachapi Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694821" start="10409" end="10423" title="Tehachapi Pass" label="Tehachapi Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="10443" end="10456" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="10484" end="10505" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q166817" start="10851" end="10859" title="Caltrain" label="Caltrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q766647" start="10880" end="10889" title="Metrolink (California)" label="Metrolink"/>
<link wikidata="Q499189" start="11598" end="11604" title="Merced" label="Merced"/>
<link wikidata="Q851000" start="11609" end="11615" title="Madera, California" label="Madera"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="11617" end="11623" title="Fresno" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q375185" start="11625" end="11632" title="Hanford, California" label="Hanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="11636" end="11647" title="Bakersfield" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="11868" end="11882" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q851000" start="13343" end="13349" title="Madera, California" label="Madera"/>
<link wikidata="Q985258" start="13359" end="13366" title="Shafter, California" label="Shafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921794" start="13434" end="13446" title="design-build" label="design-build"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591926" start="13532" end="13546" title="railroad grade" label="railroad grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q287167" start="14084" end="14118" title="San Joaquin Joint Powers Authority" label="San Joaquin Joint Powers Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q29095250" start="14756" end="14783" title="Caltrain Modernization Program" label="electrification of Caltrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="15105" end="15127" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643599" start="15177" end="15193" title="grade separation" label="grade separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q171448" start="15412" end="15427" title="grade crossings" label="grade crossings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474933" start="15475" end="15485" title="Four-quadrant gate" label="quad gates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15607" end="15615" title="Train station#Terminus" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q494723" start="15808" end="15817" title="Fullerton, California" label="Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="15861" end="15865" title="Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308991" start="15906" end="15917" title="Port of Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244441" start="15922" end="15932" title="Port of Long Beach" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105716" start="16451" end="16473" title="positive train control" label="positive train control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354340" start="16788" end="16818" title="environmental impact statement" label="environmental impact statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q805207" start="17147" end="17153" title="California State Route 152" label="SR 152"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087301" start="17172" end="17187" title="Pacheco Pass Tunnels" label="several tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q66982186" start="17757" end="17775" title="Mojave Subdivision" label="Mojave Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126676" start="17849" end="17863" title="Tehachapi Loop" label="Tehachapi Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139344" start="18115" end="18120" title="Grade (slope)" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q108047" start="18332" end="18343" title="Kern County, California" label="Kern County"/>
<link wikidata="Q128987622" start="18455" end="18475" title="High Desert Corridor" label="High Desert Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263134" start="18476" end="18491" title="Brightline West" label="Brightline West"/>
<link wikidata="Q460854" start="18616" end="18630" title="California State Route 14" label="State Route 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="18819" end="18836" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="19869" end="19877" title="megawatt" label="megawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="19907" end="19920" title="megawatt hour" label="megawatt hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12111866" start="20592" end="20610" title="maintenance of way" label="maintenance of way"/>
<link wikidata="Q204561" start="20992" end="20999" title="Modesto, California" label="Modesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="21004" end="21012" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="21175" end="21184" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q270378" start="21321" end="21325" title="Interstate 10 in California" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q270391" start="21380" end="21384" title="Interstate 15 in California" label="I-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q399993" start="21388" end="21393" title="Interstate 215 (California)" label="I-215"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148552" start="21444" end="21457" title="Inland Empire (California)" label="Inland Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q949831" start="21510" end="21539" title="Ontario International Airport" label="Ontario International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q372454" start="21544" end="21553" title="Escondido, California" label="Escondido"/>
<link wikidata="Q595550" start="21611" end="21619" title="El Monte, California" label="El Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q494728" start="21621" end="21632" title="West Covina, California" label="West Covina"/>
<link wikidata="Q486868" start="21634" end="21640" title="Pomona, California" label="Pomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="21642" end="21656" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q494707" start="21658" end="21664" title="Corona, California" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031829" start="21666" end="21675" title="March Air Reserve Base" label="March ARB"/>
<link wikidata="Q838787" start="21680" end="21688" title="Murrieta, California" label="Murrieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020792" start="21953" end="21967" title="2008 California Proposition 1A" label="Proposition 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="22246" end="22269" title="electric multiple units" label="electric multiple units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="22812" end="22815" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="ADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440355" start="22837" end="22840" title="Federal Railroad Administration" label="FRA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23338" end="23345" title="Alstom " label="Alstom "/>
<link wikidata="Q391895" start="23350" end="23366" title="Siemens Mobility" label="Siemens Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="23928" end="23966" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972039" start="24042" end="24057" title="Buy America Act" label="Buy America Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24129" end="24146" title="Hornell, New York#Hornell in the post-railroad period (1960–present)" label="Hornell, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461953" start="24171" end="24191" title="Horseheads (village), New York" label="Horseheads, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440355" start="24247" end="24250" title="Federal Railroad Administration" label="FRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9322" start="25706" end="25719" title="Deutsche Bahn" label="Deutsche Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="26220" end="26238" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263134" start="26385" end="26400" title="Brightline West" label="Brightline West"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="26514" end="26531" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q495353" start="26535" end="26558" title="Victorville, California" label="Victorville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="26640" end="26653" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q93472" start="26664" end="26676" title="Interstate 15" label="I-15 freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q128987622" start="26956" end="26976" title="High Desert Corridor" label="High Desert Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q495365" start="27258" end="27286" title="Rancho Cucamonga, California" label="Rancho Cucamonga, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="27410" end="27448" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q434302" start="27756" end="27781" title="Altamont Corridor Express" label="Altamont Corridor Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q287167" start="27803" end="27815" title="San Joaquins" label="San Joaquins"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078019" start="28097" end="28131" title="Merced station (California High-Speed Rail)" label="Merced Multi-Modal Transit Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016272" start="28629" end="28654" title="Naval Air Station Lemoore" label="Naval Air Station Lemoore"/>
<link wikidata="Q375185" start="28670" end="28677" title="Hanford, California" label="Hanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q495373" start="28679" end="28686" title="Visalia, California" label="Visalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q927173" start="28692" end="28703" title="Porterville, California" label="Porterville"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078009" start="28720" end="28756" title="Kings–Tulare Regional Station" label="Kings-Tulare high-speed rail station"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="29474" end="29484" title="Shinkansen" label="Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037988" start="29785" end="29798" title="cap-and-trade" label="cap-and-trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29095250" start="30506" end="30530" title="Caltrain Modernization Program" label="Caltrain electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020792" start="30845" end="30859" title="2008 California Proposition 1A" label="Proposition 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q29095250" start="31102" end="31126" title="Caltrain Modernization Program" label="Caltrain Electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q466637" start="31471" end="31509" title="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act" label="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="32109" end="32137" title="California State Legislature" label="California State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037988" start="32181" end="32194" title="cap-and-trade" label="cap-and-trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="32631" end="32657" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump-Pence administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="32926" end="32938" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="33089" end="33116" title="Presidency of Joe Biden" label="Biden-Harris Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440355" start="33199" end="33202" title="Federal Railroad Administration" label="FRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q985258" start="33258" end="33277" title="Shafter, California" label="Shafter, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263134" start="33605" end="33620" title="Brightline West" label="Brightline West"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="33692" end="33703" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="33709" end="33718" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="33766" end="33804" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16912277" start="35359" end="35366" title="WSP USA" label="WSP USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="35907" end="35921" title="Real and nominal value" label="nominal prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="35947" end="35956" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q830539" start="37461" end="37498" title="Wendlingen–Ulm high-speed railway" label="A high-speed line in Southern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="37602" end="37614" title="High Speed 2" label="High Speed 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="37703" end="37709" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="37715" end="37725" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="38097" end="38114" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330624" start="38281" end="38308" title="Eastern span replacement of the San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge" label="Bay Bridge replacement span"/>
<link wikidata="Q399983" start="38552" end="38557" title="Interstate 405 in California" label="I-405"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452402" start="38561" end="38575" title="Sepulveda Pass" label="Sepulveda Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514993" start="38786" end="38815" title="Silicon Valley BART extension" label="Silicon Valley BART extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815011" start="40332" end="40340" title="PG&amp;amp;E" label="PG&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408037" start="42318" end="42327" title="Ferrovial" label="Ferrovial"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="43049" end="43053" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="43058" end="43062" title="UPRR" label="UPRR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856971" start="43691" end="43703" title="Tutor Perini" label="Tutor Perini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896512" start="43717" end="43724" title="Parsons Corporation" label="Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982399" start="44150" end="44159" title="Ron Tutor" label="Ron Tutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550888" start="45166" end="45174" title="Dragados" label="Dragados"/>
<link wikidata="Q136542" start="45179" end="45187" title="Hochtief" label="Hochtief"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250587" start="45199" end="45220" title="Flatiron Construction" label="Flatiron Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264687" start="45861" end="45872" title="Kings River (California)" label="Kings River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="46021" end="46032" title="box culvert" label="box culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="46304" end="46308" title="UPRR" label="UPRR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020421" start="46387" end="46429" title="California Department of Fish and Wildlife" label="California Department of Fish and Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q27987120" start="46472" end="46491" title="Kings River Viaduct" label="Kings River Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078009" start="46501" end="46530" title="Kings–Tulare Regional Station" label="Kings–Tulare Regional Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="47701" end="47714" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440355" start="48571" end="48574" title="Federal Railroad Administration" label="FRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="48615" end="48619" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="48624" end="48637" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q156358" start="49170" end="49182" title="Kings County, California" label="Kings County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495373" start="49723" end="49730" title="Visalia" label="Visalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020475" start="51046" end="51082" title="California Environmental Quality Act" label="California Environmental Quality Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368496" start="51670" end="51698" title="Surface Transportation Board" label="Surface Transportation Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q598817" start="52511" end="52536" title="Hollywood Burbank Airport" label="Hollywood Burbank Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q913487" start="53562" end="53570" title="Corcoran, California" label="Corcoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944429" start="56624" end="56652" title="Central Valley Project" label="Central Valley Water Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="57193" end="57205" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q467891" start="57864" end="57874" title="Ray LaHood" label="Ray LaHood"/>
<link wikidata="Q967737" start="57883" end="57924" title="United States Secretary of Transportation" label="United States Secretary of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q675869" start="58229" end="58238" title="Jim Costa" label="Jim Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095444" start="58242" end="58248" title="California&amp;#x27;s 21st congressional district" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q766866" start="59249" end="59263" title="Kevin McCarthy" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q525805" start="59267" end="59278" title="California&amp;#x27;s 23rd congressional district" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="59642" end="59659" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963505" start="59675" end="59686" title="Brian Dahle" label="Brian Dahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019961" start="59690" end="59696" title="California&amp;#x27;s 1st senatorial district" label="Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916201" start="59874" end="59884" title="Vince Fong" label="Vince Fong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020017" start="59888" end="59899" title="California&amp;#x27;s 32nd State Assembly district" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212357" start="60329" end="60341" title="Joe Simitian" label="Joe Simitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="60345" end="60354" title="Palo Alto" label="Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395723" start="60603" end="60614" title="Toni Atkins" label="Toni Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301484" start="60900" end="60917" title="Reason Foundation" label="Reason Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q508775" start="61640" end="61651" title="Sierra Club" label="Sierra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="62074" end="62086" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020666" start="62366" end="62410" title="California Legislative Analyst&amp;#x27;s Office" label="California Legislative Analyst&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="65240" end="65248" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020792" start="65373" end="65387" title="2008 California Proposition 1A" label="Proposition 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140873" start="65622" end="65626" title="KTLA" label="KTLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020906" start="65642" end="65649" title="Nexstar Media Group" label="Nexstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257496" start="65986" end="66023" title="Public Policy Institute of California" label="Public Policy Institute of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="66766" end="66778" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773347" start="67202" end="67216" title="Anthony Rendon (politician)" label="Anthony Rendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q838757" start="67220" end="67228" title="Lakewood, California" label="Lakewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999865" start="67987" end="68015" title="high-speed rail in Indonesia" label="high-speed rail in Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11145901" start="68423" end="68437" title="Lowy Institute" label="Lowy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="69510" end="69536" title="Intercity Express" label="high-speed rail in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="69876" end="69885" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498920" start="70308" end="70322" title="Laura Friedman" label="Laura Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020069" start="70326" end="70334" title="California&amp;#x27;s 43rd State Assembly district" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="70781" end="70795" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q610120" start="70997" end="71001" title="Bay Area Rapid Transit" label="BART"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339558" start="71130" end="71140" title="Los Angeles Metro Rail" label="Metro Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018003" start="72043" end="72057" title="induced demand" label="induced demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835180" start="72185" end="72214" title="Transportation Research Board" label="Transportation Research Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q13447196" start="72830" end="72844" title="Times-Standard" label="Times-Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156052" start="73521" end="73530" title="Hyperloop" label="Hyperloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="73557" end="73566" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="73834" end="73852" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="73873" end="73890" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605534" start="74363" end="74376" title="Hyperloop One" label="Hyperloop One"/>
<link wikidata="Q434305" start="74579" end="74592" title="Altamont Pass" label="Altamont Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="74844" end="74855" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q508775" start="75049" end="75060" title="Sierra Club" label="Sierra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="75207" end="75219" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q590932" start="75347" end="75356" title="Los Banos, California" label="Los Banos"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="75795" end="75812" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23761722" start="75842" end="75863" title="Dumbarton Rail Bridge" label="Dumbarton Rail Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q54725" start="76238" end="76250" title="Interstate 5" label="Interstate 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646" start="76408" end="76412" title="SNCF" label="SNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q477468" start="77122" end="77132" title="Tejon Pass" label="Tejon Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695260" start="77621" end="77632" title="Tejon Ranch" label="Tejon Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q985255" start="78135" end="78140" title="Wasco, California" label="Wasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916201" start="78506" end="78516" title="Vince Fong" label="Vince Fong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266146" wikidata="Q402975" url="?curid=1266146" title="Naousa">
<text>Naousa or Naoussa may refer to:

*Naousa, Imathia, a town in Imathia, Macedonia, Greece
**Naousa massacre, 1822
**Naoussa F.C., a football club
*Naousa, Paros, a village on the island of Paros, in the Cyclades, Greece</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12875668" start="34" end="49" title="Naousa, Imathia" label="Naousa, Imathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396743" start="90" end="105" title="Naousa massacre" label="Naousa massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032016" start="114" end="126" title="Naoussa F.C." label="Naoussa F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q748821" start="145" end="158" title="Naousa, Paros" label="Naousa, Paros"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266147" wikidata="Q4693880" url="?curid=1266147" title="Agricultural Cooperative College">
<text>Agricultural Cooperative University is a private university located in Goyang City, Gyeonggi province, South Korea. It is operated by the National Agricultural Cooperative Federation, also known as Nonghyup (농협).

== History ==

The school was first founded under the aegis of Konkuk University in 1962. Nonghyup took over the operation in 1966.

==Students==

The student body is roughly 300. The school&#x27;s alumni today number more than 3,400, most of whom are employed by the National Agricultural Cooperative Federation.

==Notable people==
* Choi Sang-mok, College&#x27;s president (2020-2022) and Acting President of South Korea.

==See also==
*Education in South Korea
*List of colleges and universities in South Korea

== References ==
== External links ==
* Official school website, in Korean
* PDF file including English-language school profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4693880" start="0" end="35" title="Agricultural Cooperative College" label="Agricultural Cooperative University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42061" start="71" end="77" title="Goyang" label="Goyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q20937" start="84" end="92" title="Gyeonggi" label="Gyeonggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="103" end="114" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q490382" start="138" end="182" title="National Agricultural Cooperative Federation" label="National Agricultural Cooperative Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q490382" start="198" end="206" title="Nonghyup" label="Nonghyup"/>
<link wikidata="Q190662" start="268" end="273" title="aegis" label="aegis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41765" start="277" end="294" title="Konkuk University" label="Konkuk University"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="365" end="377" title="student body" label="student body"/>
<link wikidata="Q31178879" start="550" end="563" title="Choi Sang-mok" label="Choi Sang-mok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296418" start="613" end="637" title="President of South Korea" label="President of South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q496198" start="654" end="678" title="Education in South Korea" label="Education in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q494836" start="680" end="728" title="List of colleges and universities in South Korea" label="List of colleges and universities in South Korea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266150" wikidata="Q265218" url="?curid=1266150" title="Tamlyn Tomita">
<text>Tamlyn Naomi Tomita (born January 27, 1966) is an American actress. She made her screen debut as Kumiko in &quot;The Karate Kid Part II&quot; (1986) and reprised the character for the streaming series &quot;Cobra Kai&quot; (2021). She is also well known for her role as Waverly in &quot;The Joy Luck Club&quot; (1993). Additional films include &quot;Come See the Paradise&quot; (1990), &quot;Picture Bride&quot; (1994), &quot;Four Rooms&quot; (1995), &quot;Robot Stories&quot; (2003), &quot;The Day After Tomorrow&quot; (2004) and &quot;Gaijin 2: Love Me as I Am&quot; (2005).

Tomita also has played several recurring roles on television series, including &quot;24&quot;, &quot;Glee&quot;, &quot;Teen Wolf, Eureka,&quot; and &quot;How to Get Away with Murder&quot;. She starred on the Epix drama series &quot;Berlin Station&quot; (2016), and in 2017 began starring in the ABC medical drama &quot;The Good Doctor&quot;. In 2020, she had a recurring role in &quot;Star Trek: Picard&quot;.

==Early life==
Tamlyn Tomita, a second generation Japanese-American (nisei), was born January 27, 1966, on a U.S. military base in Okinawa and grew up in Los Angeles. Her Japanese-American father was in an internment camp during World War II. He met her mother while stationed in Okinawa between the Korean and Vietnam Wars. Her mother was of half-Native Okinawan and half-Filipino descent, born in Manila and emigrated to Okinawa after World War II. Her father became an LAPD officer upon returning to Los Angeles.

Tomita graduated from Granada Hills High School and attended University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), where she studied history and planned to become a history teacher. While a junior at UCLA, she participated in Nisei Week, where she was crowned its 1984 queen. She and several other Japanese-American girls were asked by Helen Funai, the 1963 pageant queen, to audition for the role of Kumiko in &quot;The Karate Kid II&quot;. She promised her parents that she would finish college, and then explore acting.

==Career==
===Film===
After &quot;The Karate Kid II&quot;, Tomita had major roles in a number of independent movies. Her biggest role was in the 1990 drama film &quot;Come See the Paradise&quot;. In 1993, she co-starred opposite Ming-Na Wen in the ensemble cast drama &quot;The Joy Luck Club&quot; and the next year she had a role in the 1994 independent film &quot;Picture Bride&quot;. In 1995 Tomita appeared alongside Antonio Banderas in the Robert Rodriguez-directed segment of the vignette anthology comedy &quot;Four Rooms&quot;.

In the 21st century, Tomita has had roles in other independent films and co-starred in several major Hollywood productions, including playing Janet Tokada in &quot;The Day After Tomorrow&quot;. In 2005, she starred in the Brazilian drama film &quot;Gaijin 2: Love Me as I Am&quot; and also had a leading role in the independent film &quot;Robot Stories&quot; in 2003. She was also in &quot;Only the Brave&quot; about the Japanese American segregated fighting unit, the 442nd Regimental Combat Team of World War II, which included two other &quot;Karate Kid&quot; stars, Yuji Okumoto and Pat Morita.

===Television===
Tomita appeared as a character named Ming Li on the NBC daytime soap opera &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; from May to September 1988. In 1994, she guest-starred in the first episode of season 3 of &quot;&quot;. In 2008, she made her return to daytime soaps with a recurring role on ABC&#x27;s &quot;General Hospital&quot;. In 2012, she had another recurring role on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;.

From 1996 to 1997, Tomita was a regular cast member in the short-lived UPN drama series, &quot;The Burning Zone&quot;. In 1993, she appeared in the pilot movie for &quot;Babylon 5&quot; as Lt. Commander Takashima, second-in-command of the titular space station, but she declined the opportunity to continue as a cast member of the subsequent series. During her career she has guest starred on shows such as &quot;Seven Days&quot;; &quot;Quantum Leap&quot;; &quot;Living Single&quot;; &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot;; &quot;Chicago Hope&quot;; &quot;Will &amp; Grace&quot;; &quot;Nash Bridges&quot;; &quot;The Shield&quot;; &quot;Strong Medicine&quot;; &quot;Stargate SG-1&quot;; &quot;&quot;; &quot;The Mentalist&quot;; &quot;Private Practice&quot;; &quot;True Blood&quot;; &quot;Zoo&quot;; &quot;Tour of Duty&quot;; &quot;Criminal Minds&quot;; and many other dramas and comedies. She had longer term recurring roles on &quot;Crossing Jordan&quot;, &quot;JAG&quot;, &quot;24&quot;, &quot;Eureka&quot;, &quot;Heroes&quot;, &quot;Law &amp; Order: Los Angeles&quot;, &quot;Glee&quot;, &quot;Teen Wolf&quot;, &quot;Resurrection&quot;, &quot;How to Get Away with Murder&quot;, and &quot;Chasing Life&quot;.

In 2016, Tomita played a series regular role on the Epix drama series &quot;Berlin Station&quot;. From 2017 to 2019 she was a recurring character on the ABC medical drama &quot;The Good Doctor&quot;.

Tomita began a recurring role as the Vulcan/Romulan hybrid Commodore Oh on the CBS All Access web television series &quot;Star Trek: Picard&quot; in 2020.

In 2021, she reprised her 1980s role as Kumiko for two episodes in Season 3 of &quot;Cobra Kai&quot;, a television sequel to the &quot;Karate Kid&quot; films.

== Personal life ==
Tomita has been married twice. After her first marriage ended in divorce, she started a long-term relationship with actor Daniel Blinkoff, and they had been together for 13 years as of 2017; they were married and had founded the Outside In Theatre, in the Highland Park neighborhood of Los Angeles.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===
===Online Streaming Platform Subscription===

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q265218" start="0" end="19" title="Tamlyn Tomita" label="Tamlyn Naomi Tomita"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043395" start="97" end="103" title="Kumiko (character)" label="Kumiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418251" start="113" end="135" title="The Karate Kid Part II" label="The Karate Kid Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48326845" start="207" end="216" title="Cobra Kai" label="Cobra Kai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="270" end="277" title="The Joy Luck Club (novel)#Waverly Jong" label="Waverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296376" start="287" end="304" title="The Joy Luck Club (film)" label="The Joy Luck Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580686" start="350" end="371" title="Come See the Paradise" label="Come See the Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q837939" start="392" end="405" title="Picture Bride (film)" label="Picture Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137372" start="426" end="436" title="Four Rooms" label="Four Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437259" start="457" end="470" title="Robot Stories" label="Robot Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q14320" start="491" end="513" title="The Day After Tomorrow" label="The Day After Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="" start="537" end="562" title="Gaijin 2: Love Me as I Am" label="Gaijin 2: Love Me as I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q56194" start="663" end="665" title="24 (TV series)" label="24"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="679" end="683" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q836393" start="697" end="706" title="Teen Wolf (2011 TV series)" label="Teen Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q614574" start="708" end="714" title="Eureka (2006 TV series)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862534" start="732" end="759" title="How to Get Away with Murder" label="How to Get Away with Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383759" start="786" end="790" title="Epix" label="Epix"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488911" start="810" end="824" title="Berlin Station (TV series)" label="Berlin Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q29908604" start="897" end="912" title="The Good Doctor (American TV series)" label="The Good Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="963" end="980" title="Star Trek: Picard" label="Star Trek: Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="1039" end="1056" title="Japanese-Americans" label="Japanese-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215155" start="1058" end="1063" title="nisei" label="nisei"/>
<link wikidata="Q328615" start="1120" end="1127" title="Okinawa, Okinawa" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1143" end="1154" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="1195" end="1210" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="internment camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1218" end="1230" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="1269" end="1276" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="1289" end="1295" title="Korean War" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1300" end="1311" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208167" start="1337" end="1352" title="Ryukyuan people" label="Native Okinawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="1362" end="1370" title="Filipinos" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="1388" end="1394" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1426" end="1438" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="1461" end="1465" title="LAPD" label="LAPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113413" start="1528" end="1553" title="Granada Hills Charter High School" label="Granada Hills High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="1606" end="1610" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="1698" end="1702" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564288" start="1724" end="1734" title="Nisei Week" label="Nisei Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418251" start="1915" end="1932" title="The Karate Kid II" label="The Karate Kid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418251" start="2056" end="2073" title="The Karate Kid II" label="The Karate Kid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="2119" end="2136" title="independent movie" label="independent movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580686" start="2189" end="2210" title="Come See the Paradise" label="Come See the Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q254205" start="2251" end="2262" title="Ming-Na Wen" label="Ming-Na Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="2270" end="2283" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296376" start="2296" end="2313" title="The Joy Luck Club (film)" label="The Joy Luck Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q837939" start="2388" end="2401" title="Picture Bride (film)" label="Picture Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q41548" start="2443" end="2459" title="Antonio Banderas" label="Antonio Banderas"/>
<link wikidata="Q47284" start="2467" end="2483" title="Robert Rodriguez" label="Robert Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656062" start="2508" end="2516" title="Vignette (literature)" label="vignette"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="2517" end="2526" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137372" start="2540" end="2550" title="Four Rooms" label="Four Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q14320" start="2723" end="2745" title="The Day After Tomorrow" label="The Day After Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2808" end="2833" title="Gaijin 2: Love Me as I Am" label="Gaijin 2: Love Me as I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437259" start="2898" end="2911" title="Robot Stories" label="Robot Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485771" start="2949" end="2963" title="Only the Brave (2006 film)" label="Only the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="2980" end="2997" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q704142" start="3028" end="3056" title="442nd Regimental Combat Team" label="442nd Regimental Combat Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573137" start="3129" end="3141" title="Yuji Okumoto" label="Yuji Okumoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q298799" start="3146" end="3156" title="Pat Morita" label="Pat Morita"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="3228" end="3231" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q22272" start="3257" end="3270" title="Santa Barbara (TV series)" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="3470" end="3486" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="3554" end="3571" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="3651" end="3654" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016803" start="3675" end="3691" title="The Burning Zone" label="The Burning Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q210146" start="3750" end="3759" title="Babylon 5" label="Babylon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074660" start="3993" end="4003" title="Seven Days (TV series)" label="Seven Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q230506" start="4017" end="4029" title="Quantum Leap (1989 TV series)" label="Quantum Leap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835569" start="4043" end="4056" title="Living Single" label="Living Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="4070" end="4087" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071958" start="4101" end="4113" title="Chicago Hope" label="Chicago Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q212135" start="4127" end="4143" title="Will &amp;amp; Grace" label="Will &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551002" start="4157" end="4169" title="Nash Bridges" label="Nash Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q265152" start="4183" end="4193" title="The Shield" label="The Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q549409" start="4207" end="4222" title="Strong Medicine" label="Strong Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187462" start="4236" end="4249" title="Stargate SG-1" label="Stargate SG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q204228" start="4277" end="4290" title="The Mentalist" label="The Mentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q283393" start="4304" end="4320" title="Private Practice (TV series)" label="Private Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q186219" start="4334" end="4344" title="True Blood" label="True Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157201" start="4358" end="4361" title="Zoo (American TV series)" label="Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959738" start="4375" end="4387" title="Tour of Duty (TV series)" label="Tour of Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q202141" start="4401" end="4415" title="Criminal Minds" label="Criminal Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q848337" start="4504" end="4519" title="Crossing Jordan" label="Crossing Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754197" start="4533" end="4536" title="JAG (TV series)" label="JAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q56194" start="4550" end="4552" title="24 (TV series)" label="24"/>
<link wikidata="Q614574" start="4566" end="4572" title="Eureka (2006 TV series)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q83401" start="4586" end="4592" title="Heroes (U.S. TV series)" label="Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4606" end="4634" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: LA" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="4648" end="4652" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q836393" start="4666" end="4675" title="Teen Wolf (2011 TV series)" label="Teen Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217454" start="4689" end="4701" title="Resurrection (U.S. TV series)" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862534" start="4715" end="4742" title="How to Get Away with Murder" label="How to Get Away with Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072803" start="4760" end="4772" title="Chasing Life" label="Chasing Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383759" start="4833" end="4837" title="Epix" label="Epix"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488911" start="4857" end="4871" title="Berlin Station (TV series)" label="Berlin Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086098" start="4907" end="4926" title="recurring character" label="recurring character"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="4934" end="4937" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29908604" start="4958" end="4973" title="The Good Doctor (American TV series)" label="The Good Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27903045" start="5061" end="5075" title="CBS All Access" label="CBS All Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="5076" end="5090" title="web television" label="web television"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5104" end="5121" title="Star Trek: Picard" label="Star Trek: Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043395" start="5178" end="5184" title="Kumiko (character)" label="Kumiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q48326845" start="5223" end="5232" title="Cobra Kai" label="Cobra Kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987783" start="5273" end="5283" title="The Karate Kid (franchise)" label="Karate Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135438" start="5574" end="5587" title="Highland Park, Los Angeles" label="Highland Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266153" wikidata="Q15809" url="?curid=1266153" title="Ivan Cankar">
<text>Ivan Cankar (, ) (10 May 1876 – 11 December 1918) was a Slovene writer, playwright, essayist, poet, and political activist. Together with Oton Župančič, Dragotin Kette, and Josip Murn, he is considered as the beginner of modernism in Slovene literature. He is regarded as the greatest writer in Slovene, and has sometimes been compared to Franz Kafka and James Joyce.

==Biography==
Ivan Cankar was born in the Carniolan town of Vrhnika near Ljubljana. He was one of the many children of a poor artisan who immigrated to Bosnia shortly after Ivan&#x27;s birth. He was raised by his mother, Neža Cankar née Pivk, with whom he established a close, but ambivalent relationship. The figure of a self-sacrificing and submissively repressive mother would later become one of the most recognizable features of Cankar&#x27;s prose. After finishing grammar school in his hometown, he studied at the Technical High School (&quot;Realka&quot;) in Ljubljana (1888–1896).

During this period, he started writing literature, mostly poetry, under the influence of Romantic and post-Romantic poets such as France Prešeren, Heinrich Heine, Simon Jenko and Simon Gregorčič. In 1893, he discovered the epic poetry of Anton Aškerc, which had a huge influence on the development of his style and ideals. Under Aškerc&#x27;s influence, Cankar rejected the sentimental post-Romantic poetry and embraced literary realism and national liberalism.

In 1896, he enrolled at the University of Vienna, where he studied engineering, but later switched to Slavic philology. In Vienna, he soon started to lead a bohemian lifestyle. He came under the influence of contemporary European literature, especially decadentism, symbolism and naturalism. He became friends with Fran Govekar, a young Slovene writer and intellectual living in Vienna, who introduced him to positivism and naturalism. Between 1897 and 1899, Cankar&#x27;s core ideas were essentially positivistic. In the spring of 1897 he moved back to Vrhnika. After his mother&#x27;s death in autumn of the same year, he moved to Pula and in 1898 back to Vienna, where he lived until 1909.

During his second stay in Vienna, Cankar&#x27;s worldview underwent a deep and rapid change. In a famous letter to the Slovene feminist author Zofka Kveder in 1900 he rejected positivism and naturalism. He embraced spiritualism, symbolism and idealism, and later publicly broke with Fran Govekar. At the same time, he became highly critical of Slovene liberalism, published a devastating criticism of Anton Aškerc&#x27;s poetry and gradually moved towards socialism. He was strongly influenced by the Slovene Roman Catholic priest and thinker Janez Evangelist Krek, who advocated radical social activism on a Christian basis. He nevertheless continued to oppose the clericalism and conservativism of Austrian Christian socialists in general and Krek&#x27;s Slovene People&#x27;s Party in particular. He joined the Yugoslav Social Democratic Party, an Austro-Marxist party active in the Slovene Lands and in Istria. In the first general elections to the Austrian Parliament in 1907, he ran as a candidate for the party in the largely working-class electoral district of Zagorje–Litija in Carniola, but lost to a candidate of the Slovene People&#x27;s Party. 
In 1909, he left Vienna and moved to Sarajevo in Bosnia and Hercegovina, where his brother Karlo worked as a priest. During his stay in Sarajevo, he gradually turned away from his previous militant anti-clericalism, becoming more receptive to Christian spirituality. The same year, he settled in the Rožnik district of Ljubljana. Although he remained an active member of the Yugoslav Social Democratic Party, he rejected the party&#x27;s view on Yugoslav nation-building: in a resolution in 1909, the party favoured a gradual unification of Slovene culture and language with the Serbo-Croatian ones in order to create a common Yugoslav cultural nation. Cankar, on the other hand, strongly defended the national and linguistic individuality of Slovenes. Together with Mihajlo Rostohar, he became the most vocal defender of Slovene individuality within a South Slavic political framework. Already after his electoral defeat in 1907, Cankar had started to publish numerous essays explaining his political and aesthetic views and opinions. After his return to Carniola in 1909, he began travelling throughout the Slovene Lands, delivering lectures and conferences. The most famous of these lectures were &quot;The Slovene people and the Slovene culture&quot; (&quot;Slovensko ljudstvo in slovenska kultura&quot;), delivered in Trieste in 1907, and &quot;Slovenes and Yugoslavs&quot; (&quot;Slovenci in Jugoslovani&quot;), delivered in Ljubljana in 1913. In the latter, Cankar expressed a favourable opinion on the political unification of all South Slavs, but rejected a cultural merger of South Slavic peoples. Because of the lecture, he was sentenced to one week in prison for defamation of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. 
After the outbreak of World War I in 1914, he was again imprisoned in Ljubljana Castle for supposed pro-Serbian attitudes, but was soon released. 
In 1917, he was drafted in the Austro-Hungarian Army, but was demobilized due to poor health. In his last lecture, delivered in the National Club of Trieste just after the end of the War, he called for a moral purification and rejuvenation of Slovene politics and culture. He moved from Rožnik to the center of Ljubljana, where he died in December 1918, from pneumonia, a complication of the Spanish flu pandemic which was raging at the time. His funeral was attended by a huge crowd and highest representatives from the cultural and political life in Slovenia. In 1936, his grave was moved to the Žale cemetery in Ljubljana, where he was buried next to his youth friends and fellow authors Dragotin Kette and Josip Murn.

==Work==

Ivan Cankar wrote around 20 books and is considered one of the primary exponents of Slovene modernist literature, alongside Oton Župančič, Dragotin Kette and Josip Murn. Cankar is also considered one of Europe&#x27;s most important fin de siècle. He dealt with social, national and moral themes. In Slovenia, his best-known works are the play &quot;Hlapci&quot; (&quot;Serfs&quot;), the satire &quot;Pohujšanje v dolini Šentflorijanski&quot; (Scandal in St. Florian Valley) and the novel &quot;Na klancu&quot; (On the Hill). However, his importance for Slovene and European literature probably lies in his symbolist sketches and other short stories, which, in their mixture of symbolism, modernism and even expressionism, convey a high degree of originality.
Cankar started as a poet. He published his first poems already as a teenager in the liberal literary magazine &quot;Ljubljanski zvon&quot;. In Vienna, he frequented a group of young Slovene artists and authors, among whom were Oton Župančič, Fran Eller and Fran Govekar, who introduced him to the modernist currents of European literature. In 1899, Cankar published his first collection of poetry under the title &quot;Erotika&quot;. Decadentist and sensualist influences were evident and the then bishop of Ljubljana Anton Bonaventura Jeglič was so scandalized by the book that he bought all the copies and ordered their destruction. Another edition was issued three years later, but by that time Cankar had already abandoned poetry and moved to politically-engaged literature. In 1902, he wrote his first play &quot;Za narodov blagor&quot; (For the Welfare of the Nation), which was a violent parody of the liberal nationalist elite in the Slovene Lands, especially in Carniola. The same year, he published the short novel &quot;Na klancu&quot; (On the Hill), in which he described the misery of the small rural proletariat and the poor material and spiritual conditions of the common people. The novel, which still showed strong naturalistic features, combined with allegorical symbolism and an unusual, biblically inspired style, gained him widespread recognition.

In the novels &quot;Gospa Judit&quot; (Madame Judit) and &quot;Hiša Marije Pomočnice&quot; (The Ward of Mary Help of Christians) and &quot;Križ na gori&quot; (Cross on the Mountain), all published in 1904, he turned to spiritualism and idealism, maintaining as central theme the oppressed people and their yearning for a better life. In 1906, he wrote the short novel &quot;Martin Kačur&quot; with the subtitle &quot;The Life Story of an Idealist&quot;, which is a ruthless analysis and self-analysis of the failure of an abstract idealist. During the general elections of 1907, he published the short story &quot;Hlapec Jernej in njegova pravica&quot; (The Servant Jernej and His Justice), in which he describes a clash between the individual worker and both the capitalist and traditional society, the laws of which he cannot understand. Following the electoral victory of the Slovene People&#x27;s Party, he wrote his most influential play, the satire &quot;Hlapci&quot; (Serfs), in which he satirized the conformism of the former progressive and agnostic public servants who embraced Catholicism after the defeat of the liberal party. Both the liberal and the Catholic conservative parties in the Slovene Lands reacted acrimoniously against the play: its staging was delayed until after Austria-Hungary&#x27;s dissolution in Autumn 1918.

In the play &quot;Pohujšanje v dolini Šentflorjanski&quot; (Scandal in St. Florian Valley, published in 1908), Cankar made fun of the moral rigidness and culturally backward mentality of Carniola&#x27;s small semi-urban society.

Cankar was also famous for his essays, most of which were published between 1907 and 1913, where he showed stylistic mastery and great irony.

His last collection of short stories, entitled &quot;Podobe iz sanj&quot; (Images from Dreams), which were published posthumously in 1920, is a magically realistic and allegorical depiction of the horrors of World War I. It shows a clear move from symbolism to expressionism and it has been regarded as the finest example of Cankar&#x27;s poetic prose.

== Personality and world view==
Cankar was a relatively fragile personality, both emotionally and physically, but showed an unusually strong and persistent intellectual vigour. He was a sharp thinker, who was capable of poignant criticism of both his environment and himself. He was also full of paradoxes and loved irony and sarcasm. He had an unusually sentimental and somehow ecstatic nature, intensely sensitive to ethical issues. He was very introspective: his works, which are to a large extent autobiographic, became famous for the ruthless analysis of his own deeds and misdeeds.

Cankar was raised as a Roman Catholic. In his high school years, he became a typical liberal freethinker. He rejected the religious dogmas and embraced the rational explanations provided by contemporary natural and social sciences. Between 1898 and 1902, he fell under the influence of the thinkers Ralph Waldo Emerson and Friedrich Nietzsche. In the writings of the Belgian poet Maurice Maeterlinck Cankar found the idea of the existence of a world soul with which the individual souls are connected, an idea he employed in his own works. Already around 1903, however, he turned to an original, slightly anarchist interpretation of Marxism. His later life was marked by a gradual evolution towards orthodox Christianity, which became evident after 1910 and especially in the last year of his life. Although he never officially rejected his Roman Catholic faith, he was generally considered agnostic, albeit sympathetic to some elements of traditional Catholic devotion.

== Influence ==

Cankar was an influential author already during his lifetime. His works were widely read and Cankar was the first author in Slovene who could make a living exclusively from writing. He became even more influential after his death. Due to his insistence on the cultural and national specificity of the Slovene people, Cankar became the referential figure for the young generations of Slovene intellectuals who rejected the centralistic and unitaristic policies of the Serb political elite in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. In the early 1920s, a group of young Catholics, mostly of Christian Socialist convictions, took the title of one of Cankar&#x27;s minor novels, &quot;Križ na gori&quot; (Cross on the Mountain), as the name of their journal. The group, known as the &quot;Crusaders&quot; (), became the focal point in the emergence of the Christian left in Slovenia in the 1920s and 1930s.

Cankar&#x27;s work and his personal world view influenced all three major literary trends in Slovene literature between 1918 and 1945: the expressionism of Catholic authors such as Ivan Pregelj, Stanko Majcen, and France Bevk, the social realism of the liberal left and Marxist authors (particularly Miško Kranjec, Prežihov Voranc, Ciril Kosmač, and Mile Klopčič) and the avantgardism of Srečko Kosovel. During the same period, Cankar&#x27;s political ideas influenced the Slovene social-democratic ideologist Etbin Kristan, the Christian Democratic political theorist Andrej Gosar and the democratic thinkers Albin Prepeluh and Dragotin Lončar. Cankar&#x27;s psychological introspections became a major source of Edvard Kocbek&#x27;s and Anton Trstenjak&#x27;s inquiry in the Slovene national character.

During the dictatorship of King Alexander (1929–1934), Cankar&#x27;s works were removed from the school curriculum, because he was considered a dangerous advocate of Slovene particularism and nationalism. After 1935, his status as one of the greatest Slovene writers was never put under serious question. In 1937, the first integral collection of Cankar&#x27;s work was published, edited and annotated by his cousin and conservative literary historian and critic Izidor Cankar. After World War II, the publishing house &quot;Cankarjeva založba&quot; (literally, &#x27;Cankar Press&#x27;) was established, which took care of the edition of his collected works.

Cankar was especially influential as a playwright. He is considered the father of modern Slovene theatre and has had a major influence on almost all Slovene playwrights that have come after him, starting from the expressionist theatre of the 1920s (Slavko Grum, Stanko Majcen). Between the 1950s and 1970s, most of the modernizers of Slovene theatre, such as Jože Javoršek, Dominik Smole, Marjan Rožanc, Primož Kozak, and Bojan Štih, were influenced by Cankar&#x27;s plays. The works of many contemporary Slovene playwrights and screenwriters, including Drago Jančar, Dušan Jovanović, Tone Partljič and Žarko Petan, continue to show a clear influence of Cankar&#x27;s concepts.

Many prominent Slovene thinkers reflected on Cankar&#x27;s works, including Dušan Pirjevec Ahac, Milan Komar, and Slavoj Žižek.

Already during his lifetime, his works were translated into German, Czech, Serbian, Croatian, Finnish and Russian. His work has also been translated into French, English, Italian, Hungarian, Romanian, Polish, Slovak, Bulgarian, Macedonian, Albanian and Turkish. Cankar&#x27;s influence outside the Slovene-speaking area has been small, although his work did influence some non-Slovene authors, such as the French Henry Bordeaux, who published an essay on Cankar in the 1920s, the Austrian Josef Friedrich Perkonig and the Italian Fulvio Tomizza. According to the testimony of the literary critic Josip Vidmar, Cankar&#x27;s novel &quot;Hiša Marije Pomočnice&quot; was well-received by the famous German writer Thomas Mann, who helped to publish a German edition in 1930.

== Legacy ==
To this day, Cankar&#x27;s prose is regarded as one of the finest examples of Slovene style. His influence as a novelist has faded since the 1960s, but his plays are still among the most popular theatre pieces in Slovene theatres.

Numerous streets, squares, public buildings, and institutions have been named after Ivan Cankar. During World War II, two military units of the Slovene Partisans, the Cankar Brigade and the legendary Cankar Battalion, were named after him. Since the 1980s, Slovenia&#x27;s largest congress centre, Cankar Hall in Ljubljana, has borne his name. Between June 1994 and January 2007, Cankar was portrayed on the 10,000 Slovenian tolar bill. The Cankar Award was established in 2019 by the Slovenian PEN, Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts and the University of Ljubljana.

== Bibliography ==
*&quot;Erotika&quot; (Eroticism, 1899)
*&quot;Jakob Ruda&quot; (1900)
*&quot;Knjiga za lahkomiselne ljudi&quot; (A Book for Thoughtless People, 1901)
*&quot;Tujci&quot; (Strangers, 1901)
*&quot;Za narodov blagor&quot; (For the Wealth of the Nation, 1901)
*&quot;Na klancu&quot; (On the Hill, 1902)
*&quot;Kralj na Betajnovi&quot; (The King of Betajnova, 1902)
*&quot;Ob zori&quot; (At Dawn, 1903)
*&quot;Križ na gori&quot; (The Cross on the Mountain, 1904)
*&quot;Gospa Judit&quot; (Madame Judit, 1904)
*&quot;Hiša Marije Pomočnice&quot; (The Ward of Mary Help of Christians, 1904)
*&quot;Potepuh Marko in Kralj Matjaž&quot; (The Vagabond Marko and Kralj Matjaž 1905)
*&quot;V mesečini&quot; (In the Moonlight, 1905)
*&quot;Nina&quot; (1906)
*&quot;Martin Kačur&quot; (1906)
*&quot;Aleš iz razora&quot; (Aleš from the Furrow, 1907)
*&quot;Hlapec Jernej in njegova pravica&quot; (The Servant Jernej and His Justice, 1907)
*&quot;Krpanova kobila&quot; (Krpan&#x27;s Mare, 1907)
*&quot;Zgodbe iz doline šentflorjanske&quot; (Tales from the St. Florian Valley, 1908)
*&quot;Pohujšanje v dolini Šentflorjanski&quot; (Scandal in St. Florian Valley, 1908)
*&quot;Novo življenje &quot; (New Life, 1908)
*&quot;Kurent&quot; (1909)
*&quot;Za križem&quot; (After the Cross, 1909)
*&quot;Hlapci&quot; (The Serfs, 1910)
*&quot;Bela krizantema&quot; (The White Chrysanthemum, 1910)
*&quot;Volja in moč&quot; (Will and Power, 1911)
*&quot;Troje povesti&quot; (Three Stories, 1911)
*&quot;Lepa Vida&quot; (Beautiful Vida, 1912)
*&quot;Milan in Milena&quot; (Milan and Milena, 1913)
*&quot;Moje življenje&quot; (My Life, 1914, published in 1920)
*&quot;Podobe iz sanj&quot; (Images from Dreams, written in 1917–1918, published in 1920)
*&quot;Mimo življenja&quot; (Passing Past Life, written in 1904, published in 1920)
*&quot;Romantične duše&quot; (Romantic Souls, written in 1897, published in 1922)
==Notes==
== References ==
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.

== Further reading ==
*Izidor Cankar, Preface to &quot;Ivan Cankar, &quot;Zbrani spisi&quot;&quot; (Ljubljana: Blasnikova tiskarna, 1937)
*France Bernik, &quot;Ivan Cankar: monografska študija&quot; (LJubljana: Cankarjeva založba, 1987)
*Arnaldo Bressan, &quot;Le avventure della parola: saggi sloveni e triestini&quot; (Milan: Il saggiatore, 1985)
*Andrej Inkret, &quot;Romantične duše: razmišljanja ob dramatiki Ivana Cankarja&quot; (Ljubljana: Prosvetni servis, 1966)
*Dušan Kermauner, &quot;Ivan Cankar in slovenska politika leta 1918&quot; (Ljubljana: Cankarjeva založba, 1968)
*Taras Kermauner, &quot;Dolina i nebo: eseji o Cankaru&quot; (Belgrade: Vuk Karadžić, 1979)
*Alojz Kraigher, &quot;Ivan Cankar: študije o njegovem delu in življenju, spomini nanj&quot; (Ljubljana: Cankarjeva založba, 1954)
*Matevž Kos, &quot;Cankar in Nietzsche&quot; (Ljubljana: društvo za primerjalno književnost, 2001)
*Primož Kozak, &quot;Temeljni konflikti Cankarjevih dram&quot; (Ljubljana: Cankarjeva založba, 1980)
*Filip Kumbatovič Kalan, &quot;Trois précurseurs du théǎtre contemporain en Yougoslavie: Branislav Nušić, Ivan Cankar, Miroslav Krleža&quot; (Paris: Centre national de la recherche scientifique, 1963)
*Marija Mitrović, &quot;Cankar in kritika&quot; (Koper: Lipa, 1976)
*Boris Paternu, &quot;Ivan Cankar in slovenska literarna tradicija&quot; (Ljubljana: Slavistično društvo Slovenije, 1969)
*Dušan Pirjevec Ahac, &quot;Hlapci, heroji, ljudje&quot; (Ljubljana: Cankarjeva založba, 1968)
*Jože Pogačnik, &quot;Ivan Cankar und Oton Župančič&quot; (Munich: Selbstverlag der Südosteuropa-Gesellschaft, 1991)
*Dimitrij Rupel, &quot;Svobodne besede : od Prešerna do Cankarja: sociološka študija o slovenskem leposlovju kot glasniku in pobudniku&quot; (Koper: Lipa, 1976)
*Anton Slodnjak, &quot;Ivan Cankar in Slovene and world literature&quot; (London: Modern Humanities Research Association for the School of Slavonic and East European Studies, 1981)
*Miran Štuhec, &quot;Esejistika Ivana Cankarja&quot; (Ljubljana: Slavistično društvo Slovenije, 2006)
*Josip Vidmar, &quot;Ivan Cankar&quot; (Ljubljana: Državna založba Slovenije, 1969)
*Božo Vodušek, &quot;Ivan Cankar&quot; (Ljubljana: Hram, 1937)
*Dimitrije Vučenov, &quot;Ivan Cankar&quot; (Belgrade: Rad, 1962)
*Boris Ziherl, &quot;Ivan Cankar i njegovo doba&quot; (Belgrade: Prosveta, 1949)

==External links==
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15809" start="0" end="11" title="Ivan Cankar" label="Ivan Cankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="56" end="63" title="Slovenes" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q301171" start="138" end="151" title="Oton Župančič" label="Oton Župančič"/>
<link wikidata="Q15806" start="153" end="167" title="Dragotin Kette" label="Dragotin Kette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278140" start="173" end="183" title="Josip Murn" label="Josip Murn"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="221" end="230" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933509" start="234" end="252" title="Slovene literature" label="Slovene literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="295" end="302" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="339" end="350" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="355" end="366" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="411" end="419" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q438" start="429" end="436" title="Vrhnika" label="Vrhnika"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="442" end="451" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="521" end="527" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="590" end="610" title="Neža Cankar" label="Neža Cankar née Pivk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031" start="1090" end="1105" title="France Prešeren" label="France Prešeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="1107" end="1121" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15803" start="1123" end="1134" title="Simon Jenko" label="Simon Jenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q973928" start="1139" end="1154" title="Simon Gregorčič" label="Simon Gregorčič"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="1183" end="1194" title="epic poetry" label="epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q561804" start="1198" end="1210" title="Anton Aškerc" label="Anton Aškerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="1380" end="1396" title="literary realism" label="literary realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q660018" start="1401" end="1420" title="national liberalism" label="national liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="1451" end="1471" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938123" start="1580" end="1598" title="Bohemian style" label="bohemian lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q116476" start="1644" end="1663" title="European literature" label="European literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q846094" start="1676" end="1687" title="decadentism" label="decadentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="1689" end="1698" title="symbolism (arts)" label="symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55996" start="1703" end="1713" title="naturalism (literature)" label="naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1738" end="1750" title="Fran Govekar" label="Fran Govekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="1832" end="1842" title="positivism" label="positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000" start="1847" end="1857" title="naturalism (philosophy)" label="naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="1924" end="1934" title="positivist" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656" start="2056" end="2060" title="Pula" label="Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q112919" start="2260" end="2272" title="Zofka Kveder" label="Zofka Kveder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578143" start="2332" end="2344" title="Spiritualism (beliefs)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="2360" end="2368" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008077" start="2461" end="2479" title="Liberalism in Slovenia" label="Slovene liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2626" end="2640" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487959" start="2660" end="2681" title="Janez Evangelist Krek" label="Janez Evangelist Krek"/>
<link wikidata="Q747439" start="2783" end="2794" title="clericalism" label="clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="2799" end="2813" title="conservativism" label="conservativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q692131" start="2817" end="2846" title="Christian Social Party (Austria)" label="Austrian Christian socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276547" start="2874" end="2901" title="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party (historical)" label="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560945" start="2931" end="2963" title="Yugoslav Social Democratic Party" label="Yugoslav Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q668662" start="2968" end="2982" title="Austro-Marxist" label="Austro-Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962798" start="3003" end="3016" title="Slovene Lands" label="Slovene Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="3024" end="3030" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q697775" start="3070" end="3089" title="Reichsrat (Austria)" label="Austrian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q15930" start="3186" end="3193" title="Zagorje ob Savi" label="Zagorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115226" start="3194" end="3200" title="Litija" label="Litija"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="3312" end="3320" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="3324" end="3346" title="Bosnia and Hercegovina" label="Bosnia and Hercegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="3473" end="3489" title="anti-clericalism" label="anti-clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961265" start="3575" end="3581" title="Rožnik District" label="Rožnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752412" start="3730" end="3745" title="nation-building" label="nation-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007297" start="3816" end="3831" title="Culture of Slovenia" label="Slovene culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="3854" end="3868" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q236807" start="3902" end="3910" title="Yugoslavs" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845211" start="4042" end="4058" title="Mihajlo Rostohar" label="Mihajlo Rostohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="4598" end="4605" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="4814" end="4825" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="4968" end="4993" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075156" start="5066" end="5082" title="Ljubljana Castle" label="Ljubljana Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="5100" end="5107" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="5174" end="5195" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5275" end="5288" title="National Club, Trieste" label="National Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="5502" end="5511" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="5535" end="5546" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q338245" start="5741" end="5745" title="Žale" label="Žale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15806" start="5834" end="5848" title="Dragotin Kette" label="Dragotin Kette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278140" start="5853" end="5863" title="Josip Murn" label="Josip Murn"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="5968" end="5988" title="modernist literature" label="modernist literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q301171" start="6000" end="6013" title="Oton Župančič" label="Oton Župančič"/>
<link wikidata="Q265581" start="6108" end="6121" title="fin de siècle" label="fin de siècle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="6482" end="6491" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="6583" end="6596" title="expressionism" label="expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660956" start="6751" end="6767" title="Ljubljanski zvon" label="Ljubljanski zvon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6877" end="6887" title="Fran Eller" label="Fran Eller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6892" end="6904" title="Fran Govekar" label="Fran Govekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q846094" start="7069" end="7080" title="Decadentism" label="Decadentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q651205" start="7085" end="7095" title="sensualism" label="sensualist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7153" end="7177" title="Anton Bonaventura Jeglič" label="Anton Bonaventura Jeglič"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="7749" end="7760" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166040" start="8068" end="8089" title="Hiša Marije Pomočnice" label="Hiša Marije Pomočnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895556" start="8109" end="8132" title="Mary Help of Christians" label="Mary Help of Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276547" start="8884" end="8911" title="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party (historical)" label="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="9064" end="9079" title="civil service" label="public servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9093" end="9104" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562864" start="9129" end="9142" title="National Progressive Party (Slovenia)" label="liberal party"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="9713" end="9718" title="irony" label="irony"/>
<link wikidata="Q147516" start="9865" end="9884" title="magic realism" label="magically realistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10687" end="10701" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="10757" end="10768" title="Freethought" label="freethinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="10963" end="10982" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="10987" end="11006" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q49747" start="11044" end="11063" title="Maurice Maeterlinck" label="Maurice Maeterlinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147295" start="11108" end="11118" title="Anima mundi" label="world soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="11297" end="11304" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="12120" end="12124" title="Serbs" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="12148" end="12169" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="12229" end="12248" title="Christian Socialist" label="Christian Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12321" end="12333" title="Križ na gori" label="Križ na gori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080800" start="12492" end="12506" title="Christian left" label="Christian left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933509" start="12637" end="12655" title="Slovene literature" label="Slovene literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="12683" end="12696" title="expressionism" label="expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q579636" start="12725" end="12737" title="Ivan Pregelj" label="Ivan Pregelj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12739" end="12752" title="Stanko Majcen" label="Stanko Majcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q710497" start="12758" end="12769" title="France Bevk" label="France Bevk"/>
<link wikidata="Q837024" start="12775" end="12789" title="social realism" label="social realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161900" start="12844" end="12857" title="Miško Kranjec" label="Miško Kranjec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083392" start="12859" end="12874" title="Prežihov Voranc" label="Prežihov Voranc"/>
<link wikidata="Q924983" start="12876" end="12888" title="Ciril Kosmač" label="Ciril Kosmač"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851106" start="12894" end="12906" title="Mile Klopčič" label="Mile Klopčič"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="12916" end="12928" title="avantgarde" label="avantgardism"/>
<link wikidata="Q368139" start="12932" end="12946" title="Srečko Kosovel" label="Srečko Kosovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="13025" end="13042" title="social democracy" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402466" start="13054" end="13067" title="Etbin Kristan" label="Etbin Kristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="13073" end="13093" title="Christian Democratic" label="Christian Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756042" start="13113" end="13125" title="Andrej Gosar" label="Andrej Gosar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712384" start="13154" end="13168" title="Albin Prepeluh" label="Albin Prepeluh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305490" start="13173" end="13188" title="Dragotin Lončar" label="Dragotin Lončar"/>
<link wikidata="Q367383" start="13258" end="13271" title="Edvard Kocbek" label="Edvard Kocbek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13283" end="13298" title="Anton Trstenjak (theologian)" label="Anton Trstenjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599565" start="13329" end="13347" title="National Character Studies" label="national character"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="13377" end="13391" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="King Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695797" start="13524" end="13537" title="Political particularism" label="particularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12054170" start="13813" end="13826" title="Izidor Cankar" label="Izidor Cankar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13875" end="13893" title="Cankarjeva založba" label="Cankarjeva založba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14260" end="14271" title="Slavko Grum" label="Slavko Grum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14273" end="14286" title="Stanko Majcen" label="Stanko Majcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909" start="14370" end="14383" title="Jože Javoršek" label="Jože Javoršek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290990" start="14385" end="14398" title="Dominik Smole" label="Dominik Smole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345954" start="14400" end="14413" title="Marjan Rožanc" label="Marjan Rožanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243658" start="14415" end="14427" title="Primož Kozak" label="Primož Kozak"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630065" start="14433" end="14443" title="Bojan Štih" label="Bojan Štih"/>
<link wikidata="Q384991" start="14565" end="14577" title="Drago Jančar" label="Drago Jančar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041797" start="14579" end="14594" title="Dušan Jovanović (theatre director)" label="Dušan Jovanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820844" start="14596" end="14609" title="Tone Partljič" label="Tone Partljič"/>
<link wikidata="Q393407" start="14614" end="14625" title="Žarko Petan" label="Žarko Petan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317742" start="14766" end="14785" title="Dušan Pirjevec Ahac" label="Dušan Pirjevec Ahac"/>
<link wikidata="Q14635388" start="14787" end="14798" title="Milan Komar" label="Milan Komar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184750" start="14804" end="14816" title="Slavoj Žižek" label="Slavoj Žižek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="14887" end="14892" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="14894" end="14901" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="14903" end="14911" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="14913" end="14920" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="14999" end="15008" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="15010" end="15018" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="15020" end="15026" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="15028" end="15034" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="15036" end="15045" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="15047" end="15057" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="15059" end="15067" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="15072" end="15079" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558435" start="15232" end="15246" title="Henry Bordeaux" label="Henry Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15308" end="15332" title="Josef Friedrich Perkonig" label="Josef Friedrich Perkonig"/>
<link wikidata="Q525798" start="15349" end="15363" title="Fulvio Tomizza" label="Fulvio Tomizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968767" start="15415" end="15427" title="Josip Vidmar" label="Josip Vidmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166040" start="15455" end="15476" title="Hiša Marije Pomočnice" label="Hiša Marije Pomočnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="15529" end="15540" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q174777" start="15980" end="15997" title="Slovene Partisans" label="Slovene Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16036" end="16052" title="Cankar Battalion" label="Cankar Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032503" start="16134" end="16145" title="Cankar Hall" label="Cankar Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q208133" start="16251" end="16266" title="Slovenian tolar" label="Slovenian tolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q78616695" start="16277" end="16289" title="Cankar Award" label="Cankar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q266063" start="16336" end="16374" title="Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377" start="16446" end="16469" title="University of Ljubljana" label="University of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166040" start="17001" end="17022" title="Hiša Marije Pomočnice" label="Hiša Marije Pomočnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212654" start="17140" end="17152" title="Kralj Matjaž" label="Kralj Matjaž"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555081" start="17442" end="17447" title="Martin Krpan" label="Krpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791032" start="17781" end="17790" title="The Serfs (book)" label="The Serfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12054170" start="18448" end="18461" title="Izidor Cankar" label="Izidor Cankar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18536" end="18555" title="Blasnikova tiskarna" label="Blasnikova tiskarna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18564" end="18577" title="France Bernik" label="France Bernik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18897" end="18912" title="Dušan Kermauner" label="Dušan Kermauner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277170" start="19009" end="19024" title="Taras Kermauner" label="Taras Kermauner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19101" end="19115" title="Alojz Kraigher" label="Alojz Kraigher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243658" start="19331" end="19343" title="Primož Kozak" label="Primož Kozak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19432" end="19454" title="Filip Kumbatovič Kalan" label="Filip Kumbatovič Kalan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19701" end="19714" title="Boris Paternu" label="Boris Paternu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317742" start="19823" end="19842" title="Dušan Pirjevec Ahac" label="Dušan Pirjevec Ahac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12792880" start="19918" end="19931" title="Jože Pogačnik" label="Jože Pogačnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q560656" start="20035" end="20049" title="Dimitrij Rupel" label="Dimitrij Rupel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12784883" start="20196" end="20210" title="Anton Slodnjak" label="Anton Slodnjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968767" start="20479" end="20491" title="Josip Vidmar" label="Josip Vidmar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20563" end="20575" title="Božo Vodušek" label="Božo Vodušek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20692" end="20704" title="Boris Ziherl" label="Boris Ziherl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266155" wikidata="Q7854894" url="?curid=1266155" title="Turgis Green">
<text>Turgis Green is a hamlet in the English county of Hampshire. It is split between the civil parishes of Hartley Wespall and Stratfield Turgis. It contains six Grade II listed buildings and a Grade II listed milestone (on the A33).

==Governance==
The hamlet of Turgis Green lies on the border of the civil parishes of Stratfield Turgis and Hartley Wespall with several houses in either parish. It is part of the Pamber and Silchester ward of Basingstoke and Deane borough council. The borough council is a Non-metropolitan district of Hampshire County Council.

==Geography==
Turgis Green is located nine miles south of the large town of Reading, and six miles north of Basingstoke.

Nearby towns and cities: Basingstoke, Reading

==Transportation==
The hamlet is situated on the northern section of the busy A33 road, which splits it north to south. It is not served by any public transport.

==History==
The hamlet is named for the Turgis family that owned land locally in the thirteenth century. Turgis Green was inclosed in 1866 as a result of the Inclosure Act 1845 (8 &amp; 9 Vict. c. 118), which permitted landlords to enclose open fields and common land and deny local people their historic rights to graze on these area, as well as wood gathering and water rights.
Late in the eighteenth century it was proposed to build a cut (canal branch) from the Basingstoke Canal to Turgis Green but the proposal never came to fruition.

==Sport and leisure==
The hamlet includes a cricket pitch, home of the Stratfield Turgis &amp; Hartley Wespall Cricket Club, and small children&#x27;s playground.

==Religious Sites==
Turgis Green is served by the church of St. Mary the Blessed Virgin, about a mile from the hamlet and close to the hamlet of Hartley Wespall.

==External links==
* Stratfield Turgis &amp; Hartley Wespall Cricket Club
* The History of the Basingstoke Canal
* British Listed Buildings: St. Mary the Blessed Virgin, Hartley Wespall

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7854894" start="0" end="12" title="Turgis Green" label="Turgis Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="18" end="24" title="Hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="32" end="39" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="50" end="59" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="85" end="99" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674958" start="103" end="118" title="Hartley Wespall" label="Hartley Wespall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621908" start="123" end="140" title="Stratfield Turgis" label="Stratfield Turgis"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="433" end="437" title="Wards of the United Kingdom" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q810185" start="441" end="478" title="Basingstoke and Deane" label="Basingstoke and Deane borough council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="505" end="530" title="Non-metropolitan district" label="Non-metropolitan district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646045" start="534" end="558" title="Hampshire County Council" label="Hampshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="637" end="644" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="669" end="680" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="708" end="719" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="721" end="728" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649140" start="808" end="816" title="A33 road" label="A33 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="1051" end="1069" title="Inclosure Act 1845" label="Inclosure Act 1845"/>
<link wikidata="Q120400318" start="1071" end="1086" title="8 &amp;amp; 9 Vict." label="8 &amp;amp; 9 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q2935976" start="1359" end="1376" title="Basingstoke Canal" label="Basingstoke Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210687" start="1479" end="1492" title="cricket pitch" label="cricket pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875349" start="1570" end="1596" title="playground" label="children&amp;#x27;s playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="1659" end="1686" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="St. Mary the Blessed Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674958" start="1744" end="1759" title="Hartley Wespall" label="Hartley Wespall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266160" wikidata="Q2004626" url="?curid=1266160" title="Telstar (instrumental)">
<text>&quot;Telstar&quot; is a 1962 instrumental by the English band the Tornados, written and produced by Joe Meek. It reached number one on the UK Singles Chart and the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in December 1962 (the second British recording to reach number one on that chart in the year, after &quot;Stranger on the Shore&quot; in May). It was the second instrumental single to hit number one in 1962 on both the US and UK weekly charts.

Later in 1962, Meek produced a vocal version, &quot;Magic Star&quot;, sung by Kenny Hollywood. It was released as a single by Decca Records (cat. nr F11546), with &quot;The Wonderful Story of Love&quot; on the B-side, written by Geoff Goddard. The musical director for both songs was Ivor Raymonde.

==Background==
&quot;Telstar&quot; was named after the Telstar communications satellite, which was launched into orbit on 10 July 1962. Written and produced by Joe Meek, it featured either a clavioline or the similar Jennings Univox, both keyboard instruments with distinctive electronic sounds. It was recorded in Meek&#x27;s studio in a small flat above a shop in Holloway Road, North London. &quot;Telstar&quot; won an Ivor Novello Award and is estimated to have sold at least five million copies worldwide.

In 2007, Tim Wheeler of Ash wrote that &quot;Telstar&quot; was one of the earliest pop tracks influenced by science fiction, and that &quot;for its time it was so futuristic and it still sounds pretty weird today&quot;. He observed the influence of &quot;Telstar&quot; in the 2006 single &quot;Knights of Cydonia&quot; by Muse; Muse&#x27;s singer and guitarist, Matt Bellamy, is the son of the Tornados&#x27; guitarist George Bellamy.

== Lawsuits ==
French composer Jean Ledrut accused Joe Meek of plagiarism, claiming that the tune of &quot;Telstar&quot; had been copied from &quot;La Marche d&#x27;Austerlitz&quot;, a piece from a score that Ledrut had written for the film &quot;Austerlitz&quot; (1960). This led to a lawsuit that prevented Meek from receiving royalties from the record during his lifetime, and the issue was only resolved, in Meek&#x27;s favour, three weeks after his suicide in 1967. &quot;Austerlitz&quot; was not released in the UK until 1965, and Meek was unaware of the film when the lawsuit was filed in March 1963.

==Commercial performance==
The record was an immediate hit after its release, remaining in the UK Singles Chart for 25 weeks, five of them at number 1, and in the American charts for 16 weeks. &quot;Telstar&quot; was the first U.S. number one by a British group. Prior to this, only three British solo artists had achieved a U.S. number one: &quot;Auf Wiederseh&#x27;n, Sweetheart&quot; by Vera Lynn (1952); &quot;He&#x27;s Got the Whole World in His Hands&quot; by Laurie London (1958); and &quot;Stranger on the Shore&quot; by Acker Bilk (May 1962).

According to Official Charts Company it was the second instrumental number one of 1962 in the UK, the first being &quot;Wonderful Land&quot; by The Shadows, which was number one for more weeks than any other single that year (eight).

==Track listing==
# &quot;Telstar&quot;
# &quot;Jungle Fever&quot;

==Personnel==
===The Tornados===
*Clem Cattini – drums
*Alan Caddy – guitar
*Roger LaVern – additional keyboards
*George Bellamy – rhythm guitar
*Heinz Burt – bass

===Additional personnel===
*Joe Meek – composer, producer
*Geoff Goddard – clavioline (on both sides) plus wordless vocals in the final playing of the theme (also on both sides)
*Dave Adams – transcription of Meek&#x27;s composition recording

==Charts==
==Cover versions==
Numerous cover versions of &quot;Telstar&quot; were released, including one by The Ventures, another with lyrics entitled &quot;Magic Star&quot; by Margie Singleton and a French version by Colette Deréal.

==See also==
* &quot;Early Bird&quot;, 1965 instrumental named after Intelsat I

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Roger LaVern: The Recording Of The Worldwide Hit &quot;Telstar&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2004626" start="6" end="13" title="Telstar (instrumental)" label="Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="30" end="42" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q765861" start="63" end="75" title="the Tornados" label="the Tornados"/>
<link wikidata="Q741007" start="101" end="109" title="Joe Meek" label="Joe Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="140" end="156" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="168" end="197" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621561" start="304" end="325" title="Stranger on the Shore" label="Stranger on the Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="569" end="582" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534145" start="672" end="685" title="Geoff Goddard" label="Geoff Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099496" start="727" end="740" title="Ivor Raymonde" label="Ivor Raymonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q63114705" start="798" end="805" title="Telstar" label="Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="806" end="830" title="communications satellite" label="communications satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q741007" start="903" end="911" title="Joe Meek" label="Joe Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978687" start="934" end="944" title="clavioline" label="clavioline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179048" start="960" end="968" title="Jennings Musical Instruments" label="Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881814" start="1109" end="1122" title="Holloway Road" label="Holloway Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="1124" end="1136" title="North London" label="North London"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="1165" end="1183" title="Ivor Novello Award" label="Ivor Novello Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991382" start="1264" end="1275" title="Tim Wheeler" label="Tim Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q724582" start="1279" end="1282" title="Ash (band)" label="Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772948" start="1549" end="1567" title="Knights of Cydonia" label="Knights of Cydonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="1577" end="1581" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q190576" start="1617" end="1629" title="Matt Bellamy" label="Matt Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q765861" start="1674" end="1688" title="George Bellamy (musician)" label="George Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1706" end="1712" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="1754" end="1764" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567849" start="1938" end="1948" title="Austerlitz (1960 film)" label="Austerlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="1977" end="1984" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="2020" end="2029" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="2395" end="2411" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820309" start="2648" end="2680" title="Auf Wiederseh&amp;#x27;n, Sweetheart" label="Auf Wiederseh&amp;#x27;n, Sweetheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q229330" start="2690" end="2699" title="Vera Lynn" label="Vera Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688582" start="2714" end="2756" title="He&amp;#x27;s Got the Whole World in His Hands" label="He&amp;#x27;s Got the Whole World in His Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717740" start="2766" end="2779" title="Laurie London" label="Laurie London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621561" start="2798" end="2819" title="Stranger on the Shore" label="Stranger on the Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q45610" start="2829" end="2839" title="Acker Bilk" label="Acker Bilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072376" start="2866" end="2889" title="Official Charts Company" label="Official Charts Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296673" start="2973" end="2987" title="Wonderful Land" label="Wonderful Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q212168" start="2997" end="3008" title="The Shadows" label="The Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737890" start="3190" end="3202" title="Clem Cattini" label="Clem Cattini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706303" start="3212" end="3222" title="Alan Caddy" label="Alan Caddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q765861" start="3270" end="3284" title="George Bellamy (musician)" label="George Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q268764" start="3302" end="3312" title="Heinz (singer)" label="Heinz Burt"/>
<link wikidata="Q741007" start="3349" end="3357" title="Joe Meek" label="Joe Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534145" start="3380" end="3393" title="Geoff Goddard" label="Geoff Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978687" start="3396" end="3406" title="clavioline" label="clavioline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228208" start="3500" end="3510" title="Dave Adams (musician)" label="Dave Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="3604" end="3617" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772185" start="3667" end="3686" title="The Ventures Play Telstar and the Lonely Bull" label="one by The Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760386" start="3743" end="3759" title="Margie Singleton" label="Margie Singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q466802" start="3784" end="3798" title="Colette Deréal" label="Colette Deréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q517248" start="3816" end="3838" title="Early Bird (André Brasseur song)" label="&amp;quot;Early Bird&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250614" start="3870" end="3880" title="Intelsat I" label="Intelsat I"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266162" wikidata="Q5648133" url="?curid=1266162" title="Hangzhou University">
<text>Hangzhou University (HZU; ) was a public university in Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. The institute was merged into Zhejiang University in 1998. 

The university was founded as Zhejiang Teachers College () in 1952 by merging the departments of humanities, sciences and education at Hangchow University and Zhejiang University. The name of the university in postal romanisation is the same as Hangchow University run by American missionaries, yet the Chinese names are different. 

In September 1996, the university was selected into Project 211. In September 1998, the university was merged into Zhejiang University, with its campus taken over by Zhejiang University as its Xixi Campus. 

== History ==
The idea of establishing a Hangzhou University was initially proposed in the Congress of Zhejiang Province in 1920, which was widely echoed by Zhejiang born people including Cai Yuanpei and Jiang Menglin. When Cai Yuanpei visited Hangchow University in March 1927, he said to Hangchow University students and faculty, &quot;I am coming to find a proper site for Hangzhou University but the site has been picked up by you.&quot; With the establishment of National Third Chungshan University in 1927, which later was renamed as Zhejiang University, the call for establishing Hangzhou University faded away.

During the 1952 reorganisation of Chinese higher education, part of School of Liberal Arts and School of Sciences at Zhejiang University, the School of Liberal Arts and Sciences at Hangchow University and Zhejiang Education College merged to form Zhejiang Teachers College. In September 1958, Zhejiang Teachers College, located in a newly constructed Xixi campus, merged with the Zhejiang Party School, located in the former Hangchow University campus, now known as the Zhijiang Campus, and formed Hangzhou University as a university specialised in social sciences. Thus, its mathematics, physics, chemistry departments was proposed to go into the Zhejiang College of Engineering and its biology to be incorporated into Zhejiang Agricultural University in July 1960, which didn&#x27;t come true due to objection from the universities. 

In 1960, Hangzhou University became wholly based at Xixi, as the Zhijiang campus became taken by Zhejiang University, where Zhejiang set up three new departments. From 1966 to 1976, the Cultural Revolution impacted the university, with at least ten killed due to political prosecution. Upon request of Hangzhou University professors Song Yunbin, Wang Jiawu and president Chen Jiangong, Zhou Enlai ordered to protect the Wenlan Pavilion, where the Complete Library of the Four Treasuries was protected from being destroyed by the Red Guards. As the national examination for college entrance was resumed in 1977, the university welcomed a new cohort of Class of 1981. Among around 70 graduates of the department of history class of 1981, there were at least 10 real estate tycoons including Song Weiping, Zhou Qingzhi and Xu Guangyue, and a Mao Dun Literature Prize laureate Wang Xufeng. In 1989, the students at Hangzhou University held demonstrations with Zhejiang University at Wulin Square, Hangzhou, to support the democracy movement in Beijing.

As of 1998, Hangzhou University had become a comprehensive public university ranked among top 30 universities in China, with a reputation in its sciences and humanities programs. It was under the administration of Zhejiang Provincial Government. With a student body of 8500, the university was largely a regional teaching university, with one seventh of its students being postgraduate students. In September 1998, the university was merged into Zhejiang University, with its campus taken over by Zhejiang University as its Xixi Campus.

== Campuses ==
The university was initially located at the former site of Hangchow University, which is a protected historic site since 2006. In late 1950s, the university moved to the newly built Xixi Campus until the merger with Zhejiang University in 1998, after which the campus became Xixi Campus of Zhejiang University. The road south to the campus was named after the university&#x27;s name as Hangda Road. Hangda New Village, the residential area for Hangzhou University faculty, was located at 56 Xixi Road, which has been protected as a Historical and Cultural Street of Hangzhou since September 2021.

== Publications ==
Before the merger, the university has its own publisher, Hangzhou University Press, which was merged into Zhejiang University Press in 1999. The Chinese-language academic journals &quot;Journal of Hangzhou University&quot; was merged into &quot;Journal of Zhejiang University&quot;. To be specific, &quot;Journal of Hangzhou University: Philosophy And Social Sciences Edition&quot; merged with &quot;Journal of Zhejiang University: Philosophy And Social Sciences Edition&quot; to become &quot;Journal of Zhejiang University: Humanities and Social Sciences Edition&quot;. &quot;Journal of Hangzhou University: Natural Sciences Edition&quot; was renamed as &quot;Journal of Zhejiang University: Science Edition&quot; after the merger.

== Affiliated high school ==

Xuejun High School was the high school Affiliated to Hangzhou University before 1998, which gained independence after the merger. The high school was founded as Hangzhou No. 14 Junior High School in 1956. After the establishment of Hangzhou University in 1958, a new Zhejiang Teachers College was formed, with the school renamed as the High School Affiliated to Zhejiang Teachers College in 1958. With the Zhejiang Teachers College from Hangzhou to Jinhua in 1965, Hangzhou University took the campus of Zhejiang Teachers College, with the high school becoming the High School Affiliated to Hangzhou University in 1965. It was renamed as Xuejun High School in 1970. In 1995, Xuejun High School established the private high school Wenlan High School as its private junior high school. From 1999 to 2002, the junior high school part of Xuejun High School was separated and merged into Wenlan.

== Proposed re-establishment ==
As the 1998 merger reduced top universities in Zhejiang, re-establishment of Hangzhou University has been frequently proposed. In March 2010, Sun Zhonghuan, a Hangzhou University alumnus and major politician proposed that Hangzhou Normal University should be renamed as Hangzhou University. During 2017 Lianghui, Zhao Guangyu, a major Hangzhou politician, proposed a new Hangzhou University that specialises in liberal arts should be established to complement Zhejiang University that specialises in sciences and engineering. In September 2021, a netizen proposes to Zhejiang Gongshang University that Zhejiang Gongshang University should merge with Zhejiang University of Technology to build a new Hangzhou University.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5648133" start="0" end="19" title="Hangzhou University" label="Hangzhou University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648133" start="21" end="24" title="Hangzhou University" label="HZU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="55" end="63" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="65" end="73" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q197543" start="112" end="131" title="Zhejiang University" label="Zhejiang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q197543" start="302" end="321" title="Zhejiang University" label="Zhejiang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q151868" start="353" end="372" title="Chinese postal romanization" label="postal romanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970502" start="529" end="540" title="Project 211" label="Project 211"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044820" start="670" end="681" title="Xixi Campus, Zhejiang University" label="Xixi Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19796" start="873" end="884" title="Cai Yuanpei" label="Cai Yuanpei"/>
<link wikidata="Q697761" start="889" end="902" title="Jiang Menglin" label="Jiang Menglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10877861" start="1116" end="1119" title="Hangchow University" label="you"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="1168" end="1177" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Chungshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q197543" start="1225" end="1244" title="Zhejiang University" label="Zhejiang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874361" start="1316" end="1363" title="1952 reorganisation of Chinese higher education" label="1952 reorganisation of Chinese higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090797" start="2513" end="2526" title="Chen Jiangong" label="Chen Jiangong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11080062" start="2562" end="2577" title="Wenlan Pavilion" label="Wenlan Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q699477" start="2589" end="2628" title="Complete Library of the Four Treasuries" label="Complete Library of the Four Treasuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561056" start="2931" end="2943" title="Song Weiping" label="Song Weiping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2945" end="2957" title="Zhou Qingzhi" label="Zhou Qingzhi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2962" end="2973" title="Xu Guangyue" label="Xu Guangyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q451809" start="2981" end="3005" title="Mao Dun Literature Prize" label="Mao Dun Literature Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373835" start="3015" end="3026" title="Wang Xufeng" label="Wang Xufeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657130" start="3121" end="3133" title="Wulin Square" label="Wulin Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="3160" end="3178" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="democracy movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q197543" start="3638" end="3657" title="Zhejiang University" label="Zhejiang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044820" start="3716" end="3727" title="Xixi Campus, Zhejiang University" label="Xixi Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070839" start="3789" end="3823" title="Zhijiang Campus, Zhejiang University" label="former site of Hangchow University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148583" start="4468" end="4493" title="Zhejiang University Press" label="Zhejiang University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648139" start="5126" end="5144" title="Hangzhou Xuejun High School" label="Xuejun High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148738" start="5393" end="5418" title="Zhejiang Normal University" label="Zhejiang Teachers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148738" start="5532" end="5557" title="Zhejiang Normal University" label="Zhejiang Teachers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648131" start="5856" end="5874" title="Hangzhou Wenlan High School" label="Wenlan High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638662" start="6192" end="6205" title="Sun Zhonghuan" label="Sun Zhonghuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648125" start="6272" end="6298" title="Hangzhou Normal University" label="Hangzhou Normal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133367" start="6353" end="6361" title="Two Sessions" label="Lianghui"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070664" start="6617" end="6646" title="Zhejiang Gongshang University" label="Zhejiang Gongshang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q986087" start="6700" end="6733" title="Zhejiang University of Technology" label="Zhejiang University of Technology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266164" wikidata="Q1624344" url="?curid=1266164" title="Edgmond">
<text>Edgmond is a village and civil parish in the borough of Telford and Wrekin and ceremonial county of Shropshire, England. The population of the parish at the 2011 Census was 2,062. It lies north-west of the town of Newport.

The village has two pubs (the Lion and the Lamb), a Methodist chapel and hall (neither of which are in use), a village hall, and a village shop with a co-located post office.

There is a recreation field called simply &quot;The Playing Fields&quot;, where there are Sunday cricket games, pub football matches, and a playground for young children. The village also has many areas for walking and biking including an area called the Rock Hole, an old sandstone quarry from which the rock used to build the local church was taken .

Also popular is the canal walk, which leads down to the local town of Newport along the old canals. The canals are now often used for fishing competitions. There has been much speculation about the possibility of reopening the old Shrewsbury and Newport Canal route.

There is a Church of England parish church in Edgmond, dedicated to St.Peter. It is in the Archdeaconry of Salop and Diocese of Lichfield. 

The parish war memorial, on a roadside, erected to commemorate war dead of World War I, consists of a sandstone pillar surmounted by a crucifix with figures of a soldier and a nurse looking up at the figure of Christ.

==Etymology==
The name Edgmond comes from the Anglo-Saxon for edge of marsh; the hamlet of Edgmond Marsh lies north of the village at .

==Education==
The village has a Church of England primary school, called St.Peter&#x27;s.

Harper Adams University is in Edgmond. The University has accommodation in the village, where many international students stay. The main subjects taught at the college are related to the food chain and much research is done there. Here on 10 January 1982 the English lowest temperature weather record was broken (and is kept to this day): .

==Notable people==
* Richard Barnfield (1574 – 1620) – English poet, obscure though close relationship with William Shakespeare, brought up in Edgmond.

Previous Rectors of Edgmond include:
*Thomas Gilbert was Puritan Rector of Edgmond 1648 to 1662 when he was ejected. During that period he was nicknamed &#x27;the bishop of Shropshire&#x27;.
*Thomas Bucknall Lloyd (also concurrently Archdeacon of Salop) from 1888 to 1896, dying there,
*Sir Lovelace Stamer (also concurrently Anglican Bishop of Shrewsbury), from 1896 to 1905, during which period he built new schools for local children, organised a working men&#x27;s club and reading rooms, and paid for a piped water supply for the village.

Folklorist Charlotte Burne (1850-1923) lived in childhood at Edgmond.

==Customs==
The church holds an annual Church Clipping service, which claims to be the longest uninterrupted clipping service in the country.

Edgmond was once associated with the practice of souling, a possible contributor to the halloween practice of trick or treating. The folk song &quot;The Edgmond Man&#x27;s Souling Song&quot; was released by folk musicians John Kirkpatrick and Sue Harris on their 1976 album &quot;Among The Many Attractions at the Show will be a Really High Class Band&quot;.

== Civil parish ==
In addition to the village of Edgmond, the parish includes the settlements of Edgmond Marsh and Adeney.

==Transport==

===Bus===
Services operating in the Edgmond area, as of 2023:

==See also==
*Listed buildings in Edgmond

==References==
==External links==

* Edgmond Wines - A popular wine store and wine club in Edgmond.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1624344" start="0" end="7" title="Edgmond" label="Edgmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425298" start="56" end="74" title="Telford and Wrekin" label="Telford and Wrekin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="79" end="96" title="ceremonial counties of England" label="ceremonial county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="100" end="110" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027134" start="214" end="221" title="Newport, Shropshire" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="386" end="397" title="post office" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q184872" start="411" end="421" title="recreation" label="recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="497" end="504" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="516" end="524" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875349" start="540" end="550" title="playground" label="playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="619" end="625" title="biking" label="biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503662" start="985" end="1013" title="Shrewsbury and Newport Canal" label="Shrewsbury and Newport Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1033" end="1050" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722489" start="1113" end="1134" title="Archdeaconry of Salop" label="Archdeaconry of Salop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028579" start="1139" end="1159" title="Diocese of Lichfield" label="Diocese of Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1238" end="1249" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="1428" end="1439" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="1463" end="1469" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1551" end="1568" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="1569" end="1583" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663364" start="1610" end="1633" title="Harper Adams University" label="Harper Adams University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774389" start="1869" end="1876" title="Climate of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q684646" start="1973" end="1990" title="Richard Barnfield" label="Richard Barnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2060" end="2079" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442802" start="2143" end="2157" title="Thomas Gilbert (minister)" label="Thomas Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q28747982" start="2297" end="2318" title="Thomas Lloyd (priest)" label="Thomas Bucknall Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722489" start="2338" end="2357" title="Archdeacon of Salop" label="Archdeacon of Salop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528273" start="2392" end="2411" title="Sir Lovelace Stamer, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir Lovelace Stamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763433" start="2431" end="2460" title="Anglican Bishop of Shrewsbury" label="Anglican Bishop of Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086143" start="2661" end="2676" title="Charlotte Burne" label="Charlotte Burne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134394" start="2760" end="2775" title="Clipping the church" label="Church Clipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564388" start="2913" end="2920" title="souling" label="souling"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="2952" end="2961" title="halloween" label="halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q47195" start="2974" end="2991" title="trick or treating" label="trick or treating"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="2997" end="3006" title="folk song" label="folk song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911853" start="3086" end="3102" title="John Kirkpatrick (musician)" label="John Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634117" start="3107" end="3117" title="Sue Harris" label="Sue Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812397" start="3339" end="3345" title="Adeney" label="Adeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q55620923" start="3440" end="3467" title="Listed buildings in Edgmond" label="Listed buildings in Edgmond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266165" wikidata="Q5323319" url="?curid=1266165" title="ELR">
<text>ELR may refer to:

== Transportation ==
* East Lancashire Railway, a heritage railway in England
* East Lancashire Railway (1844–1859), a former railway in the northwest of England
* East London Railway, see East London Line
* Engineer&#x27;s Line Reference, an abbreviated code for a section of rail route in the UK
* Cadillac ELR, a luxury hybrid compact coupé

== Other ==

* Employer of last resort, a formal government job guarantee program
* Environmental lapse rate, a term in meteorology
* &quot;The Environmental Law Reporter&quot;, a publication by the Environmental Law Institute
* Enzyme-linked receptor, a category of receptors involved in cell signalling
* &quot;ExtraLife Radio&quot;, a radio show created and hosted by cartoonist Scott Johnson
* &quot;European Law Reporter&quot;, a specialist journal
* &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot;, an American TV sitcom (19962005)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5323319" start="0" end="3" title="ELR" label="ELR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328784" start="42" end="65" title="East Lancashire Railway" label="East Lancashire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328785" start="99" end="134" title="East Lancashire Railway (1844–1859)" label="East Lancashire Railway (1844–1859)"/>
<link wikidata="Q831794" start="208" end="224" title="East London Line" label="East London Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377931" start="227" end="257" title="Engineer&amp;#x27;s Line Reference" label="Engineer&amp;#x27;s Line Reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025167" start="319" end="331" title="Cadillac ELR" label="Cadillac ELR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374316" start="379" end="402" title="Employer of last resort" label="Employer of last resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q66900467" start="448" end="472" title="Environmental lapse rate" label="Environmental lapse rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381134" start="563" end="590" title="Environmental Law Institute" label="Environmental Law Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381540" start="593" end="615" title="Enzyme-linked receptor" label="Enzyme-linked receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436584" start="746" end="759" title="Scott Johnson (cartoonist)" label="Scott Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20740505" start="768" end="789" title="European Law Reporter" label="European Law Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="826" end="849" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266169" wikidata="Q3850249" url="?curid=1266169" title="Loch of Strathbeg">
<text>The Loch of Strathbeg is a shallow freshwater loch on the coast of Buchan in Aberdeenshire, Scotland. It lies within the parishes of Lonmay and Crimond. The loch is a designated special protection area because of its importance to birdlife and is managed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, which operates a visitor centre at Starnafin. It is visited in the winter months by at least 20,000 birds, including pink-footed geese, whooper swans, and teals.

==History==
The Loch of Strathbeg was formerly an inlet of the sea, sheltered by a shingle bar. A channel at the east end of the bar gave access to the port of Rattray. This channel began to silt up in the 17th century, however, which proved fatal for the port. It was finally sealed by a storm around the year 1720. Writing in 1794, the minister of Crimond remarked:

Attempts were made in the 18th century to drain the loch, but these were doomed to end in failure. The ruined windmill on the shore of the loch and the drainage channel linking it to the sea are relics of this time.

During the First World War, the loch was used as a seaplane base. The disused aerodrome on its shore dates from the Second World War.

== References ==

== External links ==

*RSPB webpage for the Loch of Strathbeg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3850249" start="4" end="21" title="Loch of Strathbeg" label="Loch of Strathbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101354" start="67" end="73" title="Buchan" label="Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189912" start="77" end="90" title="Aberdeenshire" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q281188" start="133" end="139" title="Lonmay" label="Lonmay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009846" start="144" end="151" title="Crimond" label="Crimond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463705" start="178" end="201" title="special protection area" label="special protection area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="262" end="303" title="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds" label="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q209419" start="422" end="439" title="pink-footed geese" label="pink-footed geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25612" start="441" end="453" title="whooper swan" label="whooper swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25700" start="460" end="464" title="Eurasian teal" label="teal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="559" end="562" title="shoal" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296039" start="628" end="635" title="Rattray, Aberdeenshire" label="Rattray"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1065" end="1080" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="1105" end="1113" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633361" start="1132" end="1141" title="RNAS Rattray" label="aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1170" end="1186" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266170" wikidata="Q6444353" url="?curid=1266170" title="Kundong University">
<text>Kundong University, sometimes called Andong Info Tech or AIT, was a small technical college located in Andong City, North Gyeongsang province, South Korea. In July 2012 now-Ministry of Education granted voluntary closure of the university upon the request filed in May 2012. The university officially closed in August 2012.

It offered degree programs in fields such architecture, animation, herbal medicine, and civil engineering. Facilities included broadcast studios and a library of around 18,500 volumes. International sister institutions included the Canadian Malaspina University-College and the American University of Montana and Wenatchee Valley College.

==History==
The foundation which would establish the school was founded in 1972. In 1987, governmental permission to found a school was received, and in 1992 the school actually opened as Andong Industrial Technical College. The first entering class of 480 students was admitted on March 4, 1993. The entering class of 2003 numbered 842 students. The school took on its current name in 1998. From 2006, the name was Kundong University. The university closed in August, 2012

==See also==
*List of colleges and universities in South Korea
*Education in South Korea

==External links==
*Kundong University website
*Ministry of Education and Human Resources Development page on Andong Info Tech

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6444353" start="0" end="18" title="Kundong University" label="Kundong University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444353" start="37" end="53" title="Kundong University" label="Andong Info Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444353" start="57" end="60" title="Kundong University" label="AIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q42116" start="103" end="109" title="Andong" label="Andong"/>
<link wikidata="Q41154" start="116" end="132" title="North Gyeongsang" label="North Gyeongsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="143" end="154" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404048" start="173" end="194" title="Ministry of Education (South Korea)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="367" end="379" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="381" end="390" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="392" end="407" title="herbal medicine" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="413" end="430" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914214" start="566" end="594" title="Malaspina University-College" label="Malaspina University-College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="612" end="633" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982289" start="638" end="662" title="Wenatchee Valley College" label="Wenatchee Valley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q494836" start="1154" end="1202" title="List of colleges and universities in South Korea" label="List of colleges and universities in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q496198" start="1204" end="1228" title="Education in South Korea" label="Education in South Korea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266174" wikidata="Q2978687" url="?curid=1266174" title="Clavioline">
<text>The clavioline is an electronic analog synthesizer. It was invented by French engineer Constant Martin in 1947 in Versailles.

The instrument consists of a keyboard and a separate amplifier and speaker unit. The keyboard usually covered three octaves, and had a number of switches to alter the tone of the sound produced, add vibrato (a defining feature of the instrument), and provide other effects. The Clavioline used a vacuum tube oscillator to produce a buzzy waveform, almost a square wave, which could then be altered using high-pass and low-pass filtering, as well as the vibrato. The amplifier also aided in creating the instrument&#x27;s signature tones, by deliberately providing a large amount of distortion.

Several models of the Clavioline were produced by different companies. Among the more important were the Standard, Reverb, and Concert models by Selmer in France and Gibson in the United States in the 1950s. The six-octave model employing octave transposition was developed by Harald Bode and manufactured under license by Jörgensen Electronic in Germany. In England, the Jennings Organ Company&#x27;s first successful product was the Univox, an early self-powered electronic keyboard inspired by the Selmer Clavioline.
In Japan, Ace Tone&#x27;s first prototype, the Canary S-2 (1962), was based on the Clavioline.

==Recordings==
The Clavioline has been used on a number of recordings in popular music as well as in film. Along with the Mellotron, it was one of the keyboard instruments favoured by rock and pop musicians during the 1960s before the arrival of the Moog synthesizer.

*&quot;Little Red Monkey&quot; (1953) by Frank Chacksfield’s Tunesmiths features Jack Jordan on clavioline. An earlier recording of the tune by Jack Jordan himself was issued on the HMV label.
*In 1953–54, Van Phillips composed music for the clavioline for the science-fiction radio trilogy &quot;Journey into Space&quot;.
*In the Bollywood Hindi film &quot;Nagin&quot; (1954), Kalyanji Virji Shah plays the snake-charmer tune &quot;Man dole mera, tan dole mere&quot; on the clavioline, under the musical direction of Hemant Kumar.
*&quot;Runaway&quot; and &quot;Hats Off to Larry&quot; (1961) by Del Shannon each feature a bridge solo by Max Crook, performed on a heavily modified clavioline that he called the Musitron.
*English producer Joe Meek began recording with a clavioline in 1960. His production of the Tornados&#x27; hit instrumental &quot;Telstar&quot; (1962) features the clavioline or perhaps a Univox, as does the B-side of that single, &quot;Jungle Fever&quot;. Author Mark Brend states that, while the exact instrument used has long been open to debate, &quot;there remains a very faint possibility that Meek used a Univox on &#x27;Telstar,&#x27; mixed with a Clavioline.&quot;
*The jazz albums &quot;The Magic City&quot; (1966), &quot;The Heliocentric Worlds of Sun Ra, Volume Two&quot; (1966), and &quot;Atlantis&quot; (1967) by Sun Ra include clavioline.
*The Beatles used a clavioline on &quot;Baby, You&#x27;re a Rich Man&quot;, which was issued in July 1967 as the B-side of their &quot;All You Need Is Love&quot; single. John Lennon played the instrument on its oboe setting, creating an exotic sound that suggests an Indian shehnai. In his feature article on the clavioline, in &quot;Sound on Sound&quot; magazine, Gordon Reid pairs &quot;Baby, You&#x27;re a Rich Man&quot; with &quot;Telstar&quot; as the two seminal pop recordings made with the instrument. The Clavioline that the Beatles used was owned by Olympic Studios in London. 
*The Strawbs 1972 album &quot;Grave New World&quot; includes some clavioline played by their keyboardist Blue Weaver, on the song &quot;The Flower And The Young Man&quot;. 
*The Amon Düül II album &quot;Wolf City&quot; (1972)
*The White Stripes used a 1959 Univox on their album &quot;Icky Thump&quot; (2007).
*Darren Allison plays clavioline on William Blake&#x27;s &quot;Eternity&quot; by Daisy Bell, from their &quot;London&quot; album (2015).
*John Barry of the John Barry Seven made a recording called &quot;Starfire&quot; which featured the instrument. The clavioline was also used extensively on his &quot;Stringbeat&quot; LP and other recordings of the period, played by bandleader and future Benny Hill associate Ted Taylor.
*A clavioline appears on Mike Oldfield&#x27;s 2017 album &quot;Return to Ommadawn&quot;.

==See also==
* Ondioline
*Ondes Martenot
*List of electronic instruments
*Synthesizer#Monophonic electronic keyboards

== References ==
==Sources==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2978687" start="4" end="14" title="Clavioline" label="clavioline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268757" start="32" end="50" title="analog synthesizer" label="analog synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994876" start="87" end="102" title="Constant Martin" label="Constant Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="114" end="124" title="Versailles (city)" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q901207" start="156" end="164" title="Musical keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="180" end="189" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="194" end="201" title="loudspeaker" label="speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="326" end="333" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="423" end="434" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q262754" start="531" end="540" title="high-pass filter" label="high-pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="545" end="553" title="low-pass filter" label="low-pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072260" start="554" end="563" title="Filter (signal processing)" label="filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850648" start="867" end="873" title="Henri Selmer Paris" label="Selmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210278" start="888" end="894" title="Gibson Guitar Corporation" label="Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q86204" start="999" end="1010" title="Harald Bode" label="Harald Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122899" start="1094" end="1116" title="Vox (musical equipment)" label="Jennings Organ Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673009" start="1252" end="1260" title="Ace Tone" label="Ace Tone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1289" end="1299" title="Ace Tone#Clavioline" label="Canary S-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="1411" end="1424" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="1460" end="1469" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="1588" end="1604" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082544" start="1648" end="1665" title="Frank Chacksfield" label="Frank Chacksfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805539" start="1904" end="1922" title="Journey into Space" label="Journey into Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958828" start="1965" end="1970" title="Nagin (1954 film)" label="Nagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354984" start="1985" end="2004" title="Kalyanji Virji Shah" label="Kalyanji Virji Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732205" start="2125" end="2137" title="Hemanta Mukherjee" label="Hemant Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q285001" start="2146" end="2153" title="Runaway (Del Shannon song)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q27814047" start="2170" end="2187" title="Hats Off to Larry" label="Hats Off to Larry"/>
<link wikidata="Q323456" start="2204" end="2215" title="Del Shannon" label="Del Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302066" start="2246" end="2255" title="Max Crook" label="Max Crook"/>
<link wikidata="Q741007" start="2347" end="2355" title="Joe Meek" label="Joe Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q765861" start="2417" end="2429" title="the Tornados" label="the Tornados"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004626" start="2459" end="2466" title="Telstar (instrumental)" label="Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122899" start="2517" end="2523" title="Vox (musical equipment)" label="Univox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="2808" end="2812" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749406" start="2826" end="2840" title="The Magic City (Sun Ra album)" label="The Magic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739335" start="2861" end="2906" title="The Heliocentric Worlds of Sun Ra, Volume Two" label="The Heliocentric Worlds of Sun Ra, Volume Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816688" start="2931" end="2939" title="Atlantis (Sun Ra album)" label="Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q354508" start="2956" end="2962" title="Sun Ra" label="Sun Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2984" end="2995" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q241554" start="3023" end="3051" title="Baby, You&amp;#x27;re a Rich Man" label="Baby, You&amp;#x27;re a Rich Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q176098" start="3118" end="3138" title="All You Need Is Love" label="All You Need Is Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="3153" end="3164" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q847911" start="3257" end="3264" title="shehnai" label="shehnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290478" start="3317" end="3331" title="Sound on Sound" label="Sound on Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q943742" start="3542" end="3557" title="Olympic Studios" label="Olympic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q926799" start="3575" end="3582" title="Strawbs" label="Strawbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182628" start="3600" end="3615" title="Grave New World" label="Grave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q885939" start="3675" end="3686" title="Blue Weaver" label="Blue Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319707" start="3748" end="3760" title="Amon Düül II" label="Amon Düül II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020646" start="3773" end="3782" title="Wolf City" label="Wolf City"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="3797" end="3814" title="The White Stripes" label="The White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076297" start="3855" end="3865" title="Icky Thump" label="Icky Thump"/>
<link wikidata="Q543427" start="3881" end="3895" title="Darren Allison" label="Darren Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="3916" end="3929" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q111074" start="4018" end="4028" title="John Barry (composer)" label="John Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q200228" start="4271" end="4281" title="Benny Hill" label="Benny Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4292" end="4302" title="Ted Taylor (British musician)" label="Ted Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008" start="4329" end="4342" title="Mike Oldfield" label="Mike Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q27430145" start="4367" end="4385" title="Return to Ommadawn" label="Return to Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q490054" start="4409" end="4418" title="Ondioline" label="Ondioline"/>
<link wikidata="Q862501" start="4420" end="4434" title="Ondes Martenot" label="Ondes Martenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348669" start="4436" end="4466" title="List of electronic instruments" label="List of electronic instruments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4468" end="4511" title="Synthesizer#Monophonic electronic keyboards" label="Synthesizer#Monophonic electronic keyboards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266176" wikidata="Q200816" url="?curid=1266176" title="Soros Fund Management">
<text>Soros Fund Management is a privately held American investment management firm. It is currently structured as a family office, but formerly was a hedge fund. The firm was founded in 1970 by George Soros and, in 2010, was reported to be one of the most profitable firms in the hedge fund industry, averaging a 20% annual rate of return over four decades. 

It is headquartered at 250 West 55th Street in New York City. As of 2023, Soros Fund Management, LLC had US$25 billion in AUM.
==Overview==
Soros Fund Management is the primary adviser for the Quantum Group of Funds; a family of funds in international investments. The company invests in public equity and fixed income markets worldwide, as well as foreign exchange, currency, and commodity markets, and private equity and venture capital funds. The company is reported to have significant investments in transportation, energy, retail, financial, and other industries.

Robert Soros stepped down as deputy chairman and president in June 2017. David Milich assumed most of his duties. In 2017, Dawn Fitzpatrick replaced Ted Burdick as chief investment officer.

In the 2016 election cycle, Soros Fund Management donated over $10 million to Hillary Clinton&#x27;s presidential campaign through super PACs.

==History==
The company was founded by George Soros and his former business partner Jim Rogers in 1970. Before starting the business Soros and Rogers worked together at the investment bank Arnhold and S. Bleichroder.

===1992 to 2007===
In the week leading up to September 16, 1992, or &quot;Black Wednesday,&quot; Quantum Funds earned $1.8 billion by shorting British pounds and buying German marks. This transaction earned Soros the title of &quot;the Man Who Broke the Bank of England&quot;. On the other hand, British government policy in the period before the ejection of the pound sterling from the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System had been widely criticised for providing speculators with a one-way bet.

In 2000, the Quantum Fund lost its position as the largest hedge fund in the world when its assets under management changed from $10 billion to $4 billion in about a year. The fund&#x27;s losses resulted from investments in technology stocks. That year, CEO Duncan Hennes and the managers of the Quantum Fund, Stanley Druckenmiller, and Quota Fund, Nicholas Roditi, resigned. The restructuring of Soros Fund Management was announced in a shareholder letter that outlined its plan to merge the Quantum Fund with the Quantum Emerging Growth Fund to form the Quantum Endowment Fund. The intention was to transform the Quantum Fund into a &quot;lower-risk, less-speculative fund&quot; administered by an outside adviser.

===2008 to 2011===
The firm acquired a stake in Lehman Brothers just prior to its failure in 2008.

In 2009, Soros Fund Management partnered with six other hedge funds to acquire IndyMac Bank for $13.9 billion, thereby gaining control of an estimated $160 billion in bank loans, investments, and deposits.

In 2010, the company was reported to have created $32 billion in profits since 1973, making it one of the top profit-making hedge funds in the industry.

In 2011, the firm was reported to have $27.9 billion in assets under management and was ranked sixth on Institutional Investor&#x27;s Hedge Fund 100 list. That same year, the company partnered with Silver Lake Partners and created fund called Silver Lake Kraftwerk whose focus was investing in natural resource and energy companies.

In July 2011, the fund announced plans to return just under $1 billion to investors by the end of 2011 to avoid reporting requirements under the Dodd-Frank reform act and to focus on family investments. That month, the company&#x27;s chief investment officer Keith Anderson, co-founder of BlackRock left the firm.

===2012 to 2024===
In September 2016, Soros Fund Management advised a private investment fund tied to Quantum Strategic Partners, which injected the bulk of $305 million into SolarCity, a producer of solar panels. The flow of cash allowed Elon Musk, chairman of Tesla Motors and SolarCity, to purchase SolarCity and merge it with Tesla.

In June 2018, the firm was reported to own 15% of Justify, the horse that won the 2018 Preakness Stakes, Kentucky Derby and Belmont Stakes, through the international breeding and racing operation of SF Bloodstock and SF Racing Group.

According to The Wall Street Journal, Soros Fund Management gained 8.9% in 2017 and 0.9% in 2018. In the first quarter of 2019, the fund had gained 1.9%.

In May 2019, it was announced that Soros Fund Management had built up a 3% stake in Swiss asset manager GAM.
In June 2019, Soros Fund Management led an investment in Vice Media for $250 million. In August 2019, Soros Fund Management increased its stake In Manolete Partners Plc To 11.67%. As of August, 2019, Soros Fund Management&#x27;s most significant holdings were Liberty Broadband, Vici Properties, and Caesars Entertainment.

In January 2020, George Soros announced at the World Economic Forum that he would commit $1 billion to the launch of an international university, The Open Society University Network, for research and education on climate change and dealing with authoritarian governments.

In April 2020, Amply Power, a company that provides charging solutions for fleets, received its series A funding of $13.2 million from Soros Fund Management, Siemens, Congruent Ventures, PeopleFund, and Obvious Ventures.

In November 2020, Soros Fund Management disclosed that it holds 1% Class A shares in Palantir Technologies and announced that it has begun selling its shares as allowed because it disagrees with Palantir&#x27;s business practices. In a statement to the CNBC, the company said, &quot;SFM made this investment at a time when the negative social consequences of big data were less understood. SFM would not make an investment in Palantir today.&quot;

In February 2024, Soros Fund Management emerged as the largest creditor in Audacy&#x27;s prepackaged Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings, holding over $400 million of its highest-ranking debt. This debt is planned to be converted into equity in the restructured company, making Soros a significant shareholder. Audacy views this development as a positive sign, interpreting it as a &quot;vote of confidence&quot; in the company&#x27;s future.

In November 2024, Soros Fund Management closed its Hong Kong Office.

==References==
==External links==
* George Soros, &quot;The Capitalist Threat&quot; (&quot;The Atlantic&quot;, February 1997)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200816" start="0" end="21" title="Soros Fund Management" label="Soros Fund Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="27" end="41" title="Privately held company" label="privately held"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="51" end="77" title="investment management firm" label="investment management firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q751314" start="111" end="124" title="family office" label="family office"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="145" end="155" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q12908" start="189" end="201" title="George Soros" label="George Soros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817506" start="387" end="398" title="55th Street (Manhattan)" label="55th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q741435" start="477" end="480" title="Assets under management" label="AUM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765281" start="548" end="570" title="Quantum Group of Funds" label="Quantum Group of Funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="650" end="656" title="Equity (finance)" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239315" start="661" end="673" title="fixed income" label="fixed income"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="759" end="773" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="778" end="793" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q24239054" start="1049" end="1065" title="Dawn Fitzpatrick" label="Dawn Fitzpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072304" start="1090" end="1114" title="chief investment officer" label="chief investment officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872173" start="1195" end="1239" title="Hillary Clinton presidential campaign, 2016" label="Hillary Clinton&amp;#x27;s presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1248" end="1258" title="Political action committee#Super PACs" label="super PACs"/>
<link wikidata="Q552215" start="1345" end="1355" title="Jim Rogers" label="Jim Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q806781" start="1450" end="1476" title="Arnhold and S. Bleichroder" label="Arnhold and S. Bleichroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q400500" start="1553" end="1568" title="Black Wednesday" label="Black Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q106526" start="1613" end="1621" title="shorting" label="shorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="1622" end="1635" title="British pound" label="British pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="1648" end="1659" title="German mark" label="German mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="1733" end="1748" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="1775" end="1793" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="1842" end="1856" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q733221" start="1866" end="1889" title="Exchange Rate Mechanism" label="Exchange Rate Mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q385239" start="1897" end="1921" title="European Monetary System" label="European Monetary System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547711" start="1982" end="1993" title="Arbitrage betting" label="one-way bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q741435" start="2088" end="2111" title="assets under management" label="assets under management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599568" start="2306" end="2327" title="Stanley Druckenmiller" label="Stanley Druckenmiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981897" start="2345" end="2360" title="Nicholas Roditi" label="Nicholas Roditi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="2762" end="2777" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19647924" start="2893" end="2905" title="IndyMac Bank" label="IndyMac Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11095058" start="3279" end="3301" title="Institutional Investor (magazine)" label="Institutional Investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676442" start="3373" end="3393" title="Silver Lake Partners" label="Silver Lake Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234044" start="3654" end="3675" title="Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act" label="Dodd-Frank reform act"/>
<link wikidata="Q219635" start="3798" end="3807" title="BlackRock" label="BlackRock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555824" start="3999" end="4008" title="SolarCity" label="SolarCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="4063" end="4072" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="4086" end="4098" title="Tesla, Inc." label="Tesla Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q52720027" start="4212" end="4219" title="Justify (horse)" label="Justify"/>
<link wikidata="Q55003857" start="4249" end="4265" title="2018 Preakness Stakes" label="Preakness Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q52161992" start="4267" end="4281" title="2018 Kentucky Derby" label="Kentucky Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953884" start="4286" end="4300" title="2018 Belmont Stakes" label="Belmont Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="4410" end="4433" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250129" start="4656" end="4659" title="GAM (company)" label="GAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395343" start="4718" end="4728" title="Vice Media" label="Vice Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516562" start="4921" end="4938" title="Liberty Media" label="Liberty Broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q54263910" start="4940" end="4955" title="Vici Properties" label="Vici Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636524" start="4961" end="4982" title="Caesars Entertainment" label="Caesars Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="5032" end="5052" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="5198" end="5212" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="5230" end="5255" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="5416" end="5423" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047336" start="5565" end="5586" title="Palantir Technologies" label="Palantir Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="5733" end="5737" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397258" start="6004" end="6017" title="Audacy" label="Audacy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="6532" end="6544" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266178" wikidata="Q13297" url="?curid=1266178" title="Nafanan language">
<text>Nafaanra (sometimes written Nafaara, pronounced ), also known as Nafanan or Nafana, is a Senufo language spoken in northwest Ghana, along the border with Ivory Coast, east of Bondoukou. It is spoken by approximately people. Its speakers call themselves Nafana, but others call them Banda or Mfantera. Like other Senufo languages, Nafaanra is a tonal language. It is somewhat of an outlier in the Senufo language group, with the geographically-closest relatives, the Southern Senufo Tagwana–Djimini languages, approximately to the west, on the other side of Comoé National Park.

The basic word order is subject–object–verb, like Latin and Japanese. Like other Niger–Congo languages, it has a noun class system, with nouns classified according to five different classes, which also affects pronouns, adjectives and copulas. The phonology features a distinction between the length of vowels and whether they are oral or nasal (as in French or Portuguese). There are also three distinct tones, a feature shared with the other Senufo languages. Nafaanra grammar features both tense and aspect which are marked with particles. Numbers are mainly formed by adding cardinal numbers to the number 5 and by multiplying the numbers 10, 20 and 100.

==Geography and demography==
Nafaanra is bordered by Kulango languages to the west and southeast, while Deg (a Gur language) is found to the north and east. The closest eastern and western neighbour is the Mande language Ligbi. Southeast and south of Nafaanra and Ligbi, the Akan language Abron is spoken.

The Nafana people live in the north-west corner of the Brong-Ahafo Region of Ghana, concentrated mainly in Sampa (capital of the Jaman North district) and Banda. There are two dialectal variants of Nafaanra: Pantera of Banda, and Fantera of Sampa. Bendor-Samuel gives a 79% cognate relationship on the Swadesh list between the two dialects, meaning that they have many basic words in common. The Banda dialect is considered central. The terms &quot;Fantera&quot; and &quot;Pantera&quot; come from other peoples and are considered pejorative by the Nafana.

The Nafana people say that they come from a village called Kakala in Ivory Coast. Their oral history says that some of their people are still there, and if they go back they will not be allowed to leave again. They arrived in the Banda area after the Ligbi people, who came from Begho (Bigu, Bighu) to the area in the early 17th century.

According to &quot;Ethnologue&quot;, as of 2005, many Nafana are bilingual in Twi, the regional lingua franca, to some extent. Using the ILR scale, 50% of Nafana have limited working proficiency in Twi, while 20% have general professional proficiency. The remaining 30% have either elementary proficiency (15%) or no proficiency at all (15%). 15–25% of the Nafana people are literate in Twi, whereas only 1–5% are literate in Nafaanra.

65 Dompo people living in the close vicinity of Banda have shifted to Nafaanra. Dompo is their first language, thought to be extinct until a fieldwork trip by Blench in 1998 proved the contrary.

===Classification===
Maurice Delafosse was the first linguist to mention Nafaanra, calling it &quot;a much dispersed Senufo tribe&quot; in 1904. Westermann in his classification of West-African languages, also grouped Nafaanra with Senufo, apparently based on the word list found in Rapp. This classification is confirmed by Bendor-Samuel, who bases his internal Senufo classification on the comparative word lists in Swadesh et al.

It is less clear which particular Senufo branch Nafaanra is most closely related to. Bendor-Samuel gives a 60% cognate relationship based on the Swadesh list with &quot;Tenere&quot; (a western Senari dialect), 59% with &quot;Central Senari&quot; (the Senari dialect spoken around Korhogo), and 43% with the non-Senufo languages Mo (or Deg), Kabre (or Kabiye), and Dogon. The relatively low scores of about 60% point to a rather distant relationship. Likewise, Mensah and Tchagbale establish an intercomprehensibility factor of 38% with &quot;Tyebaara&quot; (Senari), concluding that Nafaanra is only distantly related to this dialect. Nafaanra has been tentatively linked to Palaka (Kpalaga) by Manessy, whereas Mills suggests a relation with the southern Tagwana–Djimini branch.

==Sounds==

===Vowels===
Nafaanra has seven oral and five nasalized vowels. A difference in vowel length can make a difference in meaning, as in &#x27;, &quot;to go&quot;, vs. &#x27;, &quot;fetish&quot; or &quot;o&quot;, &quot;we&quot; vs. &quot;oo&quot;, &quot;we will&quot;. Similarly, the phonemic contrastiveness of nasalization can be seen in &quot;sii&quot;, &quot;to be giving birth,&quot; vs. &quot;&quot;, &quot;to build&quot;. The vowel system closely resembles that of other Senufo languages. It is like the two Northern Senufo languages Supyire and Mamara in having only five nasal against seven oral vowels. 

===Consonants===


===Tone===
Like the other Senufo languages, Nafaanra has three contrastive tones: High, Mid and Low. Tone is normally not marked in the Nafaanra orthography. Examples are:
* kúfɔ̀ &quot;yam&quot; (High-Low)
* dama &quot;two pesewas (coin)&quot; (Mid)
* màŋà &quot;rope&quot; (Low)
The Mid tone sometimes has a rising feature, the High tone sometimes is subject to downstep (a tonal process resulting in a High tone being realised lower than a preceding High tone), and an upstep is also found. The &quot;rising feature&quot; of Mid may be related to the fact that two different Mid tones are found in some other Senufo languages (e.g. Sucite and Supyire). The High tone downstep (signified by a raised exclamation mark) occurs in the following context:

It is likely that the tonal lowering seen in this particular example is related to the low tone nasal prefix found in future tense constructions in some other Senufo languages. In fact, Supyire shows a similar phenomenon in future tense constructions with a direct object (in other future tense constructions, a low tone nasal is found). In general however, downstep is more widespread than in Supyire; a similar phenomenon is found in Palaka, Tagwana, and Djimini.

An upstep is found in the imperative tense of high tone verbs:

==Grammar==

The Nafaanra syllable comprises a vowel and a maximum of three consonants. A nasal consonant may occur as a syllable on its own, in which case it is called a &quot;syllabic nasal&quot;. The basic syllable structure can be rendered as (C1)(C2)V(C3), with a preference for CV and CVV. Position C1 may contain any consonant, although word-initial /r/ does not occur. Position C2 may contain only trills (/r/) or approximants (/w, l, j/). Position C3 may contain only nasals (), in which case the syllable as a whole is nasalized.

Senufo languages have a typical Niger–Congo noun class (or gender) system. Suffixes on nouns mark membership of one of the five noun genders. Pronouns, adjectives and copulas reflect the noun gender of the nominal they refer to. Although none of the sources on Nafaanra provides any details, it can be inferred from a brief word list given by Jordan 

The basic word order in Nafaanra is subject–object–verb, as can be seen in the following sentence:

===Personal pronouns===
Jordan lists the following list of pronouns, commenting, &quot;Although the pronoun system appears quite simple, it becomes complicated because all the tenses are shown by a combination of pronoun plus particle.&quot;

===Tense and aspect===
Tense and aspect in Nafaanra are generally encoded in two places: in preverbal particles and on the verb form. Nafaanra has past, recent past, and future tenses and continuative aspect. In a simple sentence, the order of the various constituents can be rendered as follows: . When the negative suffix &quot;-n&quot; is present, no fusing of preverbal particles takes place. Nafaanra additionally expresses some tense/aspect matters by use of certain time adverbs and auxiliary verbs.
Past tense is marked by the preverbal particle &quot;ná&quot; (high tone, as opposed to the low tone continuative particle). Future tense is marked by the particle &quot;wè&quot;. Simple sentences without a preverbal tense particle are interpreted as recent past (sometimes called &quot;immediate&quot;). If aspect marking is absent, simple sentences are generally interpreted as &quot;completive&quot;.



Continuative aspect (sometimes called &quot;progressive&quot;) denotes an action that is ongoing or repetitive. Continuative aspect is usually marked both by a preverbal particle &quot;nà&quot; (low tone) and by a change of the verb form. The verb &quot;sɛ́&quot;, &quot;go&quot; used in the sentences below has the continuative form &quot;síé&quot;. In sentences where both past tense particle &quot;ná&quot; and continuative particle &quot;nà&quot; are present, they combine to give the fused particle &quot;náà&quot;. In sentences in the recent past tense, the preverbal continuative particle is omitted and continuative aspect is shown only on the verb.

Two classes of verbs can be differentiated on the basis of their behaviour in aspectually marked sentences. 



===Questions===
Questions can be formed in several ways in Nafaanra. Basic yes–no questions are constructed by adding a sentence-final question marker &quot;rá&quot;. Constituent questions (sometimes called &quot;Wh-questions&quot; or &quot;question word questions&quot;) are doubly marked. They contain a sentence-initial question word and are marked with a sentence-final question marker &quot;hin&quot;.

===Numbers===
The cardinal numbers without tonal marking are presented below; where possible, the tone pattern is added based on the list in Rapp. 


Rapp (1933) compares the Nafaanra numerals for three (&quot;táárɛ&quot;) and hundred (&quot;lafaa&quot;) with &quot;eta&quot; and &quot;ke-lafa&quot; from Mpre, a hitherto unclassified language from Ghana. The Mpre &quot;eta&quot; is Kwa-like (cf. Brong &quot;esã&quot;, Ga &quot;etɛ&quot;), whereas the Nafaanra form &quot;táárɛ&quot; is transparently related to the forms found in the other (non-Kwa) Senufo languages (e.g. Supyire &quot;tàànrè&quot;). Nafaanra &quot;lafaa&quot; &quot;hundred&quot; is a typical Kwa numeral and is most probably borrowed from one of the surrounding Kwa languages (cf. Dangme &quot;làfá&quot;, Gonja &quot;kì-làfá&quot;, Ewe &quot;alafá&quot;). Rapp&#x27;s implication of affinity between Mpre and Nafaanra seems therefore unwarranted at this level.

===Colour words===
There are 3 to 4 basic colors in Nafanan. 
* &quot;wɔɔ&quot;—ki &quot;wɔ&quot;   &quot;it is black&quot;
* &quot;finge&quot;—ki &quot;finge&quot;   &quot;it is white&quot;
* &quot;ɲiɛ&quot;—ki &quot;ɲina&quot;   &quot;it is red&quot;
The cognate forms in closely related Supyire are &quot;-ɲyɛ-&quot;, &quot;red; warm colored&quot;, and &quot;-fyìn-&quot;, &quot;white; light colored&quot;, in Supyire. These adjectives are related to the respective verbs &quot;fíníŋɛ́&quot;, &quot;be white; whiten&quot; and &quot;ɲááŋá&quot;, &quot;be red; redden&quot;, which in turn are causative forms of the now defunct verbs &quot;fini&quot;,&quot;be white&quot; and &quot;ɲana&quot;, &quot;be red&quot;.

==Sample sentences==
Sample Nafaanra sentences from the SIL:



==Research==

There is relatively little published on or in the Nafaanra language. The first linguistic publication to mention Nafaanra is Delafosse (1904), containing some notes on the Nafana people and a fairly extensive comparative Senufo word list, though it lacked any proper tonal marking. Rapp (1933) is an appendix to an article on the Kulango language containing a German-Nafaanra (&quot;Nafana-Sprache&quot;) word list of around 100 items, gathered during a stay of four hours at Sampa. Rapp notes in passing that special attention was paid to the marking of the tones.

After a period of silence on Nafaanra, Painter (1966) appeared, consisting of basic word lists of the Pantera and Fantera dialects. The SIL linguist Dean Jordan published an article on Nafaanra discourse in 1978, and together with his wife Carol Jordan has produced a translation of the New Testament, which appeared in 1984. The whole bible was translated in 2015. Kropp-Dakubu&#x27;s 1980 &quot;West African language data sheets&quot; vol II contains a few pages on Nafaanra put together in the late seventies by Dean and Carol Jordan, including a phonology, a list of nouns, a list of pronouns, a list of numbers, and some example sentences; tones are not marked. A more detailed phonology of Nafaanra by Jordan, also containing a Swadesh list, appeared in 1980. Mensah and Tchagbale in their 1983 linguistic atlas of Ivory Coast include a comparative Senufo word list of about 120 items; Nafaanra is present under the name &quot;Nafara of Bondoukou&quot;. Hartell published an orthography of Nafaanra, lacking tonal marking, in 1993. The area where Nafaanra is spoken has been the subject of recent archaeological-anthropological studies.

==Notes==
== References ==
== Sources ==
=== Primary sources ===
* International Bible Society (1984): Nyiɛkpɔɔ nyu nunu fɔŋgɔ.
* 
* Painter, Colin (1966) &quot;Word lists of two Senufo dialects: Fantera et Pantera&quot;. Legon: University of Ghana. (30p)

=== Secondary sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
*&quot;Brɔfu ni yuu (a bridge material to English) Nafaanra&quot;. Ghana Institute of Linguistics, Literacy and Bible Translation (1994)
*Nafaanra dictionary , by Dean Jordan of SIL.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13297" start="0" end="8" title="Nafanan language" label="Nafaanra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13297" start="65" end="72" title="Nafanan language" label="Nafanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13297" start="76" end="82" title="Nafanan language" label="Nafana"/>
<link wikidata="Q33795" start="89" end="95" title="Senufo languages" label="Senufo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="125" end="130" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="154" end="165" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q892276" start="175" end="184" title="Bondoukou" label="Bondoukou"/>
<link wikidata="Q641394" start="253" end="259" title="Nafana people" label="Nafana"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="344" end="349" title="tone language" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675362" start="482" end="507" title="Tagwana–Djimini languages" label="Tagwana–Djimini languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q501344" start="557" end="576" title="Comoé National Park" label="Comoé National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q257885" start="589" end="599" title="word order" label="word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="603" end="622" title="subject–object–verb" label="subject–object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27716" start="629" end="634" title="Latin grammar" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343874" start="639" end="647" title="Japanese grammar" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="660" end="681" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger–Congo languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598075" start="692" end="702" title="noun class" label="noun class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="716" end="720" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="789" end="796" title="pronoun" label="pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="799" end="808" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="814" end="821" title="copula (linguistics)" label="copulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="827" end="836" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="910" end="914" title="oral vowel" label="oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="918" end="923" title="nasal vowel" label="nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344119" start="931" end="937" title="French phonology" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300216" start="941" end="951" title="Portuguese phonology" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="984" end="989" title="tonal language" label="tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="1072" end="1077" title="Grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="1082" end="1088" title="grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="1111" end="1120" title="grammatical particle" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977424" start="1292" end="1309" title="Kulango languages" label="Kulango languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35183" start="1343" end="1346" title="Deg language" label="Deg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="1350" end="1362" title="Gur languages" label="Gur language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33681" start="1445" end="1459" title="Mande languages" label="Mande language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33594" start="1460" end="1465" title="Ligbi language" label="Ligbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="1514" end="1527" title="Akan language" label="Akan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34831" start="1528" end="1533" title="Abron language" label="Abron"/>
<link wikidata="Q641394" start="1550" end="1563" title="Nafana people" label="Nafana people"/>
<link wikidata="Q397737" start="1601" end="1619" title="Brong-Ahafo Region" label="Brong-Ahafo Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275354" start="1653" end="1658" title="Sampa, Ghana" label="Sampa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1701" end="1706" title="Banda, Ghana" label="Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="1820" end="1827" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q152392" start="1848" end="1860" title="Swadesh list" label="Swadesh list"/>
<link wikidata="Q814316" start="2382" end="2387" title="Begho" label="Begho"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="2461" end="2471" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36850" start="2520" end="2523" title="Twi language" label="Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="2538" end="2551" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971810" start="2579" end="2588" title="ILR scale" label="ILR scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="2817" end="2825" title="literate" label="literate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35270" start="2959" end="2964" title="Dompo language" label="Dompo"/>
<link wikidata="Q346165" start="3096" end="3113" title="Maurice Delafosse" label="Maurice Delafosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q64454" start="3220" end="3230" title="Diedrich Hermann Westermann" label="Westermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q152392" start="3654" end="3666" title="Swadesh list" label="Swadesh list"/>
<link wikidata="Q35475" start="3850" end="3867" title="Kabiye language" label="Kabre (or Kabiye)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234776" start="3873" end="3878" title="Dogon languages" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36346" start="4184" end="4190" title="Palaka language" label="Palaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q55772730" start="4204" end="4211" title="Gabriel Manessy" label="Manessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675362" start="4265" end="4280" title="Tagwana–Djimini languages" label="Tagwana–Djimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="4358" end="4363" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q56284" start="4839" end="4846" title="Supyire language" label="Supyire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="4851" end="4857" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q845496" start="5296" end="5304" title="downstep" label="downstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q51611" start="6623" end="6629" title="trill consonant" label="trills"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="6639" end="6650" title="approximant" label="approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606582" start="6746" end="6755" title="nasalization" label="nasalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="6790" end="6801" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger–Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598075" start="6802" end="6812" title="noun class" label="noun class"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="6833" end="6839" title="Suffix" label="Suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="7146" end="7165" title="subject–object–verb" label="subject–object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="7269" end="7276" title="pronoun" label="pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="7476" end="7481" title="Grammatical tense" label="Tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="7486" end="7492" title="Grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q189756" start="9154" end="9162" title="Question" label="Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345343" start="9213" end="9228" title="yes–no question" label="yes–no question"/>
<link wikidata="Q278041" start="9851" end="9855" title="Mpre language" label="Mpre"/>
<link wikidata="Q33430" start="9930" end="9933" title="Kwa languages" label="Kwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="9967" end="9969" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="10300" end="10306" title="Ga language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="10325" end="10330" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="10352" end="10355" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="10739" end="10746" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q56284" start="10895" end="10902" title="Supyire language" label="Supyire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737190" start="11076" end="11085" title="causative" label="causative"/>
<link wikidata="Q14793" start="11254" end="11257" title="SIL International" label="SIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q35731" start="11606" end="11622" title="Kulango language" label="Kulango language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="12130" end="12143" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q152392" start="12577" end="12589" title="Swadesh list" label="Swadesh list"/>
<link wikidata="Q14793" start="13484" end="13487" title="SIL International" label="SIL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266180" wikidata="Q2601506" url="?curid=1266180" title="River Ythan">
<text>The Ythan is a river in the north-east of Scotland rising at Wells of Ythan near the village of Ythanwells and flowing south-eastwards through the towns of Fyvie, Methlick and Ellon before flowing into the North Sea near Newburgh, in Formartine.

The lower reach of the river is known as the Ythan Estuary, is a part of the River Ythan, Sands of Forvie and Meikle Loch Special Protection Area for conservation, particularly the breeding ground of three tern species (common tern, little tern and Sandwich tern) (Lumina, 2004).

The River Ythan has a length of and a catchment area of . As figures of the discharge, /s are given or /s.

==Nitrate Vulnerable Zone==
The Scottish Government has designated the River Ythan catchment as a Nitrate Vulnerable Zone following concerns about the spread of algal mats in the river during the 1990s. The resulting restrictions on the use of fertilisers in the catchment were criticised by many farmers, 90% of the land in the catchment area is used for agriculture. However, the designation and subsequent actions to solve the issue under the European Union&#x27;s LIFE Fund&#x27;s Ythan Project have led to improvements in water quality as an increasing number of farmers used techniques such as the creation of buffer strips between their fields and the river and nutrient budgeting. Both the increase in agri-environment schemes in the area and the individual river restoration work undertaken under the auspices of the Ythan Project have led to an increase in wildlife habitat in the Ythan&#x27;s catchment.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Ythan&quot; may be derived from a Brittonic source, cognate with Old Welsh &quot;eith&quot; meaning &quot;gorse&quot; (Welsh &quot;eithin&quot;) or else, from an early &quot;*Iectona&quot; meaning &quot;talkative one&quot; (Welsh &quot;iaith&quot;; c.f. River Ithon).

==Fishing==
The area of the Ythan is part of a protected region, in order to preserve Atlantic salmon and sea trout.

==See also==
* Ythan Wells Roman Camp site

==References==

* Lumina Technologies, &quot;Ythan Estuary, Aberdeenshire&quot;, Aberdeen Library archives, June, 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2601506" start="4" end="9" title="River Ythan" label="Ythan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="42" end="50" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059822" start="96" end="106" title="Ythanwells" label="Ythanwells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011189" start="156" end="161" title="Fyvie" label="Fyvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823672" start="163" end="171" title="Methlick" label="Methlick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026799" start="176" end="181" title="Ellon, Aberdeenshire" label="Ellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="206" end="215" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059187" start="221" end="229" title="Newburgh, Aberdeenshire" label="Newburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470008" start="234" end="244" title="Formartine" label="Formartine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16904166" start="292" end="305" title="Ythan Estuary" label="Ythan Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416916" start="337" end="352" title="Sands of Forvie" label="Sands of Forvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810059" start="357" end="368" title="Meikle Loch" label="Meikle Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463705" start="369" end="392" title="Special Protection Area" label="Special Protection Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18875" start="467" end="478" title="common tern" label="common tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12267692" start="480" end="491" title="little tern" label="little tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27547" start="496" end="509" title="Sandwich tern" label="Sandwich tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041372" start="734" end="757" title="Nitrate vulnerable zone" label="Nitrate Vulnerable Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="1615" end="1624" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="1646" end="1655" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="1700" end="1705" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337531" start="1835" end="1846" title="River Ithon" label="River Ithon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188879" start="1936" end="1951" title="Atlantic salmon" label="Atlantic salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095355" start="1956" end="1965" title="sea trout" label="sea trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900409" start="1983" end="1994" title="Ythan Wells" label="Ythan Wells"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266182" wikidata="Q4770505" url="?curid=1266182" title="Ansan University">
<text>Ansan University () is a 3,4-year university located in Ansan City, Gyeonggi province, South Korea. It hosts a student body of about four thousand, and offers programs in fields including nursing, physiotherapy, early childhood education, and information technology. The school was originally named Ansan 1 University.

==History==
The university opened its doors as Incheon health College of Nursing in 1972. In 1994, it changed both its name and location, moving to its present site in Ansan and taking the name Ansan Technical College. It was renamed Ansan 1 University in 1998. In 2012, the school name was changed to Ansan University.

==Department==

===Health Care===
*Department of Physical Cure
*The Department of Nursing Science
*The Clinical Laboratory
*Department of Radiology
*Department of Beauty, Art

===Family, Social Practical Business Affairs===
*Food &amp; Nutrition (College of Food &amp; Nutrition) 
*Hotel Cooking (College of Food &amp; Nutrition) 
*Social Welfare
*Tourism English
*Tourism Chinese
*International Secretary (College of International Secretary)
*International Secretarial Office Work (College of International Secretary)
*Child Educating Course
*Child Care

==See also==
* Ansan
* Education in South Korea
* List of colleges and universities in South Korea

==External links==
*Official school website, in Korean</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4770505" start="0" end="16" title="Ansan University" label="Ansan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42117" start="56" end="61" title="Ansan" label="Ansan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20937" start="68" end="76" title="Gyeonggi" label="Gyeonggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="87" end="98" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="188" end="195" title="nursing" label="nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="197" end="210" title="physiotherapy" label="physiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472221" start="212" end="237" title="early childhood education" label="early childhood education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="243" end="265" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770505" start="299" end="317" title="Ansan University" label="Ansan 1 University"/>
<link wikidata="Q20934" start="367" end="374" title="Incheon" label="Incheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q77604" start="779" end="788" title="Radiology" label="Radiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="1185" end="1195" title="Child Care" label="Child Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q42117" start="1212" end="1217" title="Ansan" label="Ansan"/>
<link wikidata="Q496198" start="1220" end="1244" title="Education in South Korea" label="Education in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q494836" start="1247" end="1295" title="List of colleges and universities in South Korea" label="List of colleges and universities in South Korea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266184" wikidata="Q786957" url="?curid=1266184" title="Point Fortin">
<text>Point Fortin, officially the Republic Borough of Point Fortin, the smallest Borough in Trinidad and Tobago is located in southwestern Trinidad, about southwest of San Fernando, in the historic county of Saint Patrick. After the discovery of petroleum in the area in 1906 the town grew into a major oil-producing centre. The town grew with the oil industry between the 1940s and 1980s, culminating in its elevation to borough status in 1980. After the end of the oil boom Point Fortin was hit hard by economic recession in the 1980s and the closure of its oil refinery. Construction of a Liquefied Natural Gas plant by Atlantic LNG in late 1990s boosted the economy.

==History and development==
At the beginning of the 20th century (before the discovery of oil), Point Fortin was an agricultural community with three distinct and separately owned cocoa and coconut estates.

These estates were sparsely populated. Employment was provided for a small number of workers who depended on the estates for their living accommodation as well as their food and other supplies. Travel in and out of Point Fortin was by coastal steamers as there was no road into or out of the area. The inhabited area was located along the seacoast.

In 1907, the Trinidad Oilfields moved into Point Fortin on an expedition for the exploration of oil and sank its first oil well on the La Fortunee Estates. That company turned out to be the only one that survived successfully, although there had been several similar expeditions by other oil companies.

The company later changed its name to the United British Oilfields of Trinidad then became Shell Trinidad Limited. In 1974 it was acquired by the Government and named TRINTOC or the Trinidad and Tobago Oil Company, today known as Petrotrin.

The change from an agricultural to an oil based economy made a significant impact in Point Fortin. There was rapid development in the construction of dwelling houses, plant, pipelines and oil tanks in the area. Point Fortin was booming and labour, particularly skilled labour for the new technology, was scarce and posed a major problem. Trinidadians did not seem to be attracted to the area.

Although people migrated from all over the country, the population in 1931 was less than 500. There were very few houses, no schools, and recreational and other facilities. As a result, Trinidadians who went to work in Point Fortin never took their families with them.

However, this changed when the company realised that in order to attract and retain workers, they needed to develop the area. This encouraged families to settle in the area, and coupled with a growth in the commercial sector, brought about such facilities as a post office, police station as well as other governmental agencies and banks.

In the 1960s the town began to see a decline due to massive retrenchment. The Government tried to revive the economic activity and eventually succeeded in establishing the Dunlop Tyre Factory. However the economic revival was only achieved in the early 1970s as a result of the Oil boom and the acquisition of Shell Trinidad Limited by the government. Point Fortin&#x27;s Mayor is Saleema McCree Thomas (PNM). The MP for Point Fortin is Kennedy Richards Jr. (PNM).

==Demographics==
===Ancestry===

==Notable natives==
Culture
*Fay-Ann Lyons Alvarez – Soca artiste 
*Austin Lyons (Superblue) – Calypsonian / Soca artist/ father of Fay-Ann Lyons and her sister Terri Lyons
*Kelvin Pope (The Mighty Duke) – Calypsonian

Sports
*Atiba Charles
*Avery John
*Kenwyne Jones
*Keyeno Thomas
*Warren Archibald
*Steve David
*Anthony Douglas
*Randy Samuel - Canadian soccer player
*Marsha Mark-Baird

==Education==
Primary schools

* Point Fortin Roman Catholic Primary School
* Point Fortin S.D.A Primary School
* Egypt Village Government Primary School
* Point Fortin Anglican Primary School
* Point Fortin A.S.J.A Primary School
* Cap-de-Ville Government Primary School
* Fanny Village Government Primary School
Secondary schools
* Point Fortin East Secondary School (formally known as PFC)
* Point Fortin West Secondary School (formally known as the Junior Secondary)
* Holy Name Convent&#x27;

Other Educational/Training Institutions
* Manchand Teeluck&#x27;s Squared Circle Grappling Academy - Professional Wrestling Academy
* Lu-Wong Dance Academy
* Com Sa Choi - Asian Culinary Institute
* Club Malibu - Pole Dancing Academy
* Sook Mai Cook - Adult Videography Agency

==Electoral districts==
* Egypt Village
* Techier/Guapo Village
* Mahaica/New Lands Village 
* Cap-De-Ville/Fanny Village
* New Village
* Hollywood Village

==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q786957" start="0" end="12" title="Point Fortin" label="Point Fortin"/>
<link wikidata="Q786957" start="29" end="61" title="Point Fortin" label="Republic Borough of Point Fortin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="76" end="83" title="Borough" label="Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="87" end="106" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="134" end="142" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023712" start="163" end="175" title="San Fernando, Trinidad and Tobago" label="San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177123" start="184" end="199" title="Counties of Trinidad and Tobago" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="241" end="250" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250780" start="462" end="470" title="oil boom" label="oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="555" end="567" title="oil refinery" label="oil refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="587" end="608" title="Liquefied Natural Gas" label="Liquefied Natural Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816474" start="618" end="630" title="Atlantic LNG" label="Atlantic LNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326740" start="3179" end="3182" title="People&amp;#x27;s National Movement" label="PNM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438876" start="3303" end="3324" title="Fay-Ann Lyons Alvarez" label="Fay-Ann Lyons Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643057" start="3356" end="3365" title="Superblue" label="Superblue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438876" start="3406" end="3419" title="Fay-Ann Lyons" label="Fay-Ann Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3435" end="3446" title="Terri Lyons" label="Terri Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751356" start="3461" end="3476" title="The Mighty Duke" label="The Mighty Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173601" start="3501" end="3514" title="Atiba Charles" label="Atiba Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q790656" start="3516" end="3526" title="Avery John" label="Avery John"/>
<link wikidata="Q312983" start="3528" end="3541" title="Kenwyne Jones" label="Kenwyne Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814880" start="3543" end="3556" title="Keyeno Thomas" label="Keyeno Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443768" start="3558" end="3574" title="Warren Archibald" label="Warren Archibald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783224" start="3576" end="3587" title="Steve David" label="Steve David"/>
<link wikidata="Q10470585" start="3589" end="3604" title="Tony Douglas (soccer)" label="Anthony Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388050" start="3606" end="3618" title="Randy Samuel" label="Randy Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21170731" start="3645" end="3662" title="Marsha Mark-Baird" label="Marsha Mark-Baird"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266185" wikidata="Q1399039" url="?curid=1266185" title="Kaunan">
<text>The &quot;k&quot;-rune (Younger Futhark , Anglo-Saxon futhorc ) is called Kaun in both the Norwegian and Icelandic rune poems, meaning &quot;ulcer&quot;. The reconstructed Proto-Germanic name is *Kauną. It is also known as Kenaz (&quot;torch&quot;), based on its Anglo-Saxon name.

The Elder Futhark shape is likely directly based on Old Italic &quot;c&quot; (, 𐌂) and on Latin C. The Younger Futhark and Anglo-Saxon Futhorc shapes have parallels in Old Italic shapes of &quot;k&quot; (, 𐌊) and Latin K (compare the Negau helmet inscription). The corresponding Gothic letter is 𐌺 &quot;k&quot;, called &quot;kusma&quot;.

The shape of the Younger Futhark &quot;kaun&quot; rune () is identical to that of the &quot;bookhand&quot; s rune in the Anglo-Saxon futhorc.
The rune also occurs in some continental runic inscriptions. It has been suggested that in these instances, it represents the &quot;ch&quot; /χ/ sound resulting from the Old High German sound shift (e.g. &quot;elch&quot; in Nordendorf II).

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="18" end="22" title="rune" label="rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399039" start="74" end="78" title="Kaunan" label="Kaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="91" end="100" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="105" end="114" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q586911" start="115" end="124" title="rune poem" label="rune poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567921" start="141" end="146" title="ulcer" label="ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="172" end="186" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399039" start="195" end="201" title="Kaunan" label="*Kauną"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399039" start="223" end="228" title="Kaunan" label="Kenaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891256" start="334" end="344" title="Old Italic alphabet" label="Old Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9820" start="378" end="379" title="C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q9922" start="501" end="502" title="K" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q989738" start="516" end="528" title="Negau helmet" label="Negau helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q467784" start="561" end="574" title="Gothic alphabet" label="Gothic letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398029" start="729" end="735" title="s rune" label="s rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712936" start="743" end="762" title="Anglo-Saxon runes" label="Anglo-Saxon futhorc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379880" start="793" end="823" title="continental runic inscriptions" label="continental runic inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704374" start="934" end="961" title="Old High German sound shift" label="Old High German sound shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q479785" start="988" end="1001" title="Nordendorf II" label="Nordendorf II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266201" wikidata="Q221214" url="?curid=1266201" title="Cugir">
<text>Cugir (; German: &quot;Kudsir, Kudschir&quot;, Hungarian: &quot;Kudzsir&quot;) is a town in Alba County, Romania. Declared a town in 1968, it administers seven villages: Bocșitura (Hungarian &quot;Boksiturahavas&quot;, German &quot;Potschitur&quot;), Bucuru (&quot;Bukuruhavas&quot;/&quot;Bukur&quot;), Călene (&quot;Kalenihavas&quot;/&quot;Kalleney&quot;), Fețeni (&quot;Fecehavas&quot;/&quot;Fetzeberg&quot;), Goașele (&quot;Goaselehavas&quot;/&quot;Eisenhammer&quot;), Mugești (&quot;Mugestihavas&quot;/&quot;Kudschirstallen&quot;), and Vinerea (&quot;Felkenyér&quot;/&quot;Oberbrodsdorf&quot;).

==Geography==
The central settlement of the Breadfield region, the town lies on the banks of the Cugir River, at the confluence of headwaters Râul Mare and Râul Mic. It is situated above sea level, at the base of the Șureanu Mountains.

Cugir is located in the southwestern part of Alba County, about from Sebeș and from Alba Iulia, the capital of the county. It lies on the border with Hunedoara County, from Orăștie and from Deva.

==Name==
Throughout the history the name of the town is mentioned in many documents under different names in different languages, therefore the old settlement &quot;villa Kunentum&quot; becomes in 1493 villa Kudzyr, in 1566 Kwczyr, in 1599 – Kuchir, in 1656 – Kuchjir, in 1673 – Kucsir, in 1733 – Kuser, in 1750 – Kudsier, 1760–1762 – Kudzser, in 1805 Kudsir and in 1850 – Kusir.

==History==

===Ancient times===

Numerous archeological discoveries prove that life in the region flourished as early as the Bronze Age, around the 10th century BC, Cugir being part of the territory known as &quot;The Iron Gates of Transylvania&quot;, a region famous for its natural iron resources. In 88–44 BC, king Burebista, the most powerful of the kings of Thrace, according to the historian Acronion, established the new capital in the area, at Sarmizegetusa Regia (located in the Șureanu Mountains, west of Cugir). In this period the settlement of Cugir (villa Kunentum) was an important center for metal extracting and processing, with renowned workshops producing tools, weapons, and coins.

=== Modern period ===
Cugir has a complex political history with periods under the Principality of Transylvania, the Habsburg monarchy, the Kingdom of Hungary, and the Kingdom of Romania.

In the mid-18th century the Habsburg Empire authorities established the &quot;Frontier Police&quot; in Transylvania. They also tried to recruit Romanians from southern Transylvania between Baraolt and Orăștie, but the locals put up a fierce resistance against the enrollment. The population revolted due to a policy of forced removal and deportation used to convince the peoples to join in, and a bloody massacre took place in the place known today as the old market of the town. Severe clashes occurred again in the area when the authorities decided to &quot;brake&quot; the neighboring villages Șibot and Vinerea to establish the 4th company. Finally, after severe conflicts and pressure, in 1764, 6 regiments were established and in 1768 another battalion was formed so that the frontier police in Transylvania was of approximatively 17,000 soldiers.
After the loss of Silesia, the authorities and the Austrian business began investing funds into the mining and manufacturing industry in Transylvania. In 1764 Empress Maria Theresa of Austria gave long-term loans without interest to concessionaires that pledged to exploit the mines and the state and concessionaire manufactories used free workers brought from Styria, Carinthia, Tyrol, Upper Hungary or Dalmatia, but the local peasants represented the main work force. Due to industrialisation, a great number of Romanian villages and their grounds, pastures, agricultural land and forest were seized. At the end of the 18th century factories for metal processing were founded in Cugir and Sibișel, just 15 years after the suppression of the Revolt of Horea, Cloșca and Crișan to exploit the mineral resources and also to bolster obedience towards the Empire. According to documents, the &quot;Iron and Steel factory&quot; was established in Cugir in the year 1799, one of the first factories in Transylvania and since then the history of the town has revolved around it.

After the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, it became part of the Kingdom of Hungary within Austria-Hungary up until the end of World War I. From that time, it has been part of Romania, which was acknowledged internationally by the Treaty of Trianon in 1920.

Thereafter the factory became owned by the Romanian state and during World War II its production was seized by Nazi Germany for war purposes. Since 1946 the Cugir Arms Factory oriented its production towards military components and house appliances, especially washing machines. It became the top Romanian producer of sewing machines for industrial and private purposes.
During the Romanian Revolution, Cugir was the first locality in Alba County and the fourth in the country where protests against the communist regime of Nicolae Ceaușescu occurred, on December 21, 1989.

==Demographics==

At the 2021 census, Cugir had a population of 19,473. According to the census from 2011, the town had a total population of 21,376; of those, 95.4% were Romanians, 3.4% Roma, 0.9% Hungarians, and 0.2% Germans.

==Climate==
Cugir has a humid continental climate (&quot;Cfb&quot; in the Köppen climate classification).

==Economy==

The town is a heavy industrialised one, with at least half of the total working age population engaged in industrial activities, and around 30 percent engaged in lumbering activities. The Cugir Arms Factory is the main employer in town and it has diversified its production to include along the traditional products automotive components and firearms, and a large part of its production is destined for export. Another employer is Star Transmission Cugir S.A., a Daimler company that produces gearbox parts.

==Education==
The town has a high school (the David Prodan Theoretical High School), one technical school (the Ion D. Lăzărescu Technical College), 3 middle schools, and 6 kindergartens.

==Sport==
The local football team, Metalurgistul Cugir, plays in the Liga III national division.

==Natives==
* Teodor Atanasiu (born 1962), politician
* Bogdan Borza (born 1997), tennis player
* Ioan Mărginean (born 1960), footballer
* Ahmet Nurmambet (1893–1953), Army officer
* Valentin Uritescu (1941–2022), actor

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221214" start="0" end="5" title="Cugir" label="Cugir"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="9" end="15" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="47" end="56" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45868" start="92" end="103" title="Alba County" label="Alba County"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="105" end="112" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q303223" start="644" end="654" title="Breadfield" label="Breadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192665" start="697" end="708" title="Cugir (river)" label="Cugir River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="731" end="740" title="headwater" label="headwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385956" start="742" end="751" title="Râul Mare (Cugir)" label="Râul Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385960" start="756" end="764" title="Râul Mic (Cugir)" label="Râul Mic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="781" end="796" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q549664" start="817" end="834" title="Șureanu Mountains" label="Șureanu Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q732376" start="906" end="911" title="Sebeș" label="Sebeș"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="921" end="931" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191071" start="987" end="1003" title="Hunedoara County" label="Hunedoara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q262472" start="1010" end="1017" title="Orăștie" label="Orăștie"/>
<link wikidata="Q204850" start="1027" end="1031" title="Deva, Romania" label="Deva"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1541" end="1551" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684406" start="1634" end="1660" title="Tapae" label="Iron Gates of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q309869" start="1734" end="1743" title="Burebista" label="Burebista"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="1779" end="1785" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1814" end="1822" title="Acronion" label="Acronion"/>
<link wikidata="Q739802" start="1868" end="1887" title="Sarmizegetusa Regia" label="Sarmizegetusa Regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q549664" start="1904" end="1921" title="Șureanu Mountains" label="Șureanu Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q655621" start="2201" end="2229" title="Principality of Transylvania (1571–1711)" label="Principality of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="2235" end="2252" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="2258" end="2276" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="2286" end="2304" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="2335" end="2350" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q533078" start="2496" end="2503" title="Baraolt" label="Baraolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q262472" start="2508" end="2515" title="Orăștie" label="Orăștie"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="3179" end="3186" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="3328" end="3352" title="Maria Theresa of Austria" label="Maria Theresa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q580447" start="3522" end="3528" title="Styria (duchy)" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="3530" end="3539" title="Carinthia (duchy)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42880" start="3541" end="3546" title="Tyrol (state)" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q999030" start="3548" end="3561" title="Upper Hungary" label="Upper Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="3565" end="3573" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q793937" start="3852" end="3859" title="Beriu" label="Sibișel"/>
<link wikidata="Q694246" start="3904" end="3938" title="Revolt of Horea, Cloșca and Crișan" label="Revolt of Horea, Cloșca and Crișan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="4245" end="4280" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="4304" end="4322" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="4330" end="4345" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4366" end="4377" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="4415" end="4422" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="4470" end="4487" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4567" end="4579" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4609" end="4621" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12742921" start="4655" end="4673" title="Cugir Arms Factory" label="Cugir Arms Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="4880" end="4899" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="5002" end="5018" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="communist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="5022" end="5039" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="5098" end="5109" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181933" start="5162" end="5178" title="2011 Romanian census" label="census from 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="5244" end="5253" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="5260" end="5264" title="Romani people in Romania" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="5271" end="5281" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="5292" end="5299" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="5326" end="5351" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5376" end="5405" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q12742921" start="5610" end="5628" title="Cugir Arms Factory" label="Cugir Arms Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="5885" end="5892" title="Mercedes-Benz Group" label="Daimler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18541813" start="6154" end="6173" title="CS Metalurgistul Cugir" label="Metalurgistul Cugir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707697" start="6188" end="6196" title="Liga III" label="Liga III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701021" start="6231" end="6246" title="Teodor Atanasiu" label="Teodor Atanasiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q39895026" start="6273" end="6285" title="Bogdan Borza" label="Bogdan Borza"/>
<link wikidata="Q97192343" start="6315" end="6329" title="Ioan Mărginean" label="Ioan Mărginean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128878" start="6356" end="6371" title="Ahmet Nurmambet" label="Ahmet Nurmambet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743030" start="6400" end="6417" title="Valentin Uritescu" label="Valentin Uritescu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266203" wikidata="Q1737119" url="?curid=1266203" title="Kaun">
<text>Kaun may refer to:

== Art and entertainment ==
* &quot;Kaun?&quot;, a 1999 Hindi film
* &quot;Kaun? Kaisey?&quot;, a 1983 Hindi film
* Kaun (song), a song by Indian Ocean from album &quot;Kandisa&quot;

== Other uses ==
* The Old Norse name of the &quot;k&quot; rune; see Kaunan
* &quot;Káun&quot;, the Hungarian name of Căoi village, Vețel Commune, Hunedoara County, Romania
* The ICAO location identifier for Auburn Municipal Airport
* KAUN-LD, an American low-power television station
* Sasha Kaun (born 1985), Russian basketball player
* Kaun (wrestler), an American professional wrestler</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1737119" start="0" end="4" title="Kaun" label="Kaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479270" start="56" end="61" title="Kaun?" label="Kaun?"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729175" start="95" end="108" title="Kaun? Kaisey?" label="Kaun? Kaisey?"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="136" end="147" title="Kaun (song)" label="Kaun (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6361542" start="189" end="196" title="Kandisa (album)" label="Kandisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399039" start="273" end="279" title="Kaunan" label="Kaunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021932" start="336" end="341" title="Vețel" label="Vețel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902840" start="412" end="436" title="Auburn Municipal Airport (California)" label="Auburn Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642777" start="439" end="446" title="KAUN-LD" label="KAUN-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q371250" start="491" end="501" title="Sasha Kaun" label="Sasha Kaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q111523371" start="543" end="558" title="Kaun (wrestler)" label="Kaun (wrestler)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266213" wikidata="Q2265053" url="?curid=1266213" title="Japanese in the Philippines">
<text>Japanese in the Philippines, or Japanese Filipino, refers to one of the largest branches of Japanese diaspora having historical contact with and having established themselves in what is now the Philippines. This also refers to Filipino citizens of either pure or mixed Japanese descent residing in the country, the latter a result of intermarriages between the Japanese and local populations.

==History==
===Classical period===
==== Settlements ====
After the establishment of a single state within Japan, official trade records began between Japan and the Philippine islands in the Heian and Muromachi period (8th to 12th centuries CE). In the case of the proto-Okinawan chiefdoms, this was much earlier, and ties in with shared migration patterns of Okinawans and Austronesian areas like the Philippines stretching back to the neolithic period. Notable settlements of the period include Bolinao and Agoo along Lingayen Gulf. The Japanese were trading with Philippine kingdoms well before the Spanish period, mainly in pottery and gold. Historical records show that Japanese traders, especially those from Nagasaki, frequently visited the Philippine shores and bartered Japanese goods for such Filipino products as gold and pearls. In the course of time, shipwrecked Japanese sailors, pirate traders, and immigrants settled in the Philippines and intermarried with the early Filipinos. The Wokous who were East Asian pirates mostly consisting of Japanese, even made it into the Philippines before their extermination in the 1600s. Aparri in the Philippines, which is located in Northern Luzon, was established as pirate city-state under the patronage of the Wokou. The area around Aparri was the site of the 1582 Cagayan battles between Japanese pirates and Spanish soldiers. When the Spaniards reached the island of Luzon in 1571, they found Japanese colonies and settlements in Manila and in some parts of the Cagayan Valley, the Cordillera region, Lingayen, Bataan, and Catanduanes Island. The relatively light complexion of the natives of Bontoc and Banaue is probably a result of the early contacts between the Japanese and other islanders from south of Japan and the natives of the Cordillera.
==== Pottery trade ====

Precolonial Philippines had a rich pottery tradition as verified by the finds at Ayub Cave in South Cotabato and other parts of the archipelago. Japanese texts mention trading expeditions to the island of Rusun (Luzon) for the highly prized Rusun and Namban jars. , also known as &quot;Luzon jars&quot;, were dark-brown to purple-black &quot;tapayan&quot; from the island of Luzon in the northern Philippines. These were highly sought after by Japanese traders in the 16th century Nanban trade and remain as valuable antique heirlooms in modern Japan. They are primarily used for the Japanese tea ceremony (&quot;chanoyu&quot;). They were prized for their simplicity and rough, often uneven design, epitomizing the traditional Japanese aesthetics of &quot;wabi-sabi&quot; (&quot;perfection in imperfection&quot;). The Tokiko calls the Rusun and Namban jars, Ru-sun tsukuru or Lu-sung ch&#x27;i (in Chinese), which simply means &quot;made in Luzon.&quot; These Rusun jars, which had rokuru (wheel mark), were said to be more precious than gold because of its ability to act as tea canisters and enhance the fermentation. In the 15th century AD, tea-jars were brought by the &quot;shōguns&quot; to Uji in Kyoto from the Philippines which was used in the Japanese tea ceremony.

The Spanish historian Antonio de Morga in his &quot;Sucesos de la Islas Filipinas&quot; (1609) described &quot;Rusun&quot; jars as thus:

&quot;Rusun&quot; jars were part of what is collectively known as Mishima (&quot;three islands&quot;) ware. With the other two islands being indigenous Taiwan and the unidentified &quot;Amakawa&quot;.

Many of the important pottery traditions that spread into the Oceania region had their counterparts in the Philippines including the well-known Lapita culture. This quote from American anthropologist Wilhelm Solheim illustrates the matter:

The finds at Ayub Cave in South Cotabato confirmed the great pottery tradition of the Philippines. In the Tokiko it mentions that all Rusun jars had this marking known as the rokuru (wheel mark). Those familiar with Philippine ethnography will know that this spiral is commonly used by many of the Philippine tribes. The following symbols were used to identify which kiln was used to make the jar: identified &quot;Imbe&quot; jars, meant jars coming from Bizen kiln, and mark three times meant a canister from the same oven. A jar with this mark is said to be made of Namban clay. This marking corresponds to the syllable la in Pampanga; Tagbanua for ka (&quot;Chinese Pottery&quot;, Field Museum of Natural History-Anth., vol.xii, Jul.1912) Of course, the symbol for la can also be the same as that for lu, and so this might correspond to the symbol said to stand for Lu in Rusun-no kokuji (Luzon national writing). According to the Tokiko, certain types of Rusun jars were distinguished by this character. De Morga mentions that Japanese traders were still coming in large numbers for these jars during his time, and that they were willing to spend great sums for them. Apparently work on these jars continued in the North, possibly among the unconquered Igorots, for De Morga had no knowledge of such current production. Later, the knowledge may have again trickled down to Vigan, where a flourishing industry of Burnay jar manufacture survives to this day. Although the Japanese described very high quality jars coming from the Philippines, not all were of elegant nature. In fact, De Morga had some disdain for some of the jars that the Japanese were buying, so they could have been similar to the well-known balanga and other jars in use today. These jars are generally handed down as heirlooms and are noted for their qualities in enhancing the fermentation process. Possibly one of the Japanese uses for the Rusun jars was fermentation of products like Kombucha and Umeboshi plums. For instance, a Japanese family in rural Japan stated that their family used old Rusun jars for exactly this purpose up to this day. In 2009, Japanese and Filipino archaeologists from the Sumitomo Foundation-funded Boljoon Archaeological Project conducted by the University of San Carlos with the National Museum of the Philippines, discovered ancient Japanese pottery that has been to believed to been in existence since the early 1700s. The ancient Japanese pottery that was discovered there, has proven that there was activity of trading activity between Japan and Cebu Island Philippines going back to the 16th century.

==== Fishing technologies ====
The Filipinos were skilled in all types of fishing and fisheries. In the south, the basnig, a Viking-like ship, was and is the vessel of choice among the Bisayans for ocean fishing. The salambao is a type of raft that utilizes a large fishing net which is lowered into the water via a type of lever made of two criss-crossed poles. Night fishing was accomplished with the help of candles similar to the copal of Mexico. These candles were made from a particular type of resin. Fish corrals, like the ones still used today, were also employed by the ancient Filipino. However, the area in which the Filipino most astonished Westerners was in their advanced aquaculture:

Many have looked to Japan for an explanation for these advanced methods. The roe was transplanted to safe pens for incubation and to guard the small fry from predators. Only when sufficiently mature to fend for themselves were they released back into the wild. These days this method is practiced by fisheries throughout the world. Before the Spanish came, the Filipinos also only used large mesh nets when fishing in rivers, lakes or in the sea. This ecologically sound practice protected the young ensuring future good catches. However, the competition brought by the Spaniards resulted in the use of such small mesh nets that the Spanish themselves eventually had to regulate the nets to prevent the destruction of the fisheries. Other Pre-Spanish Filipino industries included the manufacture of liquors and vinegars like tuba, basi, etc., the production of hides for export to Japan, export of edible bird&#x27;s nests from Northern Palawan to China, the raising and trade of civet cats, the manufacture of gunpowder, the making of wax for export to China, and the making of cotton stockings for export.
=== Spanish era ===

The Japanese population in the Philippines has since included descendants of Japanese Catholics and other Japanese Christians who fled from the religious persecution imposed by the Tokugawa shogunate during the Edo period and settled during the colonial period from the 17th century until the 19th century. A statue of daimyō Ukon Takayama, who was exiled to the Philippines in 1614 because he refused to disavow his Christian beliefs, stands a patch of land across the road from the Post Office building in the Paco, Manila. In the 17th century, the Spaniards referred to the Paco Area as the &#x27;Yellow Plaza&#x27; because of the more than 3,000 Japanese who resided there. In the 16th and 17th centuries, thousands of Japanese people traders also migrated to the Philippines and assimilated into the local population. pp. 52–3

Many of the Japanese men intermarried with Filipino women. A sizeable population settled in Manila, Davao, the Visayas and in the 1600s in Dilao, Paco, and Ilocos Norte Province. This hybrid group tend to be re-assimilated either into the Filipino or the Japanese communities, and thus no accurate denominations could be established, though their estimates range from 100,000 to 200,000. Many were killed or expelled after World War II because of their alleged collaboration with the Imperial Japanese Army (mostly as translator). Many Japanese mestizos tended to deny their Japanese heritage and changed their family names in order to avoid discrimination.
===American period and the Post-WWII era===

During the American colonial era, Japanese immigration to the Philippines increased that according to Teodoro Agoncillo that by 1939, Japanese immigrants exceeded the Chinese for the first time in Philippine history. They were very evident in Manila, and Davao where it was said to practically be a Japanese colony. During this period, Japanese laborers were also brought in to build the Benguet Road (Kennon Road) to Baguio, but eventually after the project, many moved to work in abaca plantations in Davao, where Davao soon became dubbed as &quot;Davaokuo&quot; (in Philippine and American media) or (in ) with a Japanese school, a Shinto shrine and a diplomatic mission from Japan. The place that used to be &quot;Little Tokyo&quot; in Davao was around the areas of Mintal, Calinan, Tugbok. Prominent scholars and historian like Lydia Yu-Jose and Macario Tiu wrote extensively on the lively presence of Japanese migrants in pre-war Davao due to its noticeably thriving local economy predicated by a huge concentration of rubber, copra, and hemp plantations. Unsurprisingly so, when World War II broke out, it was reported that there were more than 21,000 Japanese residents in the Philippines with about 18,000 or more in Davao, though after the outbreak of war, the Japanese population in Davao dropped slightly. There is even a popular restaurant called &quot;The Japanese Tunnel&quot;, which includes an actual tunnel built by the Japanese during World War II.

Davao in Mindanao had a large population of Japanese immigrants who acted as a fifth column, welcoming the Japanese invaders during World War II. These Japanese were disliked by the Chinese and hated by the Moros. The Moros were judged as &quot;fully capable of dealing with Japanese fifth columnists and invaders alike.&quot; The Moros were to fight the Japanese invaders when they landed at Davao on Mindanao. The Japanese went back to their ships at night to sleep since the Moros struck so much fear into them, even though the Moros were outnumbered by the Japanese.
For fear of discrimination, some fled to the mountains after World War II while many others changed their names in the attempts to assimilate. Many were also killed (&quot;c.&quot; 10,000 Japanese Mestizos and Japanese) while others were deported as an act of retaliation. Their Japanese identity may take on extremes, some have completely lost their Japanese identity while others have &quot;returned&quot; to Japan, the homeland of their forebears. There is also a number of contemporary Japanese-mestizos, not associated with the history of the earlier established ones, born either in the Philippines or Japan. These latter are the resultant of unions between Filipinos and recent Japanese immigrants to the Philippines or Japanese and immigrant Filipino workers in Japan. Most Japanese mestizos speak Tagalog and/or other Philippine languages. They may also be known as &quot;Japinos&quot;, although this term is considered derogatory by many. There are believed to be between 100,000 and 200,000 Japanese-mestizos in the country, but no accurate figure is currently available. Thousands of war-displaced ethnic Japanese still live in the country and are denied recognition as Japanese nationals in order to return to Japan.

===Modern times===

The recent Japanese Filipinos are descendants of 1980s and 1990s Japanese settlers usually businesspeople, most of whom are men, and (mostly female) locals. Many are children of thousands of overseas Filipino workers, who went to Japan mostly as entertainers. They are in the Philippines also to learn English. As the Filipina mothers return to the Philippines, most take their children along with them. A significant number in the U.S. today are the product of Filipino- and Japanese American intermarriages, mostly in California, Hawaii, or other U.S. states, or other U.S. territories in the Pacific, while others are Filipinos of Japanese ancestry who have migrated to the United States.

Several foundations today such as the &quot;Federation of Nikkeijin Kai Philippines&quot; &amp; &quot;Manila Nikkeijin Kai&quot; exist throughout the country through the efforts of prosperous Japanese descendants and expatriates to assist Filipinos of Japanese ancestry to travel in Japan to trace their roots and visit relatives, and also charity purposes such as offering Long Term Resident visa and educational scholarships to out of school Japanese Filipino children. Similar organizations exist in the Philippines to commemorate and signify the historical settlement of Japanese Filipinos in the region. The Philippines also has the highest number of Japanese in the country than any other Southeast Asian country.

=== Japanese citizenship ===
The Supreme Court of Japan on June 4, 2008, ruled against a law that denied citizenship to children born out of wedlock to Japanese fathers and foreign mothers. It upheld the 2003 and 2005 separate suits (of 10 Japanese-Filipino children for Japanese citizenship), filed by Filipino mothers who proved the fathers of their children were Japanese. It affirmed the Tokyo District Court judgment that &quot;the marital status of the parents had no bearing on nationality, and that denying the children citizenship violated constitutional guarantees of equality for all.&quot; Mel Nuqui, executive director of the Development Action for Women Network (DAWN), stated that the &quot;30-year migration of Filipino entertainers to Japan produced 100,000 Japanese-Filipino children,&quot; but very few children were legally acknowledged by their Japanese fathers. DAWN assists Filipino entertainers and Japanese-Filipinos, by helping Japanese-Filipinos locate their fathers in Japan. In 2007, it called for registration of Japanese-Filipinos, and 1,313 Japanese-Filipinos in the Philippines registered (August to October in 2007). However, only 60 of the 1,313 children had been registered in Japan, and of 2,800 children (born out of wedlock from foreign mothers who reside in Japan), 2,000 had Japanese fathers.

==Education==
*The Manila Japanese School, a Japanese international school, is located in Bonifacio Global City, Metro Manila.
*The Cebu Japanese School is a supplementary program for Japanese children in Mandaue City, Cebu.
*The Mindanao Kokusai Daigaku (Mindanao International College) and the Philippine Nikkei Jin Kai International School offer Japanese language education in Davao City.

==Notable people==

* Dominic Panganiban - YouTuber, animator, and cartoonist.
* BGen. Eric C. Uchida - brigade commander of the 301st Infantry Brigade
* Carlos B. Teraoka - Honorary Consul-General of Japan (1995-2005) and Chairman of the Filipino-Japanese Foundation of Northern Luzon
* Naitō Joan – A Christian Samurai / Lord who was banished to Manila after the Shogunate&#x27;s anti-christian edict of 1614 (Originally from Japan)
* Naitō Julia – A woman catechist who was banished to Manila after the Shogunate&#x27;s anti-christian edict of 1614 (Originally from Japan)
* Fumiya Sankai – vlogger (Originally from Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan)
* Aiko Melendez – actress and former politician. 
* Hikaru Minegishi –  footballer who plays mainly as a winger for Ceres–Negros of the Philippines Football League (Originally from Sendai, Miyagi, Japan)
* Dom Justo Takayama - Kirishitan daimyo and samurai (Originally from Uda, Nara, Japan)
* Jiro Manio – former actor
* Nina Kodaka – TV personality, host, actress &amp; pianist who gained media attention as a finalist on the 5th season of StarStruck, a reality-TV talent show broadcast on GMA Network (Originally from Tokyo, Japan)
* Satoshi Ōtomo – footballer who most recently played for Davao Aguilas in the Philippines Football League  (Originally from Sakae, Chiba, Japan)
* Sayaka Akimoto – actress and singer who was a member of the Japanese idol girl group AKB48.
* Alan Shirahama – performer, actor and DJ (Originally from Matsuyama, Ehime Prefecture, Japan)
* Loveli – fashion model and television personality (Originally from Matsuyama, Ehime Prefecture, Japan)
* Akihiro Sato – Japanese Brazilian model based in Philippines.
* Anja Aguilar – recording artist and Grand Winner of Little Big Star Season 2 in 2006.
* Gerphil Flores - classical crossover singer. 
* Tomohiko Hoshina – judoka (Originally from Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan)
* Iwa Moto – actress, model and reality television personality. 
* Maybelline Masuda - jiu-jitsu practitioner.
* Daniel Matsunaga – model, actor, professional footballer, host and businessman who became known in the Philippines by appearing in Cosmopolitan Philippines’ September 2009 &quot;Cosmo Men&quot; supplement. Born Japanese-Brazilian, obtained Filipino citizenship.
* Hikaru Minegishi – footballer who plays mainly as a winger for Ceres–Negros of the Philippines Football League (Originally from Sendai, Miyagi, Japan)
* Kintaro Miyagi – footballer who plays for the UP Fighting Maroons (Originally from Tokyo, Japan)
* Artemio Murakami - professional golfer.
* Kodo Nakano – judoka (Originally from Noda, Iwate, Japan)
* Enrique Ona – surgeon and public servant.  
* Satoshi Ōtomo – footballer who most recently played for Davao Aguilas in the Philippines Football League (Originally from Sakae, Chiba, Japan)
* Taki Saito –  actress (Originally from Fukuoka Prefecture, Japan) 
* Risa Sato – volleyball player (Originally from Osaka, Japan)
* Yuka Saso – professional golfer of Japanese descent. She created golf history for the Philippines by winning the 2021 U.S. Women&#x27;s Open.
* Daisuke Sato – professional footballer 
* Edgar Sia – businessman founder of Mang Inasal fastfood chain, his mother is a Japanese Filipina named Pacita Jaruda. 
* Akiko Thomson – television host, journalist and retired swimmer. 
* Kiyomi Watanabe - judoka who has represented the Philippines in international competitions. 
* Michiko Yamamoto – screenwriter.
* Mokomichi Hayami – actor, chef, TV presenter, entrepreneur, and model (Originally from Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, Japan)
* Maria Ozawa – actress, model and a former AV star  (Originally from Hokkaido, Japan)
* Kaede Ishiyama – MNL48 idol.
* Mara Lopez – actress and surfer.
* Fabio Ide – actor and model.
* Anthonny Iinuma – former contestant of &quot;Produce 101 Japan S2&quot; and &quot;Boys Planet&quot;. (born from Davao City)
* Ako Kamo – Miss Universe Japan 2019 (Originally from Kobe, Hyogo, Japan)
* Miho Hoshino – MNL48 idol.
* Kaori Oinuma – actress and Pinoy Big Brother: Otso winner (Originally from Nagoya, Aichi, Japan)
* Kiara Takahashi
* Junna Tsukii - Filipino-Japanese karateka
* Ramon Tulfo, Wanda Tulfo-Teo, Ben Tulfo, Raffy Tulfo and Erwin Tulfo - their mother is a Japanese Filipina named Caridad Teshiba
* Akira Morishita - Actor, singer, and member of BGYO
* Angel Satsumi - Teen actress, known as Clarissa in &quot;Pepito Manaloto&quot;
* Tsuyoshi Anthony &quot;Hori&quot; Horibata - First district representative of Camarines Sur (2022–)
* Kazel Kinouchi - actress, known as Zoey in &quot;Abot-Kamay na Pangarap&quot;
== Gallery ==
==See also==
* Red seal ships
* Filipinos in Japan
* Japan–Philippines relations

==References==
==External links==
*Japan Foundation Manila Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2265053" start="0" end="27" title="Japanese in the Philippines" label="Japanese in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265053" start="32" end="49" title="Japanese in the Philippines" label="Japanese Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373538" start="92" end="109" title="Japanese diaspora" label="Japanese diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="194" end="205" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="334" end="347" title="interracial marriage" label="intermarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="500" end="505" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="584" end="589" title="Heian period" label="Heian"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="594" end="603" title="Muromachi" label="Muromachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q911176" start="658" end="682" title="History of the Ryukyu Islands" label="proto-Okinawan chiefdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208167" start="753" end="762" title="Ryukyuan people" label="Okinawans"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="767" end="779" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="830" end="846" title="Neolithic" label="neolithic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q41807" start="890" end="897" title="Bolinao, Pangasinan" label="Bolinao"/>
<link wikidata="Q40168" start="902" end="906" title="Agoo" label="Agoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41891" start="913" end="926" title="Lingayen Gulf" label="Lingayen Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="1021" end="1028" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="1033" end="1037" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="1108" end="1116" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="1226" end="1231" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q697605" start="1392" end="1397" title="Wokou" label="Wokou"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1480" end="1491" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q43517" start="1533" end="1539" title="Aparri" label="Aparri"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="1589" end="1594" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348305" start="1710" end="1730" title="1582 Cagayan battles" label="1582 Cagayan battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="1845" end="1853" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41978" start="1953" end="1961" title="Lingayen, Pangasinan" label="Lingayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13739" start="1963" end="1969" title="Bataan" label="Bataan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13778" start="1975" end="1993" title="Catanduanes Island" label="Catanduanes Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36025" start="2045" end="2051" title="Bontoc, Mountain Province" label="Bontoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q806138" start="2056" end="2062" title="Banaue" label="Banaue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2161" end="2166" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="2439" end="2444" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="2602" end="2607" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2624" end="2635" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="2671" end="2679" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122859" start="2708" end="2720" title="Nanban trade" label="Nanban trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q202298" start="2811" end="2832" title="Japanese tea ceremony" label="Japanese tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142664" start="2983" end="2992" title="wabi-sabi" label="wabi-sabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="3406" end="3412" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q326956" start="3423" end="3426" title="Uji, Kyoto" label="Uji"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3445" end="3456" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q202298" start="3479" end="3500" title="Japanese tea ceremony" label="Japanese tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324139" start="3525" end="3541" title="Antonio de Morga" label="Antonio de Morga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3555" end="3584" title="Antonio de Morga#History of the Philippine Islands" label="Sucesos de la Islas Filipinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875549" start="3707" end="3747" title="Mishima ware" label="Mishima (&amp;quot;three islands&amp;quot;) ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="3782" end="3792" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="3793" end="3799" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="3905" end="3912" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002308" start="4043" end="4058" title="Wilhelm Solheim" label="Wilhelm Solheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234581" start="5341" end="5347" title="Igorot" label="Igorot"/>
<link wikidata="Q235004" start="5461" end="5466" title="Vigan" label="Vigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5616" end="5627" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="6238" end="6252" title="archaeologists" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6632" end="6637" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13786" start="6642" end="6646" title="Cebu" label="Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="6654" end="6665" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q271598" start="6965" end="6976" title="fishing net" label="fishing net"/>
<link wikidata="Q219426" start="7477" end="7480" title="roe" label="roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="8211" end="8218" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13869" start="8337" end="8344" title="Palawan" label="Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8348" end="8353" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294232" start="8380" end="8385" title="civet" label="civet"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="8436" end="8439" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8454" end="8459" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205621" start="8606" end="8624" title="Catholicism in Japan" label="Japanese Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="8740" end="8750" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q749873" start="8855" end="8868" title="Ukon Takayama" label="Ukon Takayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q256494" start="9041" end="9053" title="Paco, Manila" label="Paco, Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="9405" end="9413" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="9462" end="9467" title="Davao City" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q211436" start="9473" end="9480" title="Visayas" label="Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q256494" start="9501" end="9506" title="Dilao" label="Dilao"/>
<link wikidata="Q256494" start="9508" end="9512" title="Paco, Manila" label="Paco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13813" start="9518" end="9530" title="Ilocos Norte" label="Ilocos Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9785" end="9797" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056052" start="10076" end="10097" title="History of the Philippines (1898–1946)" label="American colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q109289260" start="10108" end="10138" title="immigration to the Philippines" label="immigration to the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735473" start="10167" end="10184" title="Teodoro Agoncillo" label="Teodoro Agoncillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974839" start="10232" end="10239" title="Chinese Filipino" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="10308" end="10314" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="10320" end="10325" title="Davao City" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551529" start="10467" end="10478" title="Kennon Road" label="Kennon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822" start="10483" end="10489" title="Baguio" label="Baguio"/>
<link wikidata="Q161097" start="10547" end="10552" title="Abacá" label="abaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="10568" end="10573" title="Davao City" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q845945" start="10700" end="10713" title="Shinto shrine" label="Shinto shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="10805" end="10810" title="Davao City" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q13694" start="11534" end="11539" title="Davao Region" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="11613" end="11625" title="fifth column" label="fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164208" start="11741" end="11746" title="Moros during World War II" label="Moros"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="12236" end="12246" title="cultural assimilation" label="assimilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066778" start="12932" end="12952" title="Languages of the Philippines" label="Philippine languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628193" start="13547" end="13572" title="overseas Filipino workers" label="overseas Filipino workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="13876" end="13886" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="13888" end="13894" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142255" start="14803" end="14825" title="Supreme Court of Japan" label="Supreme Court of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82678" start="15162" end="15182" title="Tokyo District Court" label="Tokyo District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11340738" start="16124" end="16146" title="Manila Japanese School" label="Manila Japanese School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8287445" start="16150" end="16179" title="nihonjin gakko" label="Japanese international school"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048055" start="16195" end="16216" title="Bonifacio Global City" label="Bonifacio Global City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580" start="16218" end="16230" title="Metro Manila" label="Metro Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q11626839" start="16263" end="16284" title="hoshuko" label="supplementary program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889017" start="16310" end="16322" title="Mandaue City" label="Mandaue City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13786" start="16324" end="16328" title="Cebu" label="Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="16454" end="16471" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="16485" end="16495" title="Davao City" label="Davao City"/>
<link wikidata="Q28092371" start="16520" end="16538" title="Dominic Panganiban" label="Dominic Panganiban"/>
<link wikidata="Q848522" start="16786" end="16796" title="Naitō Joan" label="Naitō Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="16801" end="16810" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="16811" end="16818" title="Samurai" label="Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="16926" end="16931" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394439" start="16935" end="16946" title="Naitō Julia" label="Naitō Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="17067" end="17072" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84146548" start="17076" end="17089" title="Fumiya Sankai" label="Fumiya Sankai"/>
<link wikidata="Q185125" start="17117" end="17136" title="Hamamatsu, Shizuoka" label="Hamamatsu, Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="17138" end="17143" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696971" start="17147" end="17160" title="Aiko Melendez" label="Aiko Melendez"/>
<link wikidata="Q27888533" start="17197" end="17213" title="Hikaru Minegishi" label="Hikaru Minegishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46747" start="17326" end="17340" title="Sendai, Miyagi" label="Sendai, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="17342" end="17347" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q749873" start="17351" end="17369" title="Dom Justo Takayama" label="Dom Justo Takayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q718714" start="17372" end="17382" title="Kirishitan" label="Kirishitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863747" start="17419" end="17428" title="Uda, Nara" label="Uda, Nara"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="17430" end="17435" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203095" start="17439" end="17449" title="Jiro Manio" label="Jiro Manio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12968659" start="17467" end="17478" title="Nina Kodaka" label="Nina Kodaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="17666" end="17678" title="Tokyo, Japan" label="Tokyo, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246685" start="17682" end="17695" title="Satoshi Ōtomo" label="Satoshi Ōtomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202754" start="17805" end="17817" title="Sakae, Chiba" label="Sakae, Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="17819" end="17824" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091554" start="17828" end="17842" title="Sayaka Akimoto" label="Sayaka Akimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q51118" start="17913" end="17918" title="AKB48" label="AKB48"/>
<link wikidata="Q11580058" start="17922" end="17936" title="Alan Shirahama" label="Alan Shirahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q200022" start="17980" end="18007" title="Matsuyama, Ehime Prefecture" label="Matsuyama, Ehime Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="18009" end="18014" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347337" start="18018" end="18024" title="Loveli" label="Loveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q200022" start="18085" end="18112" title="Matsuyama, Ehime Prefecture" label="Matsuyama, Ehime Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="18114" end="18119" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700945" start="18123" end="18135" title="Akihiro Sato (model)" label="Akihiro Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765688" start="18187" end="18199" title="Anja Aguilar" label="Anja Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004387" start="18275" end="18289" title="Gerphil Flores" label="Gerphil Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686412" start="18323" end="18339" title="Tomohiko Hoshina" label="Tomohiko Hoshina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174691" start="18366" end="18384" title="Shizuoka, Shizuoka" label="Shizuoka, Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="18386" end="18391" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100258" start="18395" end="18403" title="Iwa Moto" label="Iwa Moto"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637623" start="18460" end="18477" title="Maybelline Masuda" label="Maybelline Masuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218074" start="18506" end="18522" title="Daniel Matsunaga" label="Daniel Matsunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q27888533" start="18770" end="18786" title="Hikaru Minegishi" label="Hikaru Minegishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46747" start="18898" end="18912" title="Sendai, Miyagi" label="Sendai, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="18914" end="18919" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44674528" start="18923" end="18937" title="Kintaro Miyagi" label="Kintaro Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="19006" end="19018" title="Tokyo, Japan" label="Tokyo, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797460" start="19022" end="19038" title="Artemio Murakami" label="Artemio Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q26217969" start="19064" end="19075" title="Kodo Nakano" label="Kodo Nakano"/>
<link wikidata="Q733371" start="19102" end="19113" title="Noda, Iwate" label="Noda, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19115" end="19120" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379779" start="19124" end="19135" title="Enrique Ona" label="Enrique Ona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246685" start="19170" end="19183" title="Satoshi Ōtomo" label="Satoshi Ōtomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202754" start="19292" end="19304" title="Sakae, Chiba" label="Sakae, Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19306" end="19311" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30542544" start="19315" end="19325" title="Taki Saito" label="Taki Saito"/>
<link wikidata="Q123258" start="19354" end="19372" title="Fukuoka Prefecture" label="Fukuoka Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19374" end="19379" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42212199" start="19384" end="19393" title="Risa Sato" label="Risa Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="19431" end="19443" title="Osaka, Japan" label="Osaka, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56255474" start="19447" end="19456" title="Yuka Saso" label="Yuka Saso"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126756" start="19560" end="19587" title="2021 U.S. Women&amp;#x27;s Open" label="2021 U.S. Women&amp;#x27;s Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180912" start="19591" end="19603" title="Daisuke Sato (footballer)" label="Daisuke Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005721" start="19633" end="19642" title="Edgar Sia" label="Edgar Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748573" start="19668" end="19679" title="Mang Inasal" label="Mang Inasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700980" start="19754" end="19767" title="Akiko Thomson" label="Akiko Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058308" start="19822" end="19837" title="Kiyomi Watanabe" label="Kiyomi Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612883" start="19917" end="19933" title="Michiko Yamamoto (screenwriter)" label="Michiko Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200762" start="19952" end="19968" title="Mokomichi Hayami" label="Mokomichi Hayami"/>
<link wikidata="Q193638" start="20039" end="20049" title="Shibuya-ku" label="Shibuya-ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="20051" end="20063" title="Tokyo, Japan" label="Tokyo, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q233354" start="20067" end="20078" title="Maria Ozawa" label="Maria Ozawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="20135" end="20150" title="Hokkaido, Japan" label="Hokkaido, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23592670" start="20171" end="20176" title="MNL48" label="MNL48"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233972" start="20185" end="20195" title="Mara Lopez" label="Mara Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q48689400" start="20220" end="20229" title="Fabio Ide" label="Fabio Ide"/>
<link wikidata="Q105117701" start="20296" end="20316" title="Produce 101 Japan (season 2)" label="Produce 101 Japan S2"/>
<link wikidata="Q110190620" start="20333" end="20344" title="Boys Planet" label="Boys Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="20363" end="20373" title="Davao City" label="Davao City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="20430" end="20441" title="Kobe, Hyogo" label="Kobe, Hyogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="20443" end="20448" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104820202" start="20481" end="20493" title="Kaori Oinuma" label="Kaori Oinuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="20556" end="20569" title="Nagoya, Aichi" label="Nagoya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="20571" end="20576" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477999" start="20580" end="20595" title="Kiara Takahashi" label="Kiara Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q91804713" start="20598" end="20610" title="Junna Tsukii" label="Junna Tsukii"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="20631" end="20639" title="karateka" label="karateka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289886" start="20642" end="20653" title="Ramon Tulfo" label="Ramon Tulfo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20655" end="20670" title="Wanda Tulfo-Teo" label="Wanda Tulfo-Teo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886587" start="20672" end="20681" title="Ben Tulfo" label="Ben Tulfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282612" start="20683" end="20694" title="Raffy Tulfo" label="Raffy Tulfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396218" start="20699" end="20710" title="Erwin Tulfo" label="Erwin Tulfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109381670" start="20773" end="20788" title="Akira Morishita" label="Akira Morishita"/>
<link wikidata="Q104838739" start="20820" end="20824" title="BGYO" label="BGYO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166319" start="20827" end="20840" title="Angel Satsumi" label="Angel Satsumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166319" start="20884" end="20899" title="Pepito Manaloto" label="Pepito Manaloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q113463679" start="20908" end="20950" title="Hori Horibata" label="Tsuyoshi Anthony &amp;quot;Hori&amp;quot; Horibata"/>
<link wikidata="Q66771338" start="20953" end="20967" title="Camarines Sur&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="First district"/>
<link wikidata="Q13767" start="20986" end="20999" title="Camarines Sur" label="Camarines Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q129333415" start="21010" end="21024" title="Kazel Kinouchi" label="Kazel Kinouchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113641585" start="21059" end="21081" title="Abot-Kamay na Pangarap" label="Abot-Kamay na Pangarap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429347" start="21117" end="21131" title="Red seal ships" label="Red seal ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q906900" start="21134" end="21152" title="Filipinos in Japan" label="Filipinos in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062819" start="21155" end="21182" title="Japan–Philippines relations" label="Japan–Philippines relations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266215" wikidata="Q1750567" url="?curid=1266215" title="The Morning Post">
<text>The Morning Post was a conservative daily newspaper published in London from 1772 to 1937, when it was acquired by &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;.

==History==
The paper was founded by John Bell. According to historian Robert Darnton, &quot;The Morning Post&quot; scandal sheet consisted of paragraph-long news snippets, much of it false. Its original editor, the Reverend Sir Henry Bate Dudley, earned himself nicknames such as &quot;Reverend Bruiser&quot; or &quot;The Fighting Parson&quot;, and was soon replaced by an even more vitriolic editor, Reverend William Jackson, also known as &quot;Dr. Viper&quot;.

Originally a Whig paper, it was purchased by Daniel Stuart in 1795, who made it into a moderate Tory organ. A number of well-known writers contributed, including Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Charles Lamb, James Mackintosh, Robert Southey, Mary Robinson, and William Wordsworth. In the seven years of Stuart&#x27;s proprietorship, the paper&#x27;s circulation rose from 350 to over 4,000.

From 1803 until his death in 1833, the owner and editor of the &quot;Post&quot; was Nicholas Byrne; his son William Pitt Byrne later held these roles.

Later the paper was acquired by a Lancashire papermaker named Crompton. In 1848 he hired Peter Borthwick, a Scot who had been a Conservative MP for Evesham (1835–1847), as editor. When Peter died in 1852, his son Algernon took over. During the 1850s, the &quot;Post&quot; was very closely associated with the Palmerston ministry.

With the aid of Andrew Montagu, Borthwick purchased the &quot;Post&quot; in 1876. His son Oliver (1873–1905) was business manager and editor, but died young, and upon the father&#x27;s death in 1908 control went to his daughter Lilias Borthwick (1871–1965), wife of Seymour Henry Bathurst, 7th Earl Bathurst (1864–1943). In 1881, the paper appointed the first woman war correspondent when it sent Lady Florence Dixie to South Africa to cover the First Boer War.

The paper was noted for its attentions to the activities of the powerful and wealthy, its interest in foreign affairs, and in literary and artistic events. It began regular printing of notices of plays, concerts, and operas in the early 20th century, and is said to have been the first daily paper in London to do this. Arthur Hervey (1855–1922) was the paper&#x27;s music critic between 1892 and 1908.

Beginning in 1900, the Australian politician Alfred Deakin wrote anonymous commentaries on Australian politics for the paper, continuing even when he had become Prime Minister.

Maurice Baring was a foreign correspondent for the paper, reporting from Manchuria, Russia and Constantinople between 1904 and 1909. He was war correspondent with Russian forces during the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905). Also, Harold Williams started to write from Russia.

Howell Arthur Gwynne took over as editor in 1911.

===Controversial publications===
Upon General Reginald Dyer&#x27;s return to India in 1920, after his role in the Jallianwala Bagh massacre in Amritsar, the &quot;Morning Post&quot; collected and presented £26,317 to him, along with a golden sword and the title &quot;Defender of the Empire&quot; and &quot;the man who saved India&quot;. The editor of the &quot;Morning Post&quot; had received waves of letters containing contributions. The &quot;Morning Post&quot; received criticism during the sittings of the Hunter commission investigating the massacre as not being impartial.

The paper gained notoriety in 1920, after it ran a series of 17 or 18 articles based on &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;, a text previously published in Russian by Sergei Nilus as the final chapter (Chapter XII), of his book &quot;Velikoye v malom i antikhrist kak blizkaya politicheskaya vozmozhnost&#x27;. Zapiski pravoslavnogo veruyushchego&quot; (&quot;The Great within the Small and Antichrist, an Imminent Political Possibility. Notes of an Orthodox Believer&quot;). It is widely held that Victor E. Marsden, the paper&#x27;s Russian desk correspondent, used the copy of this rare book in the British Museum to translate the last chapter for the paper. Some have questioned that because the anonymous 1923 pamphlet crediting Marsden as the translator in its preface appeared three years after Marsden&#x27;s death on 28 October 1920. 

The articles were subsequently collected and formed the basis of the book &quot;The Cause of World Unrest&quot;, to which half the paper&#x27;s staff contributed, as well as George Shanks and Nesta Webster. However, credit for the compilation was ascribed principally to the paper&#x27;s editor, H.A. Gwynne. The book further denounced international Jewry, and cultural and social dissolution in the Christian nations.

===Final years===
The Bathursts sold the paper to a consortium headed by the Duke of Northumberland in 1924. After Adolf Hitler&#x27;s rise to power in 1933, it was one of the few newspapers in Europe to immediately recognize that Nazi Germany would try to &quot;seek a solution to difficulties at home with adventures abroad.&quot; In 1937, the &quot;Morning Post&quot; was sold to the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot;, which was owned by William Berry. The &quot;Post &quot;did not remain a separate title, and it was absorbed into the &quot;Telegraph&quot;.

==Editors==
* 1848: Peter Borthwick
* 1852: Algernon Borthwick
* 1897: James Nicol Dunn
* 1905: Spenser Wilkinson
* 1905: Fabian Ware
* 1911: Howell Arthur Gwynne

==References==
==Sources==
* Hindle, Wilfrid. (1937). &quot; &#x27;The Morning Post,&#x27; 1772–1937: Portrait of a Newspaper.&quot; London: Routledge. ; re-published in 1974, Google Books &quot; &#x27;The Morning Post,&#x27; 1772–1937: Portrait of a Newspaper.&quot; Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. 
* Preziosi, Giovanni. (1943). &quot;Giudaismo, Bolscevismo, Plutocrazia, Massoneria.&quot; Milan: Arnoldo Mondadori Editore. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="42" end="51" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="65" end="71" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="121" end="140" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q15486584" start="186" end="195" title="John Bell (publisher)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q964180" start="220" end="234" title="Robert Darnton" label="Robert Darnton"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="265" end="278" title="scandal sheet" label="scandal sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527125" start="378" end="395" title="Sir Henry Dudley, 1st Baronet" label="Henry Bate Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318147" start="551" end="575" title="Reverend William Jackson" label="Reverend William Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="628" end="632" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218862" start="660" end="673" title="Daniel Stuart" label="Daniel Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="711" end="715" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="777" end="800" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q372984" start="802" end="814" title="Charles Lamb (writer)" label="Charles Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q333732" start="816" end="832" title="James Mackintosh" label="James Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="834" end="848" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q532255" start="850" end="863" title="Mary Robinson (poet)" label="Mary Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="869" end="887" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016937" start="1108" end="1126" title="William Pitt Byrne" label="William Pitt Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="1186" end="1196" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172892" start="1241" end="1256" title="Peter Borthwick" label="Peter Borthwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1260" end="1264" title="Scotland" label="Scot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1280" end="1292" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418200" start="1293" end="1307" title="Evesham (UK Parliament constituency)" label="MP for Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724136" start="1365" end="1373" title="Algernon Borthwick" label="Algernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="1461" end="1471" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1499" end="1513" title="Andrew Montagu" label="Andrew Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1573" end="1579" title="Oliver Borthwick" label="Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q19043335" start="1711" end="1727" title="Lilias Margaret Frances, Countess Bathurst" label="Lilias Borthwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459129" start="1749" end="1790" title="Seymour Henry Bathurst, 7th Earl Bathurst" label="Seymour Henry Bathurst, 7th Earl Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q164236" start="1849" end="1866" title="war correspondent" label="war correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q529148" start="1880" end="1899" title="Lady Florence Dixie" label="Lady Florence Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1903" end="1915" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q329203" start="1929" end="1943" title="First Boer War" label="First Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="2142" end="2147" title="Play (theatre)" label="plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="2149" end="2156" title="concert" label="concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="2163" end="2168" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943855" start="2266" end="2279" title="Arthur Hervey" label="Arthur Hervey"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="2395" end="2408" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153672" start="2441" end="2460" title="Australian politics" label="Australian politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="2511" end="2525" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363814" start="2528" end="2542" title="Maurice Baring" label="Maurice Baring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155838" start="2549" end="2570" title="foreign correspondent" label="foreign correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="2601" end="2610" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2612" end="2618" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2623" end="2637" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="2717" end="2735" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985253" start="2755" end="2770" title="Harold Williams (linguist)" label="Harold Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921673" start="2802" end="2822" title="Howell Arthur Gwynne" label="Howell Arthur Gwynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q560470" start="2899" end="2912" title="Reginald Dyer" label="Reginald Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2930" end="2935" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="2939" end="2943" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="2967" end="2992" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="Jallianwala Bagh massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="2996" end="3004" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="3059" end="3060" title="pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="3529" end="3564" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="3603" end="3610" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q764438" start="3614" end="3626" title="Sergei Nilus" label="Sergei Nilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3982" end="3988" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="4049" end="4063" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="4147" end="4156" title="anonymity" label="anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="4162" end="4170" title="pamphlet" label="pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q670787" start="4214" end="4221" title="preface" label="preface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4372" end="4397" title="List of editions of Protocols of the Elders of Zion#1920.5" label="The Cause of World Unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544452" start="4466" end="4479" title="George Shanks" label="George Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q449869" start="4484" end="4497" title="Nesta Helen Webster" label="Nesta Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q282728" start="4628" end="4647" title="international Jewry" label="international Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="4692" end="4709" title="Christendom" label="Christian nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="4764" end="4774" title="consortium" label="consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707520" start="4789" end="4811" title="Alan Percy, 8th Duke of Northumberland" label="Duke of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4827" end="4839" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="4847" end="4860" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s rise to power" label="rise to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4943" end="4955" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="5105" end="5120" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005480" start="5147" end="5160" title="William Berry, 1st Viscount Camrose" label="William Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172892" start="5289" end="5304" title="Peter Borthwick" label="Peter Borthwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724136" start="5313" end="5331" title="Algernon Borthwick" label="Algernon Borthwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q101482871" start="5340" end="5356" title="James Nicol Dunn" label="James Nicol Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576313" start="5365" end="5382" title="Spenser Wilkinson" label="Spenser Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390334" start="5391" end="5402" title="Fabian Ware" label="Fabian Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921673" start="5411" end="5431" title="Howell Arthur Gwynne" label="Howell Arthur Gwynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116159" start="5724" end="5750" title="Greenwood Publishing Group" label="Greenwood Publishing Group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266221" wikidata="Q458422" url="?curid=1266221" title="Câmpia Turzii">
<text>Câmpia Turzii (; ; ) is a municipality in Cluj County, Transylvania, Romania, which was formed in 1925 by the union of two villages, Ghiriș (&quot;Aranyosgyéres&quot;) and Sâncrai (&quot;Szentkirály&quot;). It was declared a town in 1950 and a city in 1998.

The city is located in the southeastern part of the county, on the right bank of the Arieș River, at a distance of from Turda and from the county seat, Cluj-Napoca.

==History==

The village of Sâncrai was mentioned in a 1219 document as &quot;villa Sancti Regis&quot; (&quot;village of Holy King&quot;), while Ghiriș was first documented in 1292 as &quot;Terra Gerusteleke&quot; (&quot;Gerusteleke&quot;, literally meaning &quot;plot of Gerus&quot; in Hungarian).

Michael the Brave was murdered by agents of Giorgio Basta at the current location of Câmpia Turzii on 9 August 1601.

Câmpia Turzii is the &quot;city of adoption&quot; of Toulouse and a sister city of Siemianowice Śląskie.

==Population==
The population has evolved as follows since 1784:
*1784: Ghiriș: 565; Sâncrai: 472
*1850: Ghiriș: 1,168; Sâncrai: 487
*1910: Ghiriș: 1,815; Sâncrai: 704
*1930 census: 4,124
*1948 census: 6,310
*1956 census: 11,518
*1977 census: 22,418
*2002 census: 26,823
*2011 census: 22,223
*2021 census: 20,590

==Military activity==
The city is home to the Romanian Air Force&#x27;s RoAF 71st Air Base, and during the NATO Summit of 2008, the 323d Air Expeditionary Wing of the United States Air Force. F-15s from RAF Lakenheath in the United Kingdom flew out during the summit to augment air defence forces for the event.

In April 2015, a U.S. Air Force group of A-10 Thunderbolt attack aircraft stationed in Germany arrived at the RoAF 71st Air Base to take part in exercises with the Romanian Air Force.

==Natives==
*Mihai Adam, footballer
*Andra, singer
*Sebastian Cojocnean, footballer
*Andrei Cordoș, footballer
*Andrei Coroian, footballer
*Cozmin Gușă, physicist, journalist, and politician
*Iuliu Jenei, footballer
*Cosmin Mărginean, footballer
*Teodor Murășanu, writer and teacher
*Mircea Rus, footballer
*Virginia Ruzici, tennis player
*Ioan Sabău, footballer
*Cristian Silvășan, footballer
*Cosmin Văsîie, footballer

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q458422" start="0" end="13" title="Câmpia Turzii" label="Câmpia Turzii"/>
<link wikidata="Q640364" start="26" end="38" title="municipiu" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q182624" start="42" end="53" title="Cluj County" label="Cluj County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="55" end="67" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="69" end="76" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q660435" start="344" end="355" title="Arieș" label="Arieș River"/>
<link wikidata="Q209809" start="379" end="384" title="Turda" label="Turda"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="411" end="422" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q118755" start="725" end="742" title="Michael the Brave" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q220782" start="769" end="782" title="Giorgio Basta" label="Giorgio Basta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="896" end="904" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q158485" start="926" end="946" title="Siemianowice Śląskie" label="Siemianowice Śląskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181933" start="1221" end="1232" title="2011 Romanian census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="1242" end="1253" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q507817" start="1309" end="1327" title="Romanian Air Force" label="Romanian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733880" start="1335" end="1353" title="RoAF 71st Air Base" label="RoAF 71st Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q643292" start="1370" end="1381" title="NATO Summit" label="NATO Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634958" start="1395" end="1422" title="323d Air Expeditionary Wing" label="323d Air Expeditionary Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1430" end="1453" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="1455" end="1460" title="F-15 Eagle" label="F-15s"/>
<link wikidata="Q285198" start="1466" end="1480" title="RAF Lakenheath" label="RAF Lakenheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1488" end="1502" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192443" start="1617" end="1633" title="A-10 Thunderbolt" label="A-10 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q946720" start="1774" end="1784" title="Mihai Adam" label="Mihai Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6214240" start="1798" end="1803" title="Andra (singer)" label="Andra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442388" start="1813" end="1832" title="Sebastian Cojocnean" label="Sebastian Cojocnean"/>
<link wikidata="Q947744" start="1846" end="1859" title="Andrei Cordoș" label="Andrei Cordoș"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233725" start="1873" end="1887" title="Andrei Coroian" label="Andrei Coroian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687867" start="1901" end="1912" title="Cozmin Gușă" label="Cozmin Gușă"/>
<link wikidata="Q104783322" start="1953" end="1964" title="Iuliu Jenei" label="Iuliu Jenei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174162" start="1978" end="1994" title="Cosmin Mărginean" label="Cosmin Mărginean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12742081" start="2008" end="2023" title="Teodor Murășanu" label="Teodor Murășanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873020" start="2045" end="2055" title="Mircea Rus" label="Mircea Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q239647" start="2069" end="2084" title="Virginia Ruzici" label="Virginia Ruzici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334250" start="2101" end="2111" title="Ioan Sabău" label="Ioan Sabău"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683610" start="2125" end="2142" title="Cristian Silvășan" label="Cristian Silvășan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763762" start="2156" end="2169" title="Cosmin Văsîie" label="Cosmin Văsîie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266229" wikidata="Q3042433" url="?curid=1266229" title="Open University of Catalonia">
<text>The Open University of Catalonia (; ) is a private open university based in Barcelona, Spain.

The UOC offers graduate and postgraduate programs in Catalan, Spanish and English in fields such as Psychology, Computer Science, Education sciences, Information and Knowledge Society, and Economics. Also, an Information and Knowledge Society Doctoral Program is available that explores research fields such as e-law, e-learning, network society, education, and online communities. It has support centers in a number of cities in Spain, Andorra, Mexico and Colombia.

== History ==
The UOC was created in 1994 as a result of the Parliament of Catalonia urging the Government of the Generalitat of Catalonia to take the relevant measures to consolidate a distance learning system. It was constituted through a public deed on October 6, 1994, adopting the legal form of a foundation, the Fundació per la Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. At the same time, the UOC was recognized by the Law of the Parliament of Catalonia 3/1995, of April 6, recognizing it as a member of the Catalan universities system.

It was set up with the mission of offering lifelong learning, of encouraging all those who wish to improve their abilities and skills to access the university, and in this way to grow the educational level and skills of society in general.

== Organization and administration ==
UOC is governed by a Foundation (Fundació per a la Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, FUOC). The administration, management and representation of the FUOC correspond to the following governing bodies: a Board of Trustees, a permanent commission, which acts as a permanent body in the administration and management of the Foundation; and the Advisory Council, which assists the Board of Trustees as a consultative or advisory body for the Foundation.

As of 2023, there are 656 faculty and research staff, 208 of whom are full time researchers.

=== Presidents ===
==Academics==
=== Teaching and learning ===
As of 2023, the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya offers 28 bachelor&#x27;s programs, 53 master&#x27;s programs and eight doctoral degrees. Until the 2021–2022 academic year, UOC had granted 104,501 graduate degrees to students from 138 countries.

The UOC&#x27;s course offering is divided into the following faculties:

* Faculty of Arts and Humanities
* Faculty of Economics and Business
* Faculty of Health Sciences
* Faculty of Information and Communication Sciences
* Faculty of Computer Science, Multimedia and Telecommunications
* Faculty of Law and Political Science
* Faculty of Psychology and Education Sciences

=== Research ===
The UOC focuses its research activity on the interaction between technology and the human and social sciences. It has two research centers—the Internet Interdisciplinary Institute (IN3) and the eHealth Center (eHC)—, a research program in e-learning and seven studies with research sub-divisions. It also has a Doctoral School, with more than 350 predoctoral researchers. 

In 2019 UOC signed the DORA Declaration. In 2023, a new interdisciplinary research and innovation space was inaugurated- located in the Can Jaumandreu complex.

=== Reputation and rankings ===
Among overall rankings, &quot;Times Higher Education&quot; ranks UOC as the Number 1 online university in ibero-america, in the Top 175 among the world&#x27;s youngest universities and in the Top 10 of Spanish universities. The Shanghai Ranking of World Universities defines UOC among the 200 best universities in Communication and among the 500 best universities in Education. The university adheres to the standards set by the European Higher Education Area (EHEA).

== Publications ==
UOC promote the following publications:
* &quot;Artnodes&quot;. A journal about art, science and technology
* &quot;BiD&quot;. University text on library and information science (co-published with the University of Barcelona)
* &quot;Dictatorships &amp; Democracies&quot;. Journal of History and Culture (co-published with the Fundacio Carles Pi i Sunyer)
* &quot;COMeIN&quot;. Journal of the Faculty of Information and Communication Sciences
* &quot;Digithum&quot;. A relational perspective of culture, individual and society in late modernity (co-published with the University of Antioquia - Colombia)
* &quot;ETHE&quot;. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education (co-published with the University of Los Andes - Colombia)
* &quot;IDP&quot;. A journal about Internet, Law and Politics
* &quot;Mosaic&quot;. A journal about multimedia technologies and communication sponsored by the Faculty of Computer Science, Multimedia and Telecommunications
* &quot;Internet Policy Review&quot;. Journal of internet regulation (coedited with the Alexander Von Humboldt Institute for Internet and Society - HIIG)
* &quot;UOC R&amp;I Working Papers&quot;
* &quot;Oikonomics&quot;. A journal about economics, business and society sponsored by the Faculty of Economics and Business

=== Institutional repository ===
The UOC makes O2, their institutional repository, available to provide open access to digital publications produced by the UOC community in the course of its research, teaching and management activities.

== Notable people ==
The Open University of Catalonia had total cumulative graduates of 85,700 as of academic year 2019-2020.

=== Honorary degree recipients ===

* Josep Laporte (2003)
* Tony Bates (2005)
* Jordi Pujol i Soley (2006)
* William J. Mitchell (2006)
* Alain Touraine (2007)
* Sir Timothy Berners-Lee (2008)
* Brenda M. Gourley (2011)
* Aina Moll (2012)
* Hanna Damásio (2012)
* Alejandro Jadad (2018)
* Manuel Borja-Villel (2018)
* Mary Beard (2019)
* Mariana Mazzucato (2022) 
* Wendy Hall (2023)

==References==
==External links==
* Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (UOC)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3042433" start="4" end="32" title="Open University of Catalonia" label="Open University of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q119901925" start="51" end="66" title="Open supported learning" label="open university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="76" end="85" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="148" end="155" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="157" end="164" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="169" end="176" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="195" end="205" title="Psychology" label="Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="207" end="223" title="Computer Science" label="Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q861641" start="225" end="243" title="Education sciences" label="Education sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q184708" start="245" end="278" title="Information society" label="Information and Knowledge Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="284" end="293" title="Economics" label="Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="525" end="530" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="532" end="539" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="541" end="547" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="552" end="560" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q135630" start="624" end="647" title="Parliament of Catalonia" label="Parliament of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022" start="677" end="701" title="Generalitat de Catalunya" label="Generalitat of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704287" start="3018" end="3034" title="DORA declaration" label="DORA Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475036" start="3218" end="3240" title="Times Higher Education" label="Times Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q377916" start="3294" end="3307" title="Ibero-America" label="ibero-america"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="3416" end="3454" title="Shanghai Ranking of World Universities" label="Shanghai Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377863" start="3617" end="3647" title="European Higher Education Area" label="European Higher Education Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q219615" start="3877" end="3900" title="University of Barcelona" label="University of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258413" start="4244" end="4267" title="University of Antioquia" label="University of Antioquia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569421" start="4391" end="4414" title="University of Los Andes (Colombia)" label="University of Los Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="4737" end="4759" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander Von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065413" start="5027" end="5051" title="institutional repository" label="institutional repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q232932" start="5074" end="5085" title="Open access (publishing)" label="open access"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5373" end="5386" title="Josep Laporte i Salas" label="Josep Laporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821852" start="5396" end="5406" title="Tony Bates" label="Tony Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q458702" start="5416" end="5435" title="Jordi Pujol i Soley" label="Jordi Pujol i Soley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502565" start="5445" end="5464" title="William J. Mitchell" label="William J. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333686" start="5474" end="5488" title="Alain Touraine" label="Alain Touraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="5502" end="5521" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Timothy Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5531" end="5548" title="Brenda M. Gourley" label="Brenda M. Gourley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904512" start="5558" end="5567" title="Aina Moll Marquès" label="Aina Moll"/>
<link wikidata="Q459068" start="5577" end="5590" title="Hanna Damásio" label="Hanna Damásio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5600" end="5615" title="Alejandro Jadad" label="Alejandro Jadad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5625" end="5644" title="Manuel J. Borja-Villel" label="Manuel Borja-Villel"/>
<link wikidata="Q458403" start="5654" end="5664" title="Mary Beard (classicist)" label="Mary Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15127513" start="5674" end="5691" title="Mariana Mazzucato" label="Mariana Mazzucato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11626" start="5702" end="5712" title="Wendy Hall" label="Wendy Hall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266230" wikidata="Q2633639" url="?curid=1266230" title="I, (Annoyed Grunt)-Bot">
<text>&quot;I, (Annoyed Grunt)-Bot&quot;, also known as &quot;I, D&#x27;oh-Bot&quot;, is the ninth episode of the fifteenth season of the American animated television series &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 11, 2004. The episode was written by Dan Greaney and Allen Glazier and was directed by Lauren MacMullan.

In this episode, Homer pretends to be a battle robot to make Bart think he can competently construct things. This episode represents a milestone in the history of the series as Snowball II is killed off. The primary plot is based on Richard Matheson&#x27;s short story &quot;Steel&quot;. The episode received mixed reviews.

==Plot==
Bart is taunted by school bullies Nelson, Jimbo, Dolph and Kearney because he does not have a real 10-speed bike as they do. In order to get Homer to buy him one, Bart places his current bike so that it is run over and destroyed by Dr. Hibbert. Homer buys the 10-speed for Bart, but refuses to pay the small assembly fee and builds it himself. Bart is happy since it looks great and works perfectly at first, but it falls apart when he moons the bullies. Homer, wanting Bart to be proud of him, tries to build a battle robot for the show &quot;Robot Rumble&quot;. He fails to construct one, and instead assumes the identity of one, which Bart names &quot;Chief Knock-a Homer&quot;. Unaware of Homer&#x27;s ruse, Bart enters the robot in the Rumble.

Meanwhile, Hibbert&#x27;s car runs over and kills the Simpsons&#x27; cat Snowball II, shortly after crushing Bart&#x27;s bike. A devastated Lisa recites a poem tearfully at the funeral, where Snowball II is buried next to Snowball I. Lisa adopts a ginger cat, which she names Snowball III, but he drowns in the fish tank. The next cat, Coltrane (Snowball IV), jumps out of a window after hearing Lisa play her saxophone. The owner of the cat sanctuary refuses to give Lisa any more cats, but the Crazy Cat Lady wanders past and throws a cat at Lisa that strongly resembles Snowball II. Although Lisa tries to shoo the cat off, worried that she will meet the same fate as the others, the cat survives a near miss on the street when Gil Gunderson swerves to avoid hitting her while driving and crashes into a tree. Lisa decides to keep the cat, officially naming her Snowball V; however, the family will call her Snowball II in order to save money on a feeding dish. Principal Skinner comments disparagingly on the choice, but relents when Lisa points out that the same had previously been done for him.

Homer defeats numerous opponents and makes it to the finals, despite being injured from the battles with the other robots. In the final match against Professor Frink&#x27;s undefeated Killhammad Aieee, a super-robot of both impressive design and skill, Bart finds Homer in “Chief Knock-a Homer” after the grueling first round. Caught, Homer apologizes to Bart, but Bart is impressed because of all the pain Homer went through to win his son&#x27;s admiration. However, by then the second round has begun, and Killhammad Aieee grabs “Chief Knock-a Homer”, with Homer still inside, to finish the fight, until it squeezes Homer out of the robot and immediately stops as soon as it sees him. Frink explains that the robot follows Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Three Laws of Robotics and has been programmed to serve humans rather than harm them, with Killhammad Aieee setting out a chair for Homer and pouring him a martini. Homer wins the match (although one of the commentators points out that the tournament rules prohibit any human combatants) and Bart is proud of him.

==Cultural references==

* The title of the episode includes the phrase &quot;(Annoyed Grunt)&quot; which is how Homer&#x27;s catchphrase &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot; is written in episode scripts. Making the episode title read &quot;I, D&#x27;oh-bot&quot; - a play on Isaac Asimov&#x27;s &quot;I, Robot&quot; as well as the sci-fi action movie of the same name released later the same year.
* &quot;Robot Rumble&quot; parodies the robot combat shows &quot;Robot Wars&quot; and &quot;BattleBots&quot;.
* Homer&#x27;s robot, Chief Knock-a Homer, is a reference to the former Atlanta Braves mascot Chief Noc-A-Homa.
* The song playing while Bart and Milhouse are cycling is &quot;Magic Carpet Ride&quot; performed by Steppenwolf.
* During one of the Robot Rumble matches, one of the commentators states that one robot is &quot;killing him softly with his saw,&quot; a reference to the Roberta Flack song.
* Dr. Hibbert has a Kool and the Gang air-freshener in his car.
* The song playing during the Robot Rumble montage is &quot;Watching Scotty Grow&quot; performed by Bobby Goldsboro (The same song played in the Season 3 episode &quot;Saturdays of Thunder&quot; as Homer was helping Bart build a soapbox racer). Homer also sings part of this song when delirious from blood loss and a concussion.
* The robot that Professor Frink&#x27;s robot turns into a trophy is the T-800 endoskeleton from the &quot;Terminator&quot; film series.
* Professor Frink&#x27;s robot is named &#x27;Smashius Clay&#x27; a.k.a. &#x27;Killhammad Aieee&#x27;, based on the boxer Muhammad Ali and his birth name Cassius Clay.
* Professor Frink&#x27;s robot is largely designed after the ED-209 from the film &quot;RoboCop&quot; and its accompanying series.
* Lisa&#x27;s fourth cat, Coltrane, is named after the influential jazz performer John Coltrane.
* The robot Circuit Ray Leonard is based on the boxer Sugar Ray Leonard.
* The song playing while Homer fights Professor Frink&#x27;s robot is &quot;...In A Bag&quot; by Static-X.
* While Lisa is preparing food for Snowball III, she sings a song with the same melody as the Hokey Pokey song.

==Reception==
===Viewing figures===
The episode was watched by 16.30 million viewers, which was the 13th most-watched show that week.

===Critical response===
Colin Jacobson of &quot;DVD Movie Guide&quot; was critical of the episode, saying it &quot;starts pretty well but droops before too long. The robot theme is too silly, and the cat sequences are too morbid. Some of the battle bots bits amuse, but they&#x27;re not enough to overcome the episode&#x27;s general flaws.&quot;

On &quot;Four Finger Discount&quot;, Brendan Dando and Guy Davis liked the episode because it showed Homer being a good father and also because they were fans of &quot;Robot Wars&quot;.

== References ==
==External links==
*&quot;I, (Annoyed Grunt)-Bot&quot; at The Simpsons.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2633639" start="6" end="28" title="I, (Annoyed Grunt)-Bot" label="I, (Annoyed Grunt)-Bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633639" start="56" end="72" title="I, (Annoyed Grunt)-Bot" label="I, D&amp;#x27;oh-Bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670816" start="108" end="124" title="The Simpsons season 15" label="fifteenth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="174" end="186" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="221" end="232" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341894" start="302" end="313" title="Dan Greaney" label="Dan Greaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837902" start="318" end="331" title="Allen Glazier" label="Allen Glazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181202" start="352" end="368" title="Lauren MacMullan" label="Lauren MacMullan"/>
<link wikidata="Q292537" start="523" end="544" title="History of The Simpsons" label="history of the series"/>
<link wikidata="Q9762" start="548" end="559" title="Snowball II" label="Snowball II"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="604" end="620" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529074" start="646" end="651" title="Steel (The Twilight Zone)" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="705" end="709" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511163" start="739" end="745" title="Nelson Muntz" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237599" start="747" end="752" title="Jimbo Jones" label="Jimbo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="754" end="759" title="List of recurring The Simpsons characters#Dolph Starbeam" label="Dolph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="764" end="771" title="List of recurring The Simpsons characters#Kearney Zzyzwicz" label="Kearney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="846" end="851" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504586" start="937" end="948" title="Julius Hibbert" label="Dr. Hibbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322151" start="1141" end="1146" title="mooning" label="moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="1224" end="1229" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052229" start="1249" end="1261" title="Robot combat" label="Robot Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1528" end="1539" title="Simpson family#Snowball II" label="Snowball II"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="1610" end="1614" title="poetry" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="1632" end="1639" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1677" end="1687" title="Simpson family#Snowball I" label="Snowball I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1731" end="1743" title="Simpson family#Snowball III" label="Snowball III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1791" end="1813" title="Simpson family#Snowball II" label="Coltrane (Snowball IV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="1865" end="1874" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1951" end="1965" title="List of recurring The Simpsons characters#Crazy Cat Lady" label="Crazy Cat Lady"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2186" end="2199" title="List of recurring The Simpsons characters#Gil Gunderson" label="Gil Gunderson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2320" end="2330" title="Simpson family#Snowball V" label="Snowball V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315354" start="2390" end="2418" title="Reset button technique" label="save money on a feeding dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503373" start="2420" end="2437" title="Seymour Skinner" label="Principal Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615578" start="2514" end="2555" title="The Principal and the Pauper" label="the same had previously been done for him"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458159" start="2708" end="2723" title="Professor Frink" label="Professor Frink"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="3284" end="3296" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758" start="3304" end="3326" title="Three Laws of Robotics" label="Three Laws of Robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q273027" start="3460" end="3467" title="Martini (cocktail)" label="martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409224" start="3763" end="3773" title="D&amp;#x27;oh!" label="D&amp;#x27;oh!"/>
<link wikidata="Q393018" start="3908" end="3916" title="I, Robot" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q200572" start="3934" end="3974" title="I, Robot (film)" label="the sci-fi action movie of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052229" start="4045" end="4057" title="robot combat" label="robot combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q566838" start="4070" end="4080" title="Robot Wars (TV series)" label="Robot Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176031" start="4097" end="4107" title="BattleBots" label="BattleBots"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="4187" end="4201" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096870" start="4209" end="4225" title="Chief Noc-A-Homa" label="Chief Noc-A-Homa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276876" start="4291" end="4308" title="Magic Carpet Ride (Steppenwolf song)" label="Magic Carpet Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q465862" start="4328" end="4339" title="Steppenwolf (band)" label="Steppenwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q231484" start="4496" end="4509" title="Roberta Flack" label="Roberta Flack"/>
<link wikidata="Q652262" start="4510" end="4514" title="Killing Me Softly with His Song" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q850290" start="4536" end="4553" title="Kool and the Gang" label="Kool and the Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973143" start="4640" end="4660" title="Watching Scotty Grow" label="Watching Scotty Grow"/>
<link wikidata="Q888545" start="4680" end="4695" title="Bobby Goldsboro" label="Bobby Goldsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499697" start="4748" end="4768" title="Saturdays of Thunder" label="Saturdays of Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="4880" end="4890" title="blood loss" label="blood loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="4897" end="4907" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976616" start="4982" end="4987" title="Terminator (character)" label="T-800"/>
<link wikidata="Q620588" start="5016" end="5026" title="Terminator (franchise)" label="Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="5168" end="5180" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="5302" end="5309" title="RoboCop (1987 film)" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="5427" end="5440" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q335798" start="5496" end="5513" title="Sugar Ray Leonard" label="Sugar Ray Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q491892" start="5612" end="5620" title="Static-X" label="Static-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643110" start="5716" end="5727" title="Hokey Pokey" label="Hokey Pokey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266232" wikidata="Q1975600" url="?curid=1266232" title="Stock Car Pro Series">
<text>Stock Car Pro Series, formerly known as Stock Car Brasil, is a touring car auto racing series based in Brazil organized by Vicar. It is considered the major Brazilian and South American motorsports series. Starting in 1979 with Chevrolet as the only constructor, the series has also seen other constructors joining in and leaving such as Mitsubishi, Peugeot and Volkswagen, currently the only other besides Chevrolet is Toyota. The series is composed of 12 rounds, with the most important race, the Corrida do Milhão (English: &quot;The&quot; &quot;Million Race&quot;) being worth double points and has a prize pool of R$1 million. The competition has seen many internationally famous drivers in its ranks, such as Rubens Barrichello, Felipe Massa, Jacques Villeneuve, Lucas di Grassi, Nelson Piquet Jr., Ricardo Zonta, Tony Kanaan and António Félix da Costa.

There&#x27;s also the Stock Series, formerly known as Stock Car Light, serving as the access category to the Pro Series.

==History==
===1970s===
The series was created in 1979 as an alternative to the former Division 1 championship that competed with Chevrolet Opala and Ford Maverick. The dominance of Chevrolet over Ford models was causing a lack of public interest and sponsors. General Motors then created a new category, with a name reminiscent of the famous NASCAR with standardized performance and components for all competitors. The first race was run on 22 April 1979 at the Autódromo Internacional de Tarumã, Rio Grande do Sul with 19 cars competing, all of them being 6-cylinder Chevrolet Opalas. The pole position was held by José Carlos Palhares, and the race was won by Affonso Giaffone.

===1980s===

This decade saw the emergence of several rivalries between drivers. In 1982 two races were held for the first time at the Autodromo do Estoril, Portugal.

The first major change in the Stock Car standard occurred in 1987. With the support of General Motors, a fairing designed and built by coachbuilder Caio was adopted, which was adapted to the Opala&#x27;s chassis. The car exhibited improved aerodynamics and performance. Safety equipment become more sophisticated.

===1990s===
In 1990 General Motors renewed its interest in the category and built a prototype intended to replace the Caio/Hidroplas model.

In 1991 new rules were established and the races were disputed in double rounds on the weekends, with two drivers per car, but the series continued to lose ground with the public, sponsors and television networks to other championships with many manufacturers involved, such as Campeonato Brasileiro de Marcas e Pilotos that included the involvement of Chevrolet, Fiat, Ford and Volkswagen, as well as the always popular Formula racing championships.

In 1994 the championship returned to the old rules and Chevrolet announced that the Chevrolet Omega would be introduced as the new standard model. As part of a marketing strategy and in order to reduce costs, the tickets were free and the races were now held in double rounds sponsored by Brazilian Formula Chevrolet in an event called &quot;Chevrolet Challenger&quot;. This decade marked a dominant era for Ingo Hoffmann with eight titles, three in partnership with Ângelo Giombell. His only serious challenges came from Paulo Gomes in 1995 and Chico Serra in 1999.

===2000s===
From 2000 on, General Motors departed the series&#x27; management and Vicar Promoções Desportivas, owned by former racing driver Carlos Col, took over the organization. This ushered in a period of modernization and improved security as the category started to use a tubular chassis designated JL G-09. The project engineer was Edgardo Fernandez, who did something similar for the Argentina category Top Race V6, inspired by both NASCAR and the DTM. The chassis was built by Zeca Giaffone&#x27;s JL Racing.

In 2003 the category replaced the Chevrolet 6-cylinder engine used with modifications since 1979 with a Chevrolet V8 imported from the United States by JL Racing, similar to the engines used by the NASCAR Busch Series. Despite not managing the series anymore, General Motors still participated in the series with the Vectra.

In 2005 Mitsubishi entered the series with the Mitsubishi Lancer, marking the first time in the series&#x27; history in which Chevrolet was not the sole manufacturer competing. 30 October of that same year marked the first race held in Argentina at Autódromo Juan y Oscar Gálvez, alongside the TC 2000 category. Attendance was 70,000. Giuliano Losacco was the winner, with Mateus Greipel second and Luciano Burti coming in third.

In 2006, Volkswagen entered in the series with the Bora and the championship adopted a point system similar to the one used in NASCAR, as well as a new system with 16 teams and 32 drivers. At the end of the season, the 10 best drivers were automatically qualified to run the 4 final races, called &quot;Super Final&quot;, similar to the Chase for the Sprint Cup. 

The 2007 season marked the largest amount of manufacturers competing in the category, with the entrance of Peugeot and the 307 Sedan. The season had the presence of Chevrolet, Mitsubishi, Peugeot, and Volkswagen. Volkswagen announced it was withdrawing from the category in 2008, with two-time champion Mitsubishi doing the same one year later in 2009. In 2008, the championship changed from Pirelli tires to Goodyear.

===2010s===

In 2010 the category started using ethanol as fuel and engines with electronic injection.

In 2011, Peugeot re-entered the championship announced with the 408 sedan model, replacing the 307. In 2012, Chevrolet introduced the Chevrolet Sonic as its competing model, replacing the Vectra. 2012 was also the last season in which Goodyear supplied tires, with Pirelli returning as the sole tire supplier in the championship from 2013 onward. The category announced changes in the championship for the 2012 season, dropping the &quot;Super Final&quot; system. The scoring system was also changed, with the top twenty drivers in each race being awarded points.

For the 2016 season, General Motors announced the Chevrolet Cruze as the replacement for the Sonic. In 2017, Peugeot announced its withdrawal from the championship, leaving Chevrolet as the sole automaker to compete in the series, making it a one-make championship, with all drivers using Cruze models. 

=== 2020s ===

In 2020, Toyota Gazoo Racing entered alongside Chevrolet, fielding a regulation version of their Toyota Corolla, which received a facelift in 2021. The season also saw a return to a monocoque chassis, replacing the tubular chassis used since 2000. On 12 December 2022, Vicar and Pirelli announced that they would not be renewing their contract and that from 2023 onward, Stock Car, Stock Series, and the F4 Brazil Championship will be supplied exclusively by Hankook.

In 2025, the series will switch to a Crossover SUV-based formula. A decision based on Brazilian passenger vehicle sales, the Chevrolet Tracker and Toyota Corolla Cross will replace the existing cars whilst Mitsubishi will return to the category with the Eclipse Cross.

==Support races==
Created in 1992, the &quot;Brazilian Formula Chevrolet&quot; was the Series&#x27; main support category. It used the same chassis as Formula Opel until 1994, subsequently switching to a Techspeed chassis until 2002, which was the same year the category was retired.

The &quot;Stock Car Light&quot; second tier was created in 1993, and reformulated in 2008 to become the &quot;Copa Vicar&quot;. After a merger with Pick-up Racing Brasil, the &quot;Copa Chevrolet Montana&quot; was established and standardized around the Chevrolet Montana model. Pick-up Racing Brasil was a category created in 2001 but only became part of the Stock Car Brasil programme until 2006.

The &quot;Stock Car Jr.&quot; third tier was created in 2006. It was intended for young and amateur drivers moving from Kart racing. In 2010 the category was replaced with the &quot;Mini Challenge Brasil&quot;. After three seasons it was cancelled.

==Manufacturer representation==


==Scoring systems==

=== Prior 2012 ===
=== 2012–2013 ===
=== 2014–2015 ===
Points were awarded for each race at an event, to the driver/s of a car that completed at least 75% of the race distance and was running at the completion of the race, up to a maximum of 48 points per event.

*Dual Race: Used for the first round with Wildcard drivers.
*Feature races: Used for the first race of each event and the Stock Car Million race.
*Sprint races: Used for the second race of each event, with partially reversed (top ten) grid.
*Final race: Used for the last round of the season with double points.

=== 2016 ===
Points are awarded for each race at an event to the driver/s of a car that completed at least 75% of the race distance and was running at the completion of the race, up to a maximum of 60 points per event.

*Dual Race: Used for the first round with Wildcard drivers.
*Feature races: Used for the first race of each event and the Stock Car Million race.
*Sprint races: Used for the second race of each event, with partially reversed (top ten) grid.
*Final race: Used for the last round of the season with double points.

=== 2017 ===
Points are awarded for each race at an event to the driver/s of a car that completed at least 75% of the race distance and was running at the completion of the race.

*Feature races: Used for the first race of each event.
*Sprint races: Used for the second race of each event, with partially reversed (top ten) grid.
*Million Race: Used for One Million dollars race.
*Final race: Used for the last round of the season with double points.

=== 2018 ===
Points are awarded for each race at an event to the driver/s of a car that completed at least 75% of the race distance and was running at the completion of the race.

*Feature races: Used for the first race of each event.
*First race/Sprint races: Used the first round with wildcards drivers and for the second race of each event, with partially reversed (top ten) grid .
*Million Race: Used for One Million dollars race.
*Final race: Used for the last round of the season with double points.

=== 2019–2023 ===
Points are awarded for each race at an event to the driver/s of a car that completed at least 75% of the race distance and was running at the completion of the race.

*Feature races Used for the first race of each event.
*Sprint races:The second race of each event, with partially reversed (top ten) grid.
*Final race: Used for the last round of the season with double points.

=== Since 2024 ===
==Speed records==

==Drivers==
===Notable drivers===

* Affonso Giaffone Jr. (1979–1980s) – The winner of the first race in 1979, and the champion of the 1981 season. The father of Affonso Giaffone, a former IndyCar Series driver.
* Paulo Gomes (1979–2003/2007) – The winner of the first season in 1979, also 4-time champion.
* Chico Serra (1999–2009) – 3-time champion (1999, 2000 and 2001)
* Ingo Hoffmann (1979–2008) – 12-time champion (1980, 1985, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1996, 1997, 1998 and 2002) and the driver with the most series wins overall with 77. He competed from 1979 to 2008.
* Cacá Bueno (2002–) – 5-time Champion: (2006, 2007, 2009, 2011 and 2012). Runner-up: 2003, 2004 and 2005. He is the son of the sports commentator Galvão Bueno.
* Daniel Serra (2007–) – 3-time champion (2017, 2018 and 2019), 2-time 24 Hours of Le Mans GTE Pro class winner (2017 and 2019) and son of Chico Serra.

===Former Formula One drivers===
;Currently in the series
* Ricardo Zonta (2007–)
* Rubens Barrichello (2012–)
* Nelson Piquet Jr. (2014–2015, 2018–)
*Felipe Massa (2018, 2021–)

;Formerly in the series
* Ingo Hoffmann (1979–2008)
* Raul Boesel (1979, 2003–2005)
* Chico Serra (1980s – 2007 / 2009 / 2014)
* Tarso Marques (2005–2011, 2018)
* Roberto Moreno (2005)
* Jacques Villeneuve (2011 / 2015)
* Alex Ribeiro (1980s)
* Wilson Fittipaldi (1980s – early 1990s)
* Christian Fittipaldi (2005–2007 / 2010)
* Luciano Burti (2005–2018)
*Antônio Pizzonia (2007–2018)
* Enrique Bernoldi (2007 / 2009 / 2014–2015)
* Esteban Tuero (2005)
* Luiz Bueno (1982)
* Bruno Senna (2013–2014)
*Lucas di Grassi (2014–2015, 2018–2019)
* Ricardo Rosset (2014–2015)
* Roberto Merhi (2014)
* Jaime Alguersuari (2015)
* Vitantonio Liuzzi (2015)
* Jérôme d&#x27;Ambrosio (2018)

==Champions==
All champions are Brazilian-registered.
==Circuits==

Races are held mostly on road courses, although a race was held on a street circuit in Salvador for the first time in 2009. The tracks for the 2025 season are:

* Autódromo José Carlos Pace (Interlagos), São Paulo, SP (1979–present)
* Autódromo Internacional de Cascavel, Cascavel, PR (1979–1981, 1983–1993, 1995–1997, 2000, 2012–2021, 2023–present)
* Velopark, Nova Santa Rita, RS (2010–2019, 2022–present)
* Autódromo Velo Città, Mogi Guaçu, SP (2017–present)
* Belo Horizonte Street Circuit, Belo Horizonte, MG (2024–present)
* Autódromo Internacional Ayrton Senna (Goiânia), Goiânia, GO (1979–1981, 1983–2001, 2004, 2014–present)
* Autódromo Brasília BRB, Brasília, DF (1979–1981, 1983–1986, 1988–1992, 1994–2014, 2025)

Former circuits include:

* Autódromo Internacional Ayrton Senna (Londrina), Londrina, PR (1993–1995, 1997, 1999–2008, 2010–2012, 2016–2020)
* Autódromo Internacional de Curitiba, Pinhais, PR (1980–2018, 2020–2021)
* Autódromo Internacional de Guaporé, Guaporé, RS (1979–1981, 1983–1995, 2000, 2002)
* Autódromo Internacional de Santa Cruz do Sul, Santa Cruz do Sul, RS (2005–2011, 2014–2019, 2021–2022)
* Autódromo Internacional de Tarumã, Viamão, RS (1979–1981, 1983–1996, 1998–2001, 2004–2009, 2012–2017, 2023)
* Autódromo Internacional Nelson Piquet (Jacarepaguá), Rio de Janeiro, RJ (1979–2012)
* Autódromo Internacional Orlando Moura, Campo Grande, MS (2002–2004, 2006–2011, 2015, 2018–2019)
* Autódromo Internacional Virgílio Távora, Fortaleza, CE (1979, 1984, 1989, 1992)
* Autódromo Juan y Oscar Gálvez, Buenos Aires (2005–2007, 2017, 2023–2024)
* Autódromo Víctor Borrat Fabini, El Pinar (2024)
* Circuito Ayrton Senna, Salvador, BA (2009–2014)
* Circuito Cacá Bueno, Rio de Janeiro, RJ (2022)
* Circuito do Estoril, Estoril (1982)
* Circuito dos Cristais, Curvelo, MG (2016–2017)
* Ribeirão Preto Street Circuit, Ribeirão Preto, SP (2010–2013, 2015)

==Fatal accidents==
There have been five fatal accidents:

* In 1985, Zeca Greguricinski, died at Interlagos from burns suffered after a crash.
* In June 2001, Laércio Justino, died at Nelson Piquet Circuit of Brasília after losing control of the car and crashing at the pit lane entrance.
* In September 2003, Raphael Lima Pereira, a 19-year-old photographer, was hit by Gualter Salles at Campo Grande circuit and died. He was near the safety area at the time of the accident.
* On 9 December 2007, Rafael Sperafico, of the Sperafico racing family, died during the final race of the Stock Car Light 2007 season at Interlagos. His cousins Rodrigo and Ricardo Sperafico compete in the top-level series. It was the first fatal accident in the Stock Car Light series.
* On 3 April 2011, Gustavo Sondermann, competing in a Copa Chevrolet Montana race, was killed at Interlagos in an accident almost identical to that of Sperafico four years earlier.

==Video games==
The first official video game was Game Stock Car in 2011, with a followup title Stock Car Extreme launched in 2013. Both were developed by Reiza Studios.

In 2014, Both the Peugeot 408 and a non-licensed version of the Chevrolet Sonic called &quot;ADC Presteza&quot; were present in the Category A Touring Cars class of Grid Autosport..

Automobilista, released in 2016 and developed by Reiza Studios using the rFactor engine, featured the full 2015 and 2017 car grids and circuits. Automobilista 2, released in 2020 using the Project CARS engine, adding the 2019 and 2020 cars and circuits.

Racing simulator iRacing has included the Stock Car Pro Series cars in the game since 2022.

==See also==
*Copa Truck
*Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters
*NASCAR
**NASCAR Brasil Sprint Race
*TC 2000 Championship
*World Touring Car Cup
*Brazilian Automobile Confederation
*Stock Series

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Official website of the Stock Car Pro Series</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1975600" start="0" end="20" title="Stock Car Pro Series" label="Stock Car Pro Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975600" start="40" end="56" title="Stock Car Pro Series" label="Stock Car Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245261" start="63" end="74" title="touring car racing" label="touring car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="75" end="86" title="auto racing" label="auto racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="103" end="109" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="171" end="184" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="228" end="237" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="338" end="348" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="350" end="357" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="362" end="372" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="420" end="426" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617853" start="499" end="516" title="Stock Car Corrida do Milhão" label="Corrida do Milhão"/>
<link wikidata="Q173117" start="619" end="621" title="Brazilian real" label="R$"/>
<link wikidata="Q169846" start="715" end="733" title="Rubens Barrichello" label="Rubens Barrichello"/>
<link wikidata="Q82652" start="735" end="747" title="Felipe Massa" label="Felipe Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172843" start="749" end="767" title="Jacques Villeneuve" label="Jacques Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q172783" start="769" end="784" title="Lucas di Grassi" label="Lucas di Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172838" start="786" end="803" title="Nelson Piquet Jr." label="Nelson Piquet Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q172004" start="805" end="818" title="Ricardo Zonta" label="Ricardo Zonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q529528" start="820" end="831" title="Tony Kanaan" label="Tony Kanaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q610922" start="836" end="858" title="António Félix da Costa" label="António Félix da Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028273" start="883" end="895" title="Stock Car Light" label="Stock Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071255" start="1113" end="1128" title="Chevrolet Opala" label="Chevrolet Opala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278275" start="1133" end="1146" title="Ford Maverick (Americas)" label="Ford Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="1165" end="1174" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1180" end="1184" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="1244" end="1258" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="1326" end="1332" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827229" start="1446" end="1479" title="Autódromo Internacional de Tarumã" label="Autódromo Internacional de Tarumã"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="1481" end="1498" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1600" end="1620" title="José Carlos Palhares" label="José Carlos Palhares"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689028" start="1646" end="1662" title="Affonso Giaffone" label="Affonso Giaffone"/>
<link wikidata="Q172890" start="1800" end="1820" title="Autodromo do Estoril" label="Autodromo do Estoril"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028271" start="2567" end="2608" title="Campeonato Brasileiro de Marcas e Pilotos" label="Campeonato Brasileiro de Marcas e Pilotos"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="2642" end="2651" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="2653" end="2657" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="2659" end="2663" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="2668" end="2678" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199515" start="2710" end="2724" title="Formula racing" label="Formula racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071252" start="2825" end="2840" title="Chevrolet Omega" label="Chevrolet Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q171754" start="3149" end="3162" title="Ingo Hoffmann" label="Ingo Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q171507" start="3287" end="3298" title="Chico Serra" label="Chico Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q578444" start="3587" end="3602" title="tubular chassis" label="tubular chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401747" start="3720" end="3731" title="Top Race V6" label="Top Race V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q217000" start="3765" end="3768" title="Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters" label="DTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108477" start="3816" end="3825" title="JL Racing" label="JL Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="3942" end="3944" title="V8 engine" label="V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3963" end="3976" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q246644" start="4145" end="4151" title="Chevrolet Vectra" label="Vectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="4162" end="4172" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q272268" start="4201" end="4218" title="Mitsubishi Lancer" label="Mitsubishi Lancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="4390" end="4399" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q173116" start="4403" end="4432" title="Autódromo Juan y Oscar Gálvez" label="Autódromo Juan y Oscar Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272469" start="4448" end="4455" title="TC 2000 Championship" label="TC 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q171429" start="4553" end="4566" title="Luciano Burti" label="Luciano Burti"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="4594" end="4604" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417237" start="4636" end="4640" title="Volkswagen Bora" label="Bora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068013" start="4922" end="4946" title="Chase for the Sprint Cup" label="Chase for the Sprint Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="5057" end="5064" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q215227" start="5073" end="5082" title="Peugeot 307" label="307 Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207770" start="5342" end="5349" title="Pirelli" label="Pirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="5359" end="5367" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="5418" end="5425" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="5451" end="5471" title="Fuel injection" label="electronic injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339701" start="5538" end="5541" title="Peugeot 408 (saloon)" label="408"/>
<link wikidata="Q497226" start="5608" end="5623" title="Chevrolet Sonic" label="Chevrolet Sonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q494073" start="6089" end="6104" title="Chevrolet Cruze" label="Chevrolet Cruze"/>
<link wikidata="Q173625" start="6368" end="6387" title="Toyota Motorsport GmbH" label="Toyota Gazoo Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="6456" end="6470" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Toyota Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="6541" end="6550" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q207770" start="6638" end="6645" title="Pirelli" label="Pirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q493094" start="6818" end="6825" title="Hankook" label="Hankook"/>
<link wikidata="Q875600" start="6865" end="6878" title="Crossover (automobile)" label="Crossover SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q64578458" start="6953" end="6970" title="Chevrolet Tracker (2019)" label="Chevrolet Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q97094785" start="6975" end="6995" title="Toyota Corolla Cross" label="Toyota Corolla Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="7034" end="7044" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28956871" start="7082" end="7095" title="Mitsubishi Eclipse Cross" label="Eclipse Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q976347" start="7637" end="7654" title="Chevrolet Montana" label="Chevrolet Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617853" start="9007" end="9024" title="Stock Car Corrida do Milhão" label="Stock Car Million"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10628" end="10648" title="Affonso Giaffone Jr." label="Affonso Giaffone Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4689028" start="10753" end="10769" title="Affonso Giaffone" label="Affonso Giaffone"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="10780" end="10794" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155220" start="10805" end="10816" title="Paulo Gomes (racing driver)" label="Paulo Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171507" start="10900" end="10911" title="Chico Serra" label="Chico Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q171754" start="10966" end="10979" title="Ingo Hoffmann" label="Ingo Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q919163" start="11178" end="11188" title="Cacá Bueno" label="Cacá Bueno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637990" start="11323" end="11335" title="Galvão Bueno" label="Galvão Bueno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218740" start="11339" end="11351" title="Daniel Serra" label="Daniel Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="11408" end="11427" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q171507" start="11476" end="11487" title="Chico Serra" label="Chico Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172004" start="11550" end="11563" title="Ricardo Zonta" label="Ricardo Zonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q169846" start="11574" end="11592" title="Rubens Barrichello" label="Rubens Barrichello"/>
<link wikidata="Q172838" start="11603" end="11620" title="Nelson Piquet Jr." label="Nelson Piquet Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q82652" start="11641" end="11653" title="Felipe Massa" label="Felipe Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171754" start="11695" end="11708" title="Ingo Hoffmann" label="Ingo Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q171727" start="11723" end="11734" title="Raul Boesel" label="Raul Boesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q171507" start="11755" end="11766" title="Chico Serra" label="Chico Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q171439" start="11798" end="11811" title="Tarso Marques" label="Tarso Marques"/>
<link wikidata="Q171427" start="11832" end="11846" title="Roberto Moreno" label="Roberto Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q172843" start="11856" end="11874" title="Jacques Villeneuve" label="Jacques Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q172893" start="11891" end="11903" title="Alex Ribeiro" label="Alex Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q173296" start="11914" end="11931" title="Wilson Fittipaldi Júnior" label="Wilson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172954" start="11956" end="11976" title="Christian Fittipaldi" label="Christian Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171429" start="11998" end="12011" title="Luciano Burti" label="Luciano Burti"/>
<link wikidata="Q172734" start="12025" end="12041" title="Antônio Pizzonia" label="Antônio Pizzonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172961" start="12056" end="12072" title="Enrique Bernoldi" label="Enrique Bernoldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173298" start="12101" end="12114" title="Esteban Tuero" label="Esteban Tuero"/>
<link wikidata="Q172053" start="12124" end="12134" title="Luiz Bueno" label="Luiz Bueno"/>
<link wikidata="Q82864" start="12144" end="12155" title="Bruno Senna" label="Bruno Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172783" start="12169" end="12184" title="Lucas di Grassi" label="Lucas di Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171431" start="12210" end="12224" title="Ricardo Rosset" label="Ricardo Rosset"/>
<link wikidata="Q977386" start="12239" end="12252" title="Roberto Merhi" label="Roberto Merhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171355" start="12262" end="12279" title="Jaime Alguersuari" label="Jaime Alguersuari"/>
<link wikidata="Q171294" start="12289" end="12306" title="Vitantonio Liuzzi" label="Vitantonio Liuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171996" start="12316" end="12338" title="Jérôme d&amp;#x27;Ambrosio" label="Jérôme d&amp;#x27;Ambrosio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404296" start="12440" end="12451" title="road course" label="road course"/>
<link wikidata="Q926439" start="12484" end="12498" title="street circuit" label="street circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="12502" end="12510" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q171387" start="12578" end="12604" title="Autódromo José Carlos Pace" label="Autódromo José Carlos Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="12619" end="12628" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="12630" end="12632" title="São Paulo (state)" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827226" start="12650" end="12685" title="Autódromo Internacional de Cascavel" label="Autódromo Internacional de Cascavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205681" start="12687" end="12695" title="Cascavel" label="Cascavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499" start="12697" end="12699" title="Paraná (state)" label="PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919310" start="12767" end="12775" title="Velopark (Brazil)" label="Velopark"/>
<link wikidata="Q985571" start="12777" end="12792" title="Nova Santa Rita" label="Nova Santa Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="12794" end="12796" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="RS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16495395" start="12825" end="12845" title="Autódromo Velo Città" label="Autódromo Velo Città"/>
<link wikidata="Q956172" start="12847" end="12857" title="Mogi Guaçu" label="Mogi Guaçu"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="12859" end="12861" title="São Paulo (state)" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q123857547" start="12879" end="12908" title="Belo Horizonte Street Circuit" label="Belo Horizonte Street Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="12910" end="12924" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="12926" end="12928" title="Minas Gerais" label="MG"/>
<link wikidata="Q789407" start="12946" end="12992" title="Autódromo Internacional Ayrton Senna (Goiânia)" label="Autódromo Internacional Ayrton Senna (Goiânia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83189" start="12994" end="13001" title="Goiânia" label="Goiânia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41587" start="13003" end="13005" title="Goiás" label="GO"/>
<link wikidata="Q173835" start="13051" end="13073" title="Autódromo Internacional Nelson Piquet (Brasília)" label="Autódromo Brasília BRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="13075" end="13083" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q119158" start="13085" end="13087" title="Federal District (Brazil)" label="DF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827223" start="13168" end="13215" title="Autódromo Internacional Ayrton Senna (Londrina)" label="Autódromo Internacional Ayrton Senna (Londrina)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192387" start="13217" end="13225" title="Londrina" label="Londrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499" start="13227" end="13229" title="Paraná (state)" label="PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q537078" start="13283" end="13318" title="Autódromo Internacional de Curitiba" label="Autódromo Internacional de Curitiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788891" start="13320" end="13327" title="Pinhais" label="Pinhais"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499" start="13329" end="13331" title="Paraná (state)" label="PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q789413" start="13357" end="13391" title="Autódromo Internacional de Guaporé" label="Autódromo Internacional de Guaporé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758136" start="13393" end="13400" title="Guaporé, Rio Grande do Sul" label="Guaporé"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="13402" end="13404" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="RS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827228" start="13442" end="13486" title="Autódromo Internacional de Santa Cruz do Sul" label="Autódromo Internacional de Santa Cruz do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q781510" start="13488" end="13505" title="Santa Cruz do Sul" label="Santa Cruz do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="13507" end="13509" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="RS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827229" start="13546" end="13579" title="Autódromo Internacional de Tarumã" label="Autódromo Internacional de Tarumã"/>
<link wikidata="Q732905" start="13581" end="13587" title="Viamão" label="Viamão"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="13589" end="13591" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="RS"/>
<link wikidata="Q171437" start="13656" end="13693" title="Autódromo Internacional Nelson Piquet" label="Autódromo Internacional Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="13709" end="13723" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="13725" end="13727" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="RJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827224" start="13742" end="13779" title="Autódromo Internacional Orlando Moura" label="Autódromo Internacional Orlando Moura"/>
<link wikidata="Q168929" start="13781" end="13793" title="Campo Grande" label="Campo Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q43319" start="13795" end="13797" title="Mato Grosso do Sul" label="MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16495392" start="13840" end="13879" title="Autódromo Internacional Virgílio Távora" label="Autódromo Internacional Virgílio Távora"/>
<link wikidata="Q43463" start="13881" end="13890" title="Fortaleza" label="Fortaleza"/>
<link wikidata="Q40123" start="13892" end="13894" title="Ceará" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q173116" start="13922" end="13951" title="Autódromo Juan y Oscar Gálvez" label="Autódromo Juan y Oscar Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="13953" end="13965" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713032" start="13997" end="14027" title="Autódromo Víctor Borrat Fabini" label="Autódromo Víctor Borrat Fabini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324503" start="14029" end="14037" title="El Pinar, Uruguay" label="El Pinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9765146" start="14047" end="14068" title="Circuito Ayrton Senna" label="Circuito Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="14070" end="14078" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="14080" end="14082" title="Bahia" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q120176354" start="14097" end="14116" title="Cacá Bueno Circuit" label="Circuito Cacá Bueno"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="14118" end="14132" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="14134" end="14136" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="RJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q172890" start="14146" end="14165" title="Circuito do Estoril" label="Circuito do Estoril"/>
<link wikidata="Q193305" start="14167" end="14174" title="Estoril" label="Estoril"/>
<link wikidata="Q28679621" start="14184" end="14205" title="Circuito dos Cristais" label="Circuito dos Cristais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749748" start="14207" end="14214" title="Curvelo" label="Curvelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="14216" end="14218" title="Minas Gerais" label="MG"/>
<link wikidata="Q10277715" start="14233" end="14262" title="Ribeirão Preto Street Circuit" label="Ribeirão Preto Street Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188892" start="14264" end="14278" title="Ribeirão Preto" label="Ribeirão Preto"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="14280" end="14282" title="São Paulo (state)" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14372" end="14390" title="Zeca Greguricinski" label="Zeca Greguricinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q171387" start="14400" end="14410" title="Autódromo José Carlos Pace" label="Interlagos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14462" end="14477" title="Laércio Justino" label="Laércio Justino"/>
<link wikidata="Q173835" start="14487" end="14520" title="Autódromo Internacional Nelson Piquet (Brasília)" label="Nelson Piquet Circuit of Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q961283" start="14674" end="14688" title="Gualter Salles" label="Gualter Salles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079042" start="14802" end="14818" title="Rafael Sperafico" label="Rafael Sperafico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309101" start="14827" end="14836" title="Sperafico" label="Sperafico"/>
<link wikidata="Q303796" start="14941" end="14948" title="Rodrigo Sperafico" label="Rodrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364342" start="14953" end="14970" title="Ricardo Sperafico" label="Ricardo Sperafico"/>
<link wikidata="Q780759" start="15086" end="15104" title="Gustavo Sondermann" label="Gustavo Sondermann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15299" end="15313" title="Game Stock Car" label="Game Stock Car"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15345" end="15362" title="Stock Car Extreme" label="Stock Car Extreme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15404" end="15417" title="Reiza Studios" label="Reiza Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982737" start="15585" end="15599" title="Grid Autosport" label="Grid Autosport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15603" end="15616" title="Automobilista" label="Automobilista"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15652" end="15665" title="Reiza Studios" label="Reiza Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q310422" start="15676" end="15683" title="rFactor" label="rFactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="15684" end="15690" title="Game engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069428" start="15792" end="15804" title="Project CARS (video game)" label="Project CARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q254255" start="15875" end="15882" title="iRacing" label="iRacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48879618" start="15965" end="15975" title="Copa Truck" label="Copa Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q217000" start="15977" end="16005" title="Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters" label="Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="16007" end="16013" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q117066230" start="16016" end="16041" title="NASCAR Brasil Sprint Race" label="NASCAR Brasil Sprint Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272469" start="16043" end="16063" title="TC 2000 Championship" label="TC 2000 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q47795891" start="16065" end="16086" title="World Touring Car Cup" label="World Touring Car Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q105722372" start="16088" end="16122" title="Brazilian Automobile Confederation" label="Brazilian Automobile Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028273" start="16124" end="16136" title="Stock Series" label="Stock Series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266240" wikidata="Q6056706" url="?curid=1266240" title="Intersection algorithm">
<text>The intersection algorithm is an agreement algorithm used to select sources for estimating accurate time from a number of noisy time sources. It forms part of the modern Network Time Protocol. It is a modified form of Marzullo&#x27;s algorithm.

While Marzullo&#x27;s algorithm will return the smallest interval consistent with the largest number of sources, the returned interval does not necessarily include the center point (calculated offset) of all the sources in the intersection. The intersection algorithm returns an interval that includes that returned by Marzullo&#x27;s algorithm but may be larger since it will include the center points. This larger interval allows using additional statistical data to select a point within the interval, reducing the jitter in repeated execution.

==Method==

Given &quot;M&quot; intervals of the form &quot;c&quot; ± &quot;r&quot; (which means [&quot;c&quot;−&quot;r&quot;,&quot;c&quot;+&quot;r&quot;]), the algorithm seeks to find an interval with &quot;M&quot;−&quot;f&quot; sources. The value &quot;f&quot; is referred to as the number of falsetickers, those sources which are in error (the actual value is outside the confidence band). The best estimate is that which assumes the fewest falsetickers, &quot;f&quot;. The results will be considered valid if &quot;f&quot; &lt; &quot;M&quot;/2, otherwise the algorithm will return failure instead of an interval.

The intersection algorithm begins by creating a table of tuples &lt;offset, type&gt;. For each interval there are three entries: the lower endpoint, the midpoint and the upper endpoint, labelled with types −1, 0 and +1 respectively. Thus the interval &quot;c&quot; ± &quot;r&quot; results in the entries &lt;&quot;c&quot;−&quot;r&quot;,−1&gt;, &lt;&quot;c&quot;,0&gt; and &lt;&quot;c&quot;+&quot;r&quot;,+1&gt;. These entries are then sorted by offset.

Variables: This algorithm uses &quot;f&quot; as number of false tickers, &quot;endcount&quot; and &quot;midcount&quot; are integers. &quot;Lower&quot; and &quot;upper&quot; are values of offsets.

==References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6056706" start="4" end="26" title="Intersection algorithm" label="intersection algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="122" end="127" title="noise" label="noisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217491" start="170" end="191" title="Network Time Protocol" label="Network Time Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781885" start="218" end="243" title="Marzullo&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Marzullo&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052698" start="764" end="770" title="jitter" label="jitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160083" start="1170" end="1185" title="confidence band" label="confidence band"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266242" wikidata="Q4366609" url="?curid=1266242" title="Pogon">
<text>Pogon may refer to:

* Pogon, Albania, a municipality in Gjirokastër District, Gjirokastër County, Albania
* Pogoń, a Knight-in-pursuit coat of arms of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania
* Pogoni, a municipality in Ioannina regional unit, Greece
* Pogoń Siedlce, a Polish football club
* Pogoń Siedlce, a Polish rugby union club
* Pogoń Szczecin, a Polish football club
* Pogoń Lwów (1904), a defunct Polish football club
* Pogoń Lwów, a Ukrainian football club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2712822" start="23" end="37" title="Pogon, Albania" label="Pogon, Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188047" start="109" end="114" title="Pogoń" label="Pogoń"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207540" start="183" end="189" title="Pogoni" label="Pogoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845557" start="242" end="255" title="MKP Pogoń Siedlce" label="Pogoń Siedlce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="266" end="274" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821060" start="282" end="295" title="MKS Pogoń Siedlce (rugby union)" label="Pogoń Siedlce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="306" end="317" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q836991" start="325" end="339" title="Pogoń Szczecin" label="Pogoń Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q941363" start="366" end="383" title="Pogoń Lwów" label="Pogoń Lwów (1904)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694782" start="418" end="428" title="Pogoń Lwów (2009)" label="Pogoń Lwów"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266244" wikidata="Q1976696" url="?curid=1266244" title="Genealogies of Genesis">
<text>The genealogies of Genesis provide the framework around which the Book of Genesis is structured. Beginning with Adam, genealogical material in Genesis 4, 5, 10, 11, 22, 25, 29–30, 35–36, and 46 moves the narrative forward from the creation to the beginnings of the Israelites&#x27; existence as a people.

Adam&#x27;s lineage in Genesis contains two branches: Chapter 4 giving the descendants of Cain, and Chapter 5 that for Seth that is then continued in later chapters. Chapter 10 gives the Generations of Noah (also called the Table of Nations) that records the populating of the Earth by Noah&#x27;s descendants, and is not strictly a genealogy but an ethnography.

Genesis 5 and Genesis 11 include the age at which each patriarch had the progeny named as well as the number of years he lived thereafter. Many of the ages given in the text are long, but could have been considered modest in comparison to the ages given in other works (for instance, the Sumerian King List).

The ages include patterns surrounding the numbers five and seven, for instance the 365 year life of Enoch (the same as the number of full calendar days in a solar year) and the 777 year life of Lamech (repetitional emphasis of the number seven). Overall, the ages display clear mathematical patterns, leading some people to conclude that number symbolism was used to construct them. Nevertheless, since Genesis 5 and 11 provide the age of each patriarch at the birth of his named descendant, it also appears to present a gapless chronology from Adam to Abraham, even if the named descendant is not always a first-generation son.

==Versions==
Nearly all modern translations of Genesis are derived from the Masoretic Text, but there are also two other versions of Genesis: the Samaritan Pentateuch and the Septuagint (a Greek translation of a Hebrew text). Translations from the Masoretic Text are preferred by Western Christians, including Roman Catholics and Protestants and by followers of Orthodox Judaism, whereas the Greek version is preferred by Eastern Christians, including Eastern Orthodox, Coptic, Ethiopic, Jacobite and Armenian. The Samaritan Pentateuch is held sacred by the Samaritans.

==Cain and Seth==
Genesis names three children of Adam and Eve, Cain, Abel and Seth. A genealogy tracing the descendants of Cain is given in , while the line from Seth down to Noah appears in . Scholars have noted similarities between these descents: most of the names in each are variants of those in the other, though their order differs, with the names of Enoch and Mahalalel/Mehujael switching places in the two pedigrees. It is &quot;as if they were different versions of the same underlying tradition.&quot; This has led to speculation that a single original genealogical descent had diverged during independent transmission, only to be brought back together and put to different uses when the Book of Genesis was compiled from its Jahwist and Priestly sources.









==Generations of Noah==

Following the Genesis flood narrative, a large multi-branched genealogy presents the descendants of the sons of Noah. () The 70 names given represent biblical geography, consisting of local ethnonyms and toponyms presented in the form of eponymous ancestors (names in origin-myth genealogies that are to be understood as ancestors and embodiments of the peoples whose names they bear). This is a symbolic presentation of the peopling of the world and indicates a view of the unity of the human race. The peoples and places are not organised by geography, language family or ethnic groups, and probably do not represent the geography of a particular point in history, instead deriving from an old nucleus of geographical knowledge to which additional names/peoples were subsequently added.

==Abraham&#x27;s family tree==

The following is a family tree for the descendants of the line of Noah&#x27;s son Shem, through Abraham to Jacob and his sons. Dashed lines are marriage connections.
==Genesis chrono-genealogy==
The numbers given in the text are usually similar but do vary between versions. The numbers in the Masoretic, Samaritan, and Lucianic Septuagint versions of Genesis are shown in this table:

The following table lists the patriarchs that appear in the Vulgate and the Septuagint, but their names are spelled as they appear in the King James Version of the Bible. Their year of birth differs according to the Vulgate or the Septuagint. Also given is each patriarch&#x27;s age at the birth of his named son and the age of the patriarch&#x27;s death. Cainan, born after the flood, is mentioned in the Septuagint but not the Vulgate. Methuselah survived the flood according to the Septuagint (but not the Vulgate), even though he was not on Noah&#x27;s Ark.

The genealogies of Genesis contain a difficulty with regards to the birth of Arphaxad. One method of calculating places the birth of Arphaxad 600 years after the birth of Noah, while another places Arphaxad&#x27;s birth 602 years after Noah. The table below uses the 602-year method; the 600 year method would decrease the date for Arphaxad and all the following figures by two years.

This chart counts year totals only. &quot;Anno Mundi&quot; (AM, or &#x27;in the year of the world&#x27;) can be calculated by adding 2 to any given value in either the &quot;Birth&quot; or &quot;Death&quot; columns. The result will give a corresponding date in AM. The epoch for this calendar system is 3761 BC.&quot;&quot;

&quot;(Note: the numbers in green are consistent across all versions, while the numbers in yellow are contradicted in one other version and the numbers in red are contradicted by more than one of the other versions.)&quot;
1According to most interpretations, including the New Testament Epistle to the Hebrews, Enoch did not die, but was taken away by God (at an age of 365).
Genesis states that Enoch &quot;walked with God; and he &quot;[was]&quot; not; for God took him.&quot;

2On this chart Noah is listed as having lived 502 years when he begat Shem and this calculation is based on the birth year of Arphaxad. The extra-biblical Book of Jasher also mentions that Noah was 502 years old when his wife Naamah bore Shem.

===Number symbolism===
The following table lists all the ages of the patriarchs from Adam to Moses in the Masoretic Text, which add up to 12,600.

The value of 12,600 is a variant of the symbolic value of 1,260 later used in the Book of Revelation (e.g. Rev. 11:2–11; 12:4–6, 11; 13:5), although may derive from earlier traditions. Another example of the numerical schema of 12,600 can be found in the War Scroll discovered at Qumran, where &quot;the Sons of Light shall fight against the Sons of Darkness in the final days for a period of 35 years. Employing the Jewish luni-solar calendar of the 360-day year, 35 years equals 12,600 days.&quot; The patriarchal ages were individually selected to achieve this total.

=== Usage of Anno Mundi ===
The current formal usage of the Anno Mundi calendar era is implemented based on the calculations of Maimonides in &quot;Mishneh Torah&quot; (completed in AD 1178). It is the official method of calculating years for the Hebrew calendar currently in use. Based on a calculation using the Masoretic Text recorded in the &quot;Seder Olam Rabbah&quot; (c 160 AD) of Rabbi Jose ben Halafta, the first five days of creation in Genesis were in Anno Mundi 1, and the creation of Adam was on 1 Tishrei (Rosh Hashanah) in Anno Mundi 2 which corresponds to 3760 BC. The official Anno Mundi epoch is Anno Mundi 1. This first year begins almost a full year before creation and is commonly referred to as &quot;The Year Of Emptiness&quot; or &quot;The Ascension Year&quot; in Jewish tradition and coincides with the years 3761/3760 BC.

=== Counting years ===
Counting a number of years based on an annual fixed calendar date yields a different result from a rolling year count based on dates such as birthdays which have the possibility of being at any time of the year and change depending on the individual. Using this method has led some chronologists to add or subtract a 0.5 year margin to/from the birth year of each patriarch to account for unknown birth dates.

The first mention in Genesis of the use of a fixed method to reckon years is made in Genesis 1 referring to the &quot;lights in the firmament&quot;. A fixed calendar system is usually determined by an annual epoch such as New Year&#x27;s Day (1 January) which is fixed by the alignment of astronomical objects; the reckoning of the year occurs on its epoch. Years represented in Anno Mundi dates could be interpreted to be in alignment with Rosh Hashanah and are counted according to its annual occurrence.

=== Birth years of Shem and Arphaxad ===
There are several different interpretations as to the exact birth year of Shem and his son Arphaxad. Based on Noah being at least 500 years old when he began to beget children and Noah&#x27;s sons each having an age difference, it is not uncommon to encounter chronologies that list Shem as being 98 years old when the flood began. Shem begat Arphaxad two years after the flood when he was 100 years old.

In the Masoretic, Vulgate and the Samaritan Pentateuch the method of starting from the birth of Noah and adding exactly 500 years until Shem, and adding another 100 years until the birth of Arphaxad (Born 2 years after the flood) would be the same year as the death of Methuselah following the above chart. Since Methuselah was not mentioned in Genesis among those who were aboard the ark, it is possible that his death came in the same year of the flood.

Based on the Masoretic Text, counting 1656 years on the above chart will result in being the 600th year of Noah&#x27;s life, the year of the death of Methuselah and year that the flood began. The two-year discrepancy is commonly resolved by rendering the birth year of Shem in the same year that Noah was 502 years old, and rendering Arphaxad as having been born two years after the death of Methuselah and the flood.

===Differences in the numbers===
A comparison of the Genesis 5 numbers (Adam through Noah) in the above table shows that the ages when the sons were born plus the remainders equal the totals given in each version, but each version uses different numbers to arrive at these totals. The three versions agree on some of the total ages at death, but many of the other numbers differ by exactly 100 years. The Septuagint ages of the fathers at the birth of their sons are in many instances 100 years greater than the corresponding ages in the other two versions; in Genesis 11 some of the Samaritan Pentateuch ages agree with the Septuagint ages and are also 100 years beyond that of the Masoretic and Vulgate versions.

The Samaritan chronology has Jared, Methuselah, and Lamech dying in Noah&#x27;s 600th year, the year of the flood. The Masoretic chronology also has Methuselah dying in Noah&#x27;s 600th year, but the Masoretic version uses a different chronology than the Samaritan version, with about 350 extra years between creation and flood. The Lucianic text of the Septuagint has Methuselah surviving the flood and therefore the 100 year differences were not an attempt by the Septuagint editors to have Jared, Methuselah, or Lamech die during or prior to the flood. Some scholars argue that the differences between the Masoretic and Septuagint chronologies in Genesis 5 can be explained as alterations designed to rationalize a primary Masoretic system of chronology to a later Septuagint system. According to another scholar, to assume that the Masoretic Text is primary &quot;is a mere convention for the scholarly world&quot; and &quot;it should not be postulated in advance that MT reflects the original text of the biblical books better than the other texts.&quot; The present-day Greek Orthodox Septuagint text still offers the Lucianic numbers for Methuselah, which undoubtedly are the numbers as found in the original Septuagint text, most likely based on the Hebrew original that was used for the translation. This opens the possibility that these were the original numbers in the Hebrew tradition also, that only later, after discovering the chronological discrepancy, have been changed by adapting the Methuselah numbers to 167+782=969 (in some Septuagint manuscripts) or to 187+782=969 (in some other Septuagint manuscripts as well as in the present-day Masoretic text). The scholarly Septuagint translation of the Hebrew Pentateuch into Greek at Alexandria, Egypt, in about 280 BC worked from a Hebrew text that was edited in the 5th and 4th centuries BC. This would be centuries older than the proto–Masoretic Text selected as the official text by the Masoretes.

The Genesis 5 ages were presumably intended to be read at face value, as years and not months. Attempts to rationalize the ages by translating &quot;years&quot; as &quot;months&quot; results in some of the Genesis 5 people fathering children when they were five years old (if the Masoretic chronology is assumed to be primary).

There is one discrepancy between the antediluvian chronologies of different texts of the Septuagint - the age at which Methuselah gave birth to Lamech: 167 or 187 years. Because of this, the date of the Flood is shifted by 20 years. This difference is probably due to the different lists of the Septuagint from which the translation was made. For example, according to Lucianic version of the Septuagint (end of the 3rd century), the Flood was in 2242, and according to the Code of Alexandria of the Septuagint the Flood was in 2262 from cm. (as in the printed editions of the Septuagint, for example, the Frankfurt Bible or the reconstruction of G. B. Sweet; as well as in the Church Slavonic translation of the Elizabethan Bible).

==Priestly source==
The Priestly source illustrates history in Genesis by compiling the genealogy beginning with the &quot;generations of the heavens and the earth&quot; and continuing through Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac to the descendants of Jacob and Esau. Jacob&#x27;s descendants are listed in Genesis 46:8-27, beginning with the phrase &quot;these are the names.&quot;

==Similar Mesopotamian traditions==
The genealogies of Genesis have been likened to the Sumerian King List. Some versions of the latter (not including the oldest known version, where no flood is mentioned) consist of a list of implausibly long-lived figures, followed by a flood, followed by a list of figures with long but gradually shortening lifespans that move into normal historical lengths. Attempts at finding a correlation between the ages presented in the two lists have been made.

==See also==
* Chronology of the Bible
* Genealogies in the Bible
* Genealogy of Jesus
* List of oldest fathers

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* Reviewed by Margaret C. Miller in &quot;Bryn Mawr Classical Review,&quot; 2002

==External links==
* Sexton, Jeremy. &quot;Who Was Born When Enosh Was 90? A Semantic Reevaluation of William Henry Green&#x27;s Chronological Gaps,&quot; &quot;Westminster Theological Journal&quot; 77 (2015): 193-218 (pastorsexton.com/articles)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1976696" start="4" end="26" title="Genealogies of Genesis" label="genealogies of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="66" end="81" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="112" end="116" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="265" end="275" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q205365" start="396" end="400" title="Cain" label="Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q107626" start="425" end="429" title="Seth" label="Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033715" start="493" end="512" title="Generations of Noah" label="Generations of Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="592" end="596" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="639" end="648" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="656" end="667" title="ethnography" label="ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189541" start="725" end="734" title="Patriarchs (Bible)" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q270860" start="958" end="976" title="Sumerian King List" label="Sumerian King List"/>
<link wikidata="Q213027" start="1080" end="1085" title="Enoch" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10921342" start="1174" end="1180" title="Lamech (father of Noah)" label="Lamech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="1533" end="1540" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="1686" end="1700" title="Masoretic Text" label="Masoretic Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q149441" start="1756" end="1776" title="Samaritan Pentateuch" label="Samaritan Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="1785" end="1795" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="1858" end="1872" title="Masoretic Text" label="Masoretic Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1920" end="1935" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1940" end="1950" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="1972" end="1988" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="2032" end="2050" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="2062" end="2078" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="2080" end="2086" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="2088" end="2096" title="Ethiopic" label="Ethiopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077454" start="2098" end="2106" title="Jacobite Syrian Christian Church" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="2111" end="2119" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q149441" start="2125" end="2145" title="Samaritan Pentateuch" label="Samaritan Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="2168" end="2178" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q205365" start="2245" end="2249" title="Cain" label="Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q313421" start="2251" end="2255" title="Abel" label="Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107626" start="2260" end="2264" title="Seth" label="Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099313" start="2919" end="2926" title="Jahwist" label="Jahwist"/>
<link wikidata="Q514434" start="2931" end="2946" title="Priestly source" label="Priestly source"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532837" start="2997" end="3020" title="Genesis flood narrative" label="Genesis flood narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="3173" end="3181" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="3187" end="3194" title="toponym" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q390248" start="3221" end="3239" title="eponymous ancestor" label="eponymous ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q390248" start="3251" end="3262" title="origin myth" label="origin-myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="3538" end="3553" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="3557" end="3570" title="ethnic groups" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="3871" end="3875" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q200902" start="3887" end="3891" title="Shem" label="Shem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="3901" end="3908" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="3912" end="3917" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q510737" start="4125" end="4133" title="Lucian of Antioch" label="Lucianic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="4251" end="4258" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="4329" end="4347" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q126553" start="4736" end="4751" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q457520" start="4831" end="4839" title="Arphaxad" label="Arphaxad"/>
<link wikidata="Q743781" start="5182" end="5192" title="Anno Mundi" label="Anno Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q507810" start="5409" end="5414" title="Epoch (reference date)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="5752" end="5774" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q970053" start="6100" end="6114" title="Sefer haYashar (midrash)" label="Book of Jasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="6419" end="6437" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189577" start="6592" end="6602" title="War Scroll" label="War Scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q223399" start="6617" end="6623" title="Qumran" label="Qumran"/>
<link wikidata="Q743781" start="6969" end="6979" title="Anno Mundi" label="Anno Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="6980" end="6992" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="7037" end="7047" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q201029" start="7057" end="7070" title="Mishneh Torah" label="Mishneh Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="7156" end="7171" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852626" start="7260" end="7277" title="Seder Olam Rabbah" label="Seder Olam Rabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q982075" start="7304" end="7320" title="Jose ben Halafta" label="Jose ben Halafta"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="7407" end="7411" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q217782" start="7421" end="7428" title="Tishrei" label="Tishrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="12465" end="12475" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q756227" start="12697" end="12706" title="Masoretes" label="Masoretes"/>
<link wikidata="Q514434" start="13796" end="13811" title="Priestly source" label="Priestly source"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448627" start="14654" end="14677" title="Chronology of the Bible" label="Chronology of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531592" start="14680" end="14704" title="Genealogies in the Bible" label="Genealogies in the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q51630" start="14707" end="14725" title="Genealogy of Jesus" label="Genealogy of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417517" start="14728" end="14750" title="List of oldest fathers" label="List of oldest fathers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266250" wikidata="Q6642106" url="?curid=1266250" title="List of systemic diseases with ocular manifestations">
<text>An ocular manifestation of a systemic disease is an eye condition that directly or indirectly results from a disease process in another part of the body. There are many diseases known to cause ocular or visual changes. Diabetes, for example, is the leading cause of new cases of blindness in those aged 20–74, with ocular manifestations such as diabetic retinopathy and macular edema affecting up to 80% of those who have had the disease for 15 years or more. Other diseases such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and hypertension are commonly found to have associated ocular symptoms.

== Systemic allergic diseases ==
* Asthma
* Atopic dermatitis
* Atopic eczema
* Hay fever
* Urticaria
* Vernal conjunctivitis

== Skin and mucous membrane diseases ==
* Acne rosacea
* Albinism
* Atopic dermatitis
* Behçet&#x27;s disease
* Cicatricial pemphigoid
* Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
* Epidermolysis bullosa
* Erythema multiforme
* Goltz–Gorlin syndrome
* Ichthyosis
* Incontinentia pigmenti
* Nevus of Ota
* Pemphigus
* Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
* Psoriasis
* Stevens–Johnson syndrome (Erythema multiforme major)
* Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada syndrome
* Xeroderma pigmentosum

==Phacomatoses==
* Angiomatosis retinae (Von Hippel–Lindau disease) (retinocerebellar capillary hemangiomatosis)
* Ataxia telangiectasia (Louis–Bar syndrome)
* Encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis (Sturge–Weber syndrome) (encephalofacial cavernous hemangiomatosis)
* Neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen&#x27;s disease)
* Tuberous sclerosis (Bourneville&#x27;s syndrome)
* Wyburn–Mason syndrome (racemose hemangiomatosis)

==Collagen diseases==
* Ankylosing spondylitis
* Dermatomyositis
* Periarteritis nodosa
* Reactive arthritis
* Rheumatoid arthritis
* Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
* Sarcoidosis
* Scleroderma
* Systemic lupus erythematosus
* Temporal arteritis
* Relapsing polychondritis
* Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 50-60% have ophthalmologic manifestations, which can be a presenting feature in a minority of patients. Orbital disease is the most common manifestation, and may result in proptosis, restrictive ophthalmopathy, chronic orbital pain, and in chronic cases, orbital retraction syndrome and intractable socket pain. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis may also cause inflammation of the optic nerve, ophthalmoplegia, conjunctivitis, keratitis, scleritis, episcleritis, dacrocystitis, nasolacrimnal duct obstruction, dacroadenitis, uveitis, and retinal vasculitis.

==Systemic viral infections==
* Varicella (chickenpox)
* Rubeola (measles)
* Rubella (German measles)
* Variola (smallpox)
* Vaccinia
* Herpes simplex
* Herpes zoster
* Mumps
* Infectious mononucleosis
* Influenza
* Cytomegalic inclusion disease
* Pharyngoconjunctival fever (adenovirus 3)
* Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (adenovirus 8)
* Human immunodeficiency virus (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome)
* Ebola
* Rift Valley Fever
* Dengue
* Hantavirus
==Systemic bacterial infections==
* Gonorrhea (ophthalmia neonatorum)
* Brucellosis
* Diphtheria
* Lyme disease
* Sepsis (bacterial metastatic endophthalmitis)
* Tularemia
* Leprosy (Hansen&#x27;s disease)
* Tuberculosis
* Syphilis

== Systemic protozoal infections ==
* Lymphogranuloma venereum (chlamydial)
* Inclusion conjunctivitis (chlamydial)
* Malaria
* Toxoplasmosis

== Systemic fungal infections ==
* &quot; Candida albicans&quot;
* Histoplasmosis
* Coccidioidomycosis
* &quot;Cryptococcus&quot;
* Metastatic fungal endophthalmitis
* &quot;Actinomyces&quot;
* &quot;Streptothrix&quot;

== Systemic cestode and nematode infections ==
* Cysticercosis (tapeworm)
* Echinococcosis (hydatid cyst)
* Toxocariasis (&quot;toxocara&quot;)
* Trichinosis (&quot;trichinella&quot;)
* Onchocerciasis
* Loiasis (&quot;loa loa&quot;)

==Chromosomal disorders and genetic syndromes==
* Cri-du chat syndrome
* Schmid–Fraccaro syndrome
* Turner&#x27;s syndrome
* Ring-D chromosome
* Monosomy-G syndrome
* Trisomy 13 (Patau&#x27;s syndrome, D-syndrome)
* Trisomy 18 (Edwards&#x27; syndrome, E-syndrome)
* Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
* Deletion of long arm of chromosome 18
* Deletion of chromosome 18
* Ciliopathic genetic syndromes—A number of widely variant genetic disorders with occular phenotypes have been identified with genotypical ciliopathy.

==Hematologic diseases==
* Anemia

==Cardiovascular diseases==
* Cardiovascular diseases
:*Arteriosclerosis
:*Hypertension
:*Pre-eclampsia (toxemia of pregnancy)
* Occlusive vascular disease (sudden)
:*Emboli and thrombi
:*Central retinal artery occlusion
:*Cardiac myxoma
:*Cranial arteritis
:*Sickle cell attack
* Occlusive vascular disease (slow, progressive)
:*Carotid artery disease
:*Arterial spasm (TIA)
:*Diabetes mellitus
:*Collagen diseases
* Venous occlusive disease
:*Thrombosis
:*Use of hormonal contraception
* Endocarditis
* Myxoma
* Aortic arch syndrome (takayasu)
* Pre-eclampsia (toxemia of pregnancy)
* Thromboangiitis obliterans
* Hereditary telangiectasia (Rendu–Osler–Weber syndrome)

==Endocrine diseases==
* Cushing&#x27;s disease
* Addison&#x27;s disease
* Diabetes mellitus
* Hyperparathyroidism
* Hypoparathyroidism
* Hyperthyroidism
* Hypothyroidism

==Gastrointestinal and nutritional disorders==
* Alcoholism
* Crohn&#x27;s disease
* Liver disease
* Malnutrition
* Peptic ulcer disease
* Pancreatic disease
* Regional enteritis or ulcerative colitis
* Vitamin A deficiency
* Vitamin B deficiency
* Vitamin C deficiency
* Hypervitaminosis A, B, and D
* Whipple&#x27;s disease

==Metabolic disorders==
* Albinism
* Alkaptonuria
* Amyloidosis
* Chediak–Higashi syndrome
* Cystinosis
* Fabry&#x27;s disease
* Galactosemia
* Gaucher&#x27;s disease
* Gout
* Hemochromatosis
* Histiocytosis
* Homocystinuria
* Lipidoses
* Marfan&#x27;s syndrome
* Weill–Marchesani syndrome
* Mucopolysaccharidosis
* Niemann–Pick disease
* Osteogenesis imperfecta
* Wilson&#x27;s disease

==Musculoskeletal disease==
* Albright&#x27;s disease (fibrous dysplasia of bone)
* Apert syndrome
* Conradi&#x27;s syndrome
* Craniofacial syndromes
* Facial deformity syndromes
* Muscular dystrophy disorders
* Myasthenia gravis
* Osteogenesis imperfecta
* Paget&#x27;s disease

==Pulmonary diseases==
* Asthma
* Bronchogenic carcinoma
* Bronchiectasis
* Cystic fibrosis of the pancreas
* Emphysema
* Pneumonias
* Tuberculosis

==Renal disease==
* Alport&#x27;s syndrome
* Azotemia (acute and chronic pyelonephritis)
* Lowe&#x27;s syndrome
* Medullary cystic disease
* Nephrotic syndrome (acute glomerulonephritis, diabetic kidney, system lupus erythematosus)
* Renal transplantation
* Wilms&#x27; tumor (nephroblastoma)

==Neoplastic diseases with ocular metastases==
* Carcinoma and sites of primary lesions
* Blood
:*Leukemia
:*Lymphoma
* Breast
* Colon
* Kidney
* Lung
* Genital organs
:*Ovary or cervix
:*Testis or prostate
* Skin
:*Melanoma
* Gut
:*Stomach
:*Pancreas
* Thyroid

== See also ==
* List of cutaneous conditions

==References==
* Pavan-Langston, Deborah (1990). &quot;Manual of Ocular Diagnosis and Therapy.&quot; Little, Brown and Company.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1414805" start="29" end="45" title="systemic disease" label="systemic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="109" end="116" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="219" end="227" title="Diabetes" label="Diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="279" end="288" title="blindness" label="blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q631361" start="345" end="365" title="diabetic retinopathy" label="diabetic retinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813737" start="370" end="383" title="macular edema" label="macular edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="483" end="517" title="AIDS" label="acquired immunodeficiency syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="529" end="541" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="633" end="639" title="Asthma" label="Asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q268667" start="642" end="659" title="Atopic dermatitis" label="Atopic dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q268667" start="662" end="675" title="Atopic eczema" label="Atopic eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="678" end="687" title="Hay fever" label="Hay fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="690" end="699" title="Urticaria" label="Urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686833" start="702" end="723" title="Vernal conjunctivitis" label="Vernal conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q831530" start="767" end="779" title="Acne rosacea" label="Acne rosacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="782" end="790" title="Albinism" label="Albinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q268667" start="793" end="810" title="Atopic dermatitis" label="Atopic dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q911427" start="813" end="834" title="Behçet&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Behçet&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q881811" start="837" end="859" title="Pemphigoid" label="Cicatricial pemphigoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141499" start="862" end="884" title="Ehlers–Danlos syndrome" label="Ehlers–Danlos syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q923020" start="887" end="908" title="Epidermolysis bullosa" label="Epidermolysis bullosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363732" start="911" end="930" title="Erythema multiforme" label="Erythema multiforme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536720" start="933" end="954" title="Goltz–Gorlin syndrome" label="Goltz–Gorlin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q523893" start="957" end="967" title="Ichthyosis" label="Ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q884590" start="970" end="992" title="Incontinentia pigmenti" label="Incontinentia pigmenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053690" start="995" end="1007" title="Nevus of Ota" label="Nevus of Ota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483214" start="1010" end="1019" title="Pemphigus" label="Pemphigus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052391" start="1022" end="1046" title="Pseudoxanthoma elasticum" label="Pseudoxanthoma elasticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179945" start="1049" end="1058" title="Psoriasis" label="Psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053948" start="1061" end="1085" title="Stevens–Johnson syndrome" label="Stevens–Johnson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396392" start="1087" end="1112" title="Erythema multiforme major" label="Erythema multiforme major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238645" start="1116" end="1145" title="Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada syndrome" label="Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q612693" start="1148" end="1169" title="Xeroderma pigmentosum" label="Xeroderma pigmentosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q741315" start="1190" end="1210" title="Angiomatosis retinae" label="Angiomatosis retinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q741315" start="1212" end="1237" title="Von Hippel–Lindau disease" label="Von Hippel–Lindau disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q387082" start="1286" end="1307" title="Ataxia telangiectasia" label="Ataxia telangiectasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387082" start="1309" end="1327" title="Louis–Bar syndrome" label="Louis–Bar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886238" start="1331" end="1363" title="Encephalotrigeminal Angiomatosis" label="Encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886238" start="1365" end="1386" title="Sturge–Weber syndrome" label="Sturge–Weber syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q847605" start="1434" end="1451" title="Neurofibromatosis" label="Neurofibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362721" start="1490" end="1508" title="Tuberous sclerosis" label="Tuberous sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q892776" start="1541" end="1562" title="Wyburn–Mason syndrome" label="Wyburn–Mason syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q52849" start="1615" end="1637" title="Ankylosing spondylitis" label="Ankylosing spondylitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q681160" start="1640" end="1655" title="Dermatomyositis" label="Dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q745162" start="1658" end="1678" title="Periarteritis nodosa" label="Periarteritis nodosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327700" start="1681" end="1699" title="Reactive arthritis" label="Reactive arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="1702" end="1722" title="Rheumatoid arthritis" label="Rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193894" start="1750" end="1761" title="Sarcoidosis" label="Sarcoidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q958797" start="1764" end="1775" title="Scleroderma" label="Scleroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="1778" end="1806" title="Systemic lupus erythematosus" label="Systemic lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="1809" end="1827" title="Temporal arteritis" label="Temporal arteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187656" start="1830" end="1854" title="Relapsing polychondritis" label="Relapsing polychondritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161568" start="1857" end="1889" title="Granulomatosis with polyangiitis" label="Granulomatosis with polyangiitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q684383" start="2062" end="2071" title="proptosis" label="proptosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2073" end="2099" title="restrictive ophthalmopathy" label="restrictive ophthalmopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161568" start="2202" end="2234" title="Granulomatosis with polyangiitis" label="Granulomatosis with polyangiitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q972514" start="2250" end="2281" title="optic neuritis" label="inflammation of the optic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723331" start="2283" end="2298" title="ophthalmoplegia" label="ophthalmoplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="2300" end="2314" title="conjunctivitis" label="conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q757838" start="2316" end="2325" title="keratitis" label="keratitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q511000" start="2327" end="2336" title="scleritis" label="scleritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726949" start="2338" end="2350" title="episcleritis" label="episcleritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157761" start="2352" end="2365" title="dacrocystitis" label="dacrocystitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2399" end="2412" title="dacroadenitis" label="dacroadenitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q280027" start="2414" end="2421" title="uveitis" label="uveitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="2480" end="2489" title="Varicella" label="Varicella"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="2491" end="2501" title="chickenpox" label="chickenpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="2505" end="2512" title="Rubeola" label="Rubeola"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="2514" end="2521" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q155857" start="2525" end="2532" title="Rubella" label="Rubella"/>
<link wikidata="Q155857" start="2534" end="2548" title="German measles" label="German measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2552" end="2559" title="Variola" label="Variola"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2561" end="2569" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986297" start="2573" end="2581" title="Vaccinia" label="Vaccinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="2584" end="2598" title="Herpes simplex" label="Herpes simplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q182155" start="2601" end="2614" title="Herpes zoster" label="Herpes zoster"/>
<link wikidata="Q176741" start="2617" end="2622" title="Mumps" label="Mumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q207367" start="2625" end="2649" title="Infectious mononucleosis" label="Infectious mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="2652" end="2661" title="Influenza" label="Influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946" start="2664" end="2693" title="Cytomegalic inclusion disease" label="Cytomegalic inclusion disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q837054" start="2696" end="2722" title="Pharyngoconjunctival fever" label="Pharyngoconjunctival fever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2724" end="2736" title="adenovirus 3" label="adenovirus 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623006" start="2740" end="2769" title="Keratoconjunctivitis" label="Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2771" end="2783" title="adenovirus 8" label="adenovirus 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="2787" end="2815" title="Human immunodeficiency virus" label="Human immunodeficiency virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2817" end="2851" title="AIDS" label="acquired immunodeficiency syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="2855" end="2860" title="Ebola virus disease" label="Ebola"/>
<link wikidata="Q326638" start="2863" end="2880" title="Rift Valley fever" label="Rift Valley Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q30953" start="2883" end="2889" title="Dengue fever" label="Dengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9002005" start="2892" end="2902" title="Hantavirus hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome" label="Hantavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="2939" end="2948" title="Gonorrhea" label="Gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q363988" start="2950" end="2971" title="ophthalmia neonatorum" label="ophthalmia neonatorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156050" start="2975" end="2986" title="Brucellosis" label="Brucellosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="2989" end="2999" title="Diphtheria" label="Diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="3002" end="3014" title="Lyme disease" label="Lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="3017" end="3023" title="Sepsis" label="Sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153861" start="3065" end="3074" title="Tularemia" label="Tularemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="3077" end="3084" title="Leprosy" label="Leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="3086" end="3107" title="Hansen&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Hansen&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3111" end="3123" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="3126" end="3134" title="Syphilis" label="Syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q694552" start="3174" end="3198" title="Lymphogranuloma venereum" label="Lymphogranuloma venereum"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="3214" end="3238" title="Inclusion conjunctivitis" label="Inclusion conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="3254" end="3261" title="Malaria" label="Malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154878" start="3264" end="3277" title="Toxoplasmosis" label="Toxoplasmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310443" start="3321" end="3337" title="Candida albicans" label="Candida albicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q627625" start="3346" end="3360" title="Histoplasmosis" label="Histoplasmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q868137" start="3363" end="3381" title="Coccidioidomycosis" label="Coccidioidomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309498" start="3390" end="3402" title="Cryptococcus (fungus)" label="Cryptococcus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3411" end="3444" title="Metastatic fungal endophthalmitis" label="Metastatic fungal endophthalmitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312213" start="3453" end="3464" title="Actinomyces" label="Actinomyces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3479" end="3491" title="Streptothrix" label="Streptothrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q246068" start="3548" end="3561" title="Cysticercosis" label="Cysticercosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280912" start="3563" end="3571" title="tapeworm" label="tapeworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q777087" start="3575" end="3589" title="Echinococcosis" label="Echinococcosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q777087" start="3591" end="3603" title="hydatid cyst" label="hydatid cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345113" start="3607" end="3619" title="Toxocariasis" label="Toxocariasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522497" start="3627" end="3635" title="toxocara" label="toxocara"/>
<link wikidata="Q495146" start="3645" end="3656" title="Trichinosis" label="Trichinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q630285" start="3664" end="3675" title="trichinella" label="trichinella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137321" start="3685" end="3699" title="Onchocerciasis" label="Onchocerciasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760607" start="3702" end="3709" title="Loiasis" label="Loiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134361" start="3717" end="3724" title="loa loa" label="loa loa"/>
<link wikidata="Q752298" start="3783" end="3803" title="Cri-du chat syndrome" label="Cri-du chat syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199621" start="3806" end="3830" title="Cat eye syndrome" label="Schmid–Fraccaro syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="3833" end="3855" title="Turner&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Turner&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3858" end="3875" title="Ring-D chromosome" label="Ring-D chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3878" end="3897" title="Monosomy-G syndrome" label="Monosomy-G syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q284219" start="3900" end="3910" title="Trisomy 13" label="Trisomy 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q284219" start="3912" end="3933" title="Patau&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Patau&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3935" end="3945" title="D-syndrome" label="D-syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q457737" start="3949" end="3959" title="Trisomy 18" label="Trisomy 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q457737" start="3961" end="3983" title="Edwards&amp;#x27; syndrome" label="Edwards&amp;#x27; syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3985" end="3995" title="E-syndrome" label="E-syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="3999" end="4009" title="Trisomy 21" label="Trisomy 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="4011" end="4024" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q780468" start="4052" end="4065" title="chromosome 18 (human)" label="chromosome 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q780468" start="4080" end="4093" title="chromosome 18 (human)" label="chromosome 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q203031" start="4096" end="4125" title="Ciliopathy" label="Ciliopathic genetic syndromes"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="4153" end="4170" title="genetic disorders" label="genetic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q550455" start="4176" end="4183" title="retinopathy" label="occular"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="4184" end="4193" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="4221" end="4232" title="genotype" label="genotypical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="4273" end="4279" title="Anemia" label="Anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="4311" end="4334" title="Cardiovascular diseases" label="Cardiovascular diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q184559" start="4337" end="4353" title="Arteriosclerosis" label="Arteriosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="4356" end="4368" title="Hypertension" label="Hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q61335" start="4371" end="4384" title="Pre-eclampsia" label="Pre-eclampsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576205" start="4410" end="4436" title="Occlusive vascular disease" label="Occlusive vascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q275466" start="4448" end="4454" title="Emboli" label="Emboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="4459" end="4466" title="thrombi" label="thrombi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348620" start="4469" end="4501" title="Central retinal artery occlusion" label="Central retinal artery occlusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q589612" start="4504" end="4518" title="Myxoma" label="Cardiac myxoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="4521" end="4538" title="Cranial arteritis" label="Cranial arteritis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4541" end="4559" title="Sickle cell attack" label="Sickle cell attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576205" start="4562" end="4588" title="Occlusive vascular disease" label="Occlusive vascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576205" start="4611" end="4633" title="Carotid artery disease" label="Carotid artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q593958" start="4636" end="4656" title="Transient ischemic attack" label="Arterial spasm (TIA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="4659" end="4676" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446169" start="4679" end="4696" title="Collagen diseases" label="Collagen diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q261327" start="4699" end="4723" title="Venous occlusive disease" label="Venous occlusive disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q261327" start="4726" end="4736" title="Thrombosis" label="Thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292449" start="4746" end="4768" title="hormonal contraception" label="hormonal contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="4771" end="4783" title="Endocarditis" label="Endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q589612" start="4786" end="4792" title="Myxoma" label="Myxoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q432462" start="4795" end="4815" title="Aortic arch syndrome" label="Aortic arch syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q61335" start="4829" end="4842" title="Pre-eclampsia" label="Pre-eclampsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746001" start="4868" end="4894" title="Thromboangiitis obliterans" label="Thromboangiitis obliterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q776881" start="4897" end="4922" title="Hereditary telangiectasia" label="Hereditary telangiectasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q776881" start="4924" end="4950" title="Rendu–Osler–Weber syndrome" label="Rendu–Osler–Weber syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947304" start="4978" end="5000" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="5003" end="5025" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="5028" end="5045" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344835" start="5048" end="5067" title="Hyperparathyroidism" label="Hyperparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586088" start="5070" end="5088" title="Hypoparathyroidism" label="Hypoparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="5091" end="5106" title="Hyperthyroidism" label="Hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501" start="5109" end="5123" title="Hypothyroidism" label="Hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="5174" end="5184" title="Alcoholism" label="Alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="5187" end="5207" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q929737" start="5210" end="5223" title="Liver disease" label="Liver disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="5226" end="5238" title="Malnutrition" label="Malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="5241" end="5261" title="Peptic ulcer disease" label="Peptic ulcer disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130407" start="5264" end="5282" title="Pancreatic disease" label="Pancreatic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="5285" end="5303" title="Regional enteritis" label="Regional enteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477" start="5307" end="5325" title="ulcerative colitis" label="ulcerative colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655893" start="5328" end="5348" title="Vitamin A deficiency" label="Vitamin A deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q183206" start="5351" end="5371" title="Vitamin B deficiency" label="Vitamin B deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="5374" end="5394" title="Vitamin C deficiency" label="Vitamin C deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q423927" start="5397" end="5413" title="Hypervitaminosis" label="Hypervitaminosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q653078" start="5428" end="5450" title="Whipple&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Whipple&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="5478" end="5486" title="Albinism" label="Albinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q651680" start="5489" end="5501" title="Alkaptonuria" label="Alkaptonuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q816798" start="5504" end="5515" title="Amyloidosis" label="Amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q934034" start="5518" end="5542" title="Chediak–Higashi syndrome" label="Chediak–Higashi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149042" start="5545" end="5555" title="Cystinosis" label="Cystinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q615645" start="5558" end="5578" title="Fabry&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Fabry&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q774483" start="5581" end="5593" title="Galactosemia" label="Galactosemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861645" start="5596" end="5618" title="Gaucher&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Gaucher&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="5621" end="5625" title="Gout" label="Gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025687" start="5628" end="5643" title="Hemochromatosis" label="Hemochromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411740" start="5646" end="5659" title="Histiocytosis" label="Histiocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="5662" end="5676" title="Homocystinuria" label="Homocystinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540902" start="5679" end="5688" title="Lipidoses" label="Lipidoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q208562" start="5691" end="5713" title="Marfan&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Marfan&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961695" start="5716" end="5741" title="Weill–Marchesani syndrome" label="Weill–Marchesani syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="5744" end="5765" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419931" start="5768" end="5788" title="Niemann–Pick disease" label="Niemann–Pick disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="5791" end="5814" title="Osteogenesis imperfecta" label="Osteogenesis imperfecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q117121" start="5817" end="5838" title="Wilson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118166" start="5870" end="5893" title="Albright&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Albright&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410864" start="5895" end="5920" title="fibrous dysplasia of bone" label="fibrous dysplasia of bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q618246" start="5924" end="5938" title="Apert syndrome" label="Apert syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964437" start="5941" end="5964" title="Conradi&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Conradi&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q525642" start="5967" end="5989" title="Craniofacial syndromes" label="Craniofacial syndromes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5992" end="6018" title="Facial deformity syndromes" label="Facial deformity syndromes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6021" end="6049" title="Muscular dystrophy disorders" label="Muscular dystrophy disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="6052" end="6069" title="Myasthenia gravis" label="Myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="6072" end="6095" title="Osteogenesis imperfecta" label="Osteogenesis imperfecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035074" start="6098" end="6118" title="Paget&amp;#x27;s disease of bone" label="Paget&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="6145" end="6151" title="Asthma" label="Asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="6154" end="6176" title="Bronchogenic carcinoma" label="Bronchogenic carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q32778" start="6179" end="6193" title="Bronchiectasis" label="Bronchiectasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6196" end="6227" title="Cystic fibrosis#Gastrointestinal" label="Cystic fibrosis of the pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="6230" end="6239" title="Emphysema" label="Emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="6242" end="6251" title="Pneumonia" label="Pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="6255" end="6267" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331116" start="6289" end="6311" title="Alport&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Alport&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q794072" start="6314" end="6322" title="Azotemia" label="Azotemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506652" start="6342" end="6356" title="pyelonephritis" label="pyelonephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200839" start="6360" end="6380" title="Lowe&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Lowe&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916694" start="6383" end="6407" title="Medullary cystic disease" label="Medullary cystic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q504790" start="6410" end="6428" title="Nephrotic syndrome" label="Nephrotic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q740909" start="6503" end="6524" title="Renal transplantation" label="Renal transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756289" start="6527" end="6544" title="Wilms&amp;#x27; tumor" label="Wilms&amp;#x27; tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q756289" start="6546" end="6560" title="nephroblastoma" label="nephroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33525" start="6612" end="6621" title="Carcinoma" label="Carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="6653" end="6658" title="Blood" label="Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="6661" end="6669" title="Leukemia" label="Leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="6672" end="6680" title="Lymphoma" label="Lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="6683" end="6689" title="Breast" label="Breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="6692" end="6697" title="Colon (anatomy)" label="Colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="6700" end="6706" title="Kidney" label="Kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="6709" end="6713" title="Lung" label="Lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="6716" end="6730" title="Sex organ" label="Genital organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="6733" end="6738" title="Ovary" label="Ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="6742" end="6748" title="cervix" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="6751" end="6757" title="Testis" label="Testis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="6761" end="6769" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="6772" end="6776" title="Skin" label="Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="6779" end="6787" title="Melanoma" label="Melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="6790" end="6793" title="Gut (zoology)" label="Gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="6796" end="6803" title="Stomach" label="Stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="6806" end="6814" title="Pancreas" label="Pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="6817" end="6824" title="Thyroid" label="Thyroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q246809" start="6843" end="6871" title="List of cutaneous conditions" label="List of cutaneous conditions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266251" wikidata="Q562543" url="?curid=1266251" title="Igi">
<text>Igi or IGI may refer to:

==Organisations==
* Industrial and General Insurance Company, based in Nigeria with subsidiaries in Uganda and Rwanda
* Innovative Genomics Institute, founded by Jennifer Doudna
* International Gemological Institute, a diamond grading laboratory
* University of International Golden Indonesia (Universitas IGI)

== Other uses ==
* &quot;Igi&quot; (short story), 1977, by Georgian author Jemal Karchkhadze
* Igi, one of the Asia Islands of Indonesia
* Igi, a Samoan slack-key guitar tuning
* IGI, or 𒅆, a cuneiform sign
* Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
* Instrument Ground Instructor, a United States aviation license
* Interconnector Greece – Italy, a planned natural gas pipeline
* International Genealogical Index
* &quot;Project I.G.I.&quot;, a tactical shooter computer game
** &quot;I.G.I.-2: Covert Strike&quot;, its sequel

== See also ==
* Iggy
* IGY (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q562543" start="0" end="3" title="Igi" label="Igi"/>
<link wikidata="Q562543" start="7" end="10" title="Igi" label="IGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733666" start="46" end="86" title="Industrial and General Insurance Company" label="Industrial and General Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q107517870" start="146" end="175" title="Innovative Genomics Institute" label="Innovative Genomics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987051" start="206" end="241" title="International Gemological Institute" label="International Gemological Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895547" start="274" end="318" title="University of International Golden Indonesia" label="University of International Golden Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820557" start="357" end="386" title="Igi (short story)" label="&amp;quot;Igi&amp;quot; (short story)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087314" start="449" end="461" title="Asia Islands" label="Asia Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507082" start="491" end="507" title="slack-key guitar" label="slack-key guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q731288" start="530" end="544" title="List of cuneiform signs" label="cuneiform sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q821275" start="547" end="582" title="Indira Gandhi International Airport" label="Indira Gandhi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610860" start="592" end="620" title="Instrument Ground Instructor" label="Instrument Ground Instructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045886" start="657" end="686" title="Interconnector Greece – Italy" label="Interconnector Greece – Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050729" start="721" end="753" title="International Genealogical Index" label="International Genealogical Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323444" start="762" end="776" title="Project I.G.I." label="Project I.G.I."/>
<link wikidata="" start="826" end="849" title="I.G.I.-2: Covert Strike" label="I.G.I.-2: Covert Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q43900738" start="886" end="890" title="Iggy" label="Iggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971061" start="893" end="913" title="IGY (disambiguation)" label="IGY (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266253" wikidata="Q2887916" url="?curid=1266253" title="Battle of Aughrim">
<text>The Battle of Aughrim () was the decisive battle of the Williamite War in Ireland. It was fought between the largely Irish Jacobite army loyal to James II and the forces of William III on 12 July 1691 (old style, equivalent to 22 July new style), near the village of Aughrim, County Galway.

The battle was one of the bloodiest ever fought in the British Isles: 7,000 people were killed. The Jacobite defeat at Aughrim meant the effective end of James&#x27;s cause in Ireland, although the city of Limerick held out until the autumn of 1691.

==Background==
By 1691, the Jacobites had adopted a defensive position. In the previous year they had retreated into Connacht behind the easily defensible line of the Shannon, with strongholds at Sligo, Athlone and Limerick guarding the routes into the province and the western ports. William besieged Limerick in late August 1690 but, suffering heavy casualties and losses to disease, he called off the siege and put his army into winter quarters. However, internal divisions, exacerbated by the departure of James for France after defeat at the Boyne, were increasingly undermining the Jacobite command.

The main split was between the &quot;Peace Party&quot;, led by James&#x27;s viceroy Tyrconnell, which proposed negotiating a settlement with William, and the &quot;War Party&quot; of army officers grouped around Patrick Sarsfield, who believed the war could still be won outright. Encouraged by William&#x27;s failure to take Limerick and looking to break Tyrconnell&#x27;s influence, Sarsfield&#x27;s faction decided to appeal directly to Louis XIV of France requesting that Tyrconnell and army commander Berwick be removed from office and that Louis send military aid.

The &quot;Peace Party&quot; obtained an offer of settlement from the Williamites in December, upon which Sarsfield demanded that Berwick have Riverston, Denis Daly and other &quot;Peace Party&quot; leaders arrested. Berwick complied, probably with the approval of Tyrconnell, who returned from France to try and preserve his influence by repositioning himself with Sarsfield&#x27;s faction.

Alarmed by the fracturing of the Irish command, James was persuaded to request further military support directly from Louis. Louis sent general Charles Chalmot de Saint-Ruhe to replace Berwick as senior Jacobite commander, with secret instructions to assess whether Louis should send further military aid. Saint-Ruhe, accompanied by lieutenant-generals de Tessé and d&#x27;Usson, arrived at Limerick on 9 May, bringing sufficient arms, corn and meal to sustain the army until the autumn, but not the troops or money the Jacobites desperately needed.

By this stage William&#x27;s forces were led by his subordinates, Dutch officer Godert de Ginkel and second-in-command Württemberg. Ginkel was conscious of the poor military situation facing William in the Netherlands, and seeking a quick end to the war obtained William&#x27;s permission to offer the Jacobites moderate terms of surrender. By late spring 1691, however, Ginkel became concerned that a French convoy could land further reinforcements at Galway or Limerick, and began planning to enter the field as quickly as possible. During May, both sides began assembling forces for a summer campaign, the Jacobites at Limerick and the Williamites at Mullingar.

On 16 June, Ginkel&#x27;s cavalry reconnoitred from Ballymore towards the Jacobite garrison at Athlone. Saint-Ruhe had been unsure where Ginkel would attempt to cross the Shannon, but by 19 June he realised Athlone was the target and began concentrating his troops west of the town. Ginkel breached the Jacobite lines of defence and took Athlone on 30 June after a bloody siege; Saint-Ruhe was unable to relieve the town and fell back to the west. Athlone was seen as a significant victory and likely to provoke the collapse of the Jacobite army. The Lords Justice in Dublin issued a proclamation offering generous terms for Jacobites who surrendered, including a free pardon, restoration of forfeited estates, and the offer of similar or higher rank and pay if they wished to join William&#x27;s army.

Unaware of the location of Saint-Ruhe&#x27;s main army and assuming he was outnumbered, on 10 July Ginkel continued a cautious advance through Ballinasloe down the main Limerick and Galway road. Saint-Ruhe&#x27;s and Tyrconnell&#x27;s plan had been to fall back on Limerick and force the Williamites into another year of campaigning, but wishing to redeem his errors at Athlone Saint-Ruhe appears to have instead decided to force a decisive battle. Ginkel found his way blocked by Saint-Ruhe&#x27;s army at Aughrim on the early morning of 12 July 1691.

===Deployments===
At this point of the campaign, both armies were about 20,000 strong. The core of the Jacobite force was formed around James&#x27;s old Irish Army, which had been reorganised by Tyrconnell from 1686 onwards by dismissing the majority of Protestant officers and men. It had been substantially expanded with newly recruited Irish Catholic regiments, organised in the English military tradition.

While it is not now possible to establish with certainty which Jacobite infantry regiments fought at Aughrim, at least 30 have been identified as likely present, including the Foot Guards, Talbot&#x27;s, Nugent&#x27;s, Fitzgerald&#x27;s, Boffin&#x27;s, Cormack O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s, Saxby&#x27;s and Iveagh&#x27;s. The Jacobites also retained around 4,000 cavalry and dragoons, mostly much better trained and equipped than their foot.

The composition of Ginkel&#x27;s army is better documented than that of the Jacobites: in addition to English regiments, it included a large number of Anglo-Irish Protestants as well as Dutch, Danish and French Huguenot contingents. Different contemporary sources give different dispositions for Ginkel&#x27;s forces at Aughrim, but most agree that the right wing was composed of English, Anglo-Irish and Huguenot cavalry, with Danish and French cavalry on the left. Ginkel positioned the English infantry regiments on the right of his centre, with French, Danish and Dutch foot on their left.

According to witnesses of the battle the Jacobite lines at Aughrim occupied a strong defensive position extending over two miles. To protect his largely inexperienced infantry, Saint-Ruhe deployed most of it in two divisions under Major-Generals John Hamilton and William Dorrington along the crest of a ridge known as Kilcommadan Hill, their positions protected by small hillside enclosures and hedgerows. The centre was further screened by a large bog, impassable to cavalry, through which the Melehan River flowed. The left flank was also bounded by &quot;a large Red Bogg, almost a mile over&quot;, through which there was only one causeway, overlooked by the deserted village of Aughrim and a ruined castle: Saint-Ruhe deployed the bulk of his cavalry here under Parker, Luttrell and Purcell, under the overall command of Dominic Sheldon. On the right flank where the Tristaun stream ran through the &quot;Pass&quot; of Urraghry or Urachree, much the more open and weaker position, Saint-Ruhe placed his best infantry and the cavalry regiments of Abercorn, Tyrconnell and Edmund Prendergast, all under his second-in-command, the chevalier de Tessé. According to one participant&#x27;s account Patrick Sarsfield had quarrelled with Saint-Ruhe and was posted with the cavalry reserve to the left rear, under strict instructions not to move without orders.

==Battle==
After heavy mist all morning, Ginkel&#x27;s forces moved into position by about two o&#x27;clock in the afternoon, and both sides cannonaded each other for the next few hours. Ginkel planned to avoid fully joining battle until the next day; he ordered a probing attack on the Jacobites&#x27; weaker right flank led by a captain and sixteen Danish troopers, followed by 200 of Cunningham&#x27;s Eniskillen dragoons.

The Jacobite response demonstrated the strength of their defence but also meant that the attackers were no longer able to break off the engagement as Ginkel had planned. A conference was held at about 4 pm: Ginkel still favoured withdrawing, but the Williamite infantry general Hugh Mackay argued for an immediate full-scale attack.

Battle was joined in earnest between five and six o&#x27;clock. In the centre, the largely English and Scots regiments under Mackay attempted a frontal assault on Dorrington&#x27;s infantry on Kilcommadan Hill. The attackers had to contend with waist-deep water and a tenacious Irish defence of the reinforced hedge lines. They withdrew with heavy losses: the Jacobites pursued them downhill, capturing colonels Erle and Herbert.

On their left centre, the Williamites advanced across low ground exposed to Jacobite fire and took a great number of casualties. The Williamite assault in this area, led by St John&#x27;s and Tiffin&#x27;s regiments and the Huguenot foot, was driven back into the bog by the Irish foot fighting with clubbed (reversed) muskets; many of the attackers were killed or drowned. In the rout, the pursuing Jacobites managed to spike a battery of Williamite guns. The Jacobite regiments of the Guards and Gordon O&#x27;Neill were said to have fought particularly strongly. The musketry was so intense that &quot;the ridges seemed to be ablaze&quot; according to Andreas Claudianus, a Norwegian fighting with the Danish infantry.

The Jacobite right and centre holding firm, Ginkel tried to force a way across the causeway on the Jacobite left, where any attack would have to pass along a narrow lane covered by Walter Burke&#x27;s regiment from their positions in Aughrim castle. Four battalions led by Brigadier Kirke secured positions near the castle, following which Compton&#x27;s Royal Horse Guards got across the causeway at the third attempt. Dorrington having earlier withdrawn two battalions of infantry from this area to reinforce the Jacobite centre, they were faced only with weak opposition, reaching Aughrim village. While a force of Jacobite cavalry and dragoons under Luttrell had been tasked with covering this flank, their commander had ordered them to fall back, following a route now known locally as &quot;Luttrell&#x27;s Pass&quot;. Rumours later flew that he had been in the pay of William, although it seems most probable that Luttrell withdrew as he had little or no infantry support. The cavalry regiments of Henri de Massue, Lanier, Langston and Byerley also crossed the causeway, attacking Dorrington&#x27;s flank.

Most commentators, even those sympathetic to William, judged that the Irish foot had fought exceptionally well, and some accounts including James II&#x27;s &quot;Memoirs&quot; claim that Saint-Ruhe was &quot;in a transport of joy to see the foot [...] behave themselves so well&quot;.

Appearing to believe that the battle could be won, he was heard to shout, &quot;they are running, we will chase them back to the gates of Dublin&quot;, before riding across the battlefield to direct the defence against the Williamite cavalry on his left wing. However, as he rode over to rally his cavalry, Saint-Ruhe paused briefly to direct the fire of a battery, and was decapitated by a cannonball; his death was said to have occurred around sunset, shortly after eight o&#x27;clock.

After Saint-Ruhe&#x27;s death the Jacobite left, devoid of a senior commander, collapsed very quickly: the regiment of Horse Guards left the field almost immediately, followed shortly by the cavalry and dragoon regiments of Luttrell, Sheldon and Galmoy. De Tessé attempted to head a cavalry counter-attack but was seriously wounded shortly afterwards. The Jacobite left flank was now exposed: Mackay and Tollemache also attacked again in the centre, pushing the Jacobites towards the hilltop. Burke and his regiment, still holding the castle, were forced to surrender. Most of the infantry remained unaware of Saint-Ruhe&#x27;s death, however, and Hamilton&#x27;s infantry on the Jacobite right continued to counter-attack, fighting the Huguenot foot to a standstill in an area still known locally as the &quot;Bloody Hollow&quot;. At around nine o&#x27;clock towards nightfall the Jacobite infantry were finally pushed to the top of Killcommadan hill and broke, fleeing towards a bog in the left rear of their position, while their cavalry retreated towards Loughrea.

Sarsfield and Galmoy briefly tried to organise a rearguard action but as in many battles of the period, most of the Jacobite casualties occurred in the pursuit, which was ended only by darkness and the onset of mist and rain. The defeated infantry were cut down in their hundreds by the Williamite cavalry as they tried to get away, many of them having thrown away their weapons in order to run faster.

In addition to the rank and file the Jacobite casualties and prisoners included many of its most experienced infantry officers: the dead included brigadiers Barker, O&#x27;Neill and O&#x27;Connell, and colonels Moore, Talbot, O&#x27;Mahony, Nugent, Felix O&#x27;Neil and Ulick Burke, Lord Galway. The two major-generals commanding the Jacobite centre, Hamilton and Dorrington, were both taken prisoner, Hamilton dying of wounds shortly afterwards. Though the killing of prisoners to prevent rescue was a common practice at the time, Jacobite soldiers were accused of having &quot;cut to pieces&quot; colonel Herbert after his capture. One contemporary Jacobite source (Leslie) alleged that about 2,000 Jacobites were killed &quot;in cold blood&quot; with many, including Lord Galway and colonel Charles Moore, killed after being promised quarter.

An eyewitness with the Williamite army, George Story, wrote that &quot;from the top of the Hill where [the Jacobite] Camp had been,&quot; the bodies &quot;looked like a great Flock of Sheep, scattered up and down the Countrey for almost four Miles round.&quot;

==Aftermath==
Estimates of the two armies&#x27; losses vary, but they were extremely heavy overall; it is generally agreed that 7,000 men were killed at Aughrim. Aughrim has been described as &quot;quite possibly the bloodiest battle ever fought in the British Isles&quot;, but earlier medieval battles, although poorly recorded, may rival this battle in casualty numbers. At the time, the Williamites claimed to have lost only 600 and to have killed some 7,000 Jacobites. Some recent studies put the Williamite losses as high as 3,000, but they are more generally given as 3,000, with 4,000 Jacobites killed. Another 4,000 Jacobites had deserted, while Ginkel recorded 526 prisoners taken of all ranks. While Ginkel had given word to Dorrington that the captives would be treated as prisoners of war, general officers were instead taken to the Tower of London as prisoners of state, while the majority of the rank and file were incarcerated on Lambay Island where many died of disease and starvation.

Aughrim was the decisive battle of the conflict: the Jacobites had lost many experienced officers, along with much of the army&#x27;s equipment and supplies. The remnants of the Jacobite army retreated to the mountains before regrouping under Sarsfield&#x27;s command at Limerick. Many of their infantry regiments were seriously depleted: on 22 July, Bellew&#x27;s regiment was listed as having 240 soldiers, having lost all its senior officers and sergeants; Slane&#x27;s regiment 140 soldiers, and Louth&#x27;s just 28, although some stragglers arrived later. The city of Galway surrendered without a fight after the battle, on advantageous terms, while Sarsfield and the Jacobites&#x27; main army surrendered shortly afterwards at Limerick after a short siege.

===Cultural impact===

According to Ó Ciardha, the battle &quot;made a searing impression on the Irish consciousness&quot;. Irish tradition came to refer to the battle as &quot;Eachdhroim an áir&quot; – &quot;Aughrim of the slaughter&quot; – after a line in a poem by Irish-language poet Séamas Dall Mac Cuarta, the &quot;Elegy for Sorley MacDonnell&quot;. While Ginkel ordered the burial of his own dead, the remaining Jacobites were left unburied, their bones remaining scattered on the battlefield for years afterwards: Mac Cuarta wrote &quot;It is at Aughrim of the slaughter where they are to be found, their damp bones lying uncoffined&quot;.

John Dunton in his work, &quot;Teague Land&quot;, an account of his travels in Ireland written seven years after the battle, wrote that: &quot;After the battle the English did not tarry to bury any of the dead but their own, and left those of the enemy exposed to the fowls of the air, for the country was then so uninhabited that there were not hands to inter them. Many dogs resorted to this aceldama [Potter&#x27;s field] where for want of other food they fed on man&#x27;s [sic] flesh, and thereby became so dangerous and fierce that a single person could not pass that way without manifest hazard&quot;. He ends the description with the story of a faithful greyhound belonging to a Jacobite killed in the battle who remained by his master&#x27;s body defending it until shot by a passing soldier in January of the following year.

While Aughrim remained a powerful symbol of disaster for Irish Catholics, it was also the focus of Loyalist (particularly Orange Order) celebrations in Ireland on 12 July up until the early 19th century. Thereafter, it was superseded by the Battle of the Boyne in commemorations on &quot;the Twelfth&quot; due to the switch to the Gregorian calendar (in which 1 July became 11 July and 12 July became 22 July ).

It has been suggested that the Boyne became emphasised because the Irish troops could be more easily presented as cowardly than at Aughrim, where they were generally agreed to have fought bravely. The Loyalist song &quot;The Sash&quot; mentions Aughrim.

The battle was the subject of a 1728 tragic drama by Robert Ashton, &quot;The Battle of Aughrim or the Fall of Monsieur St Ruth&quot;, which after initial neglect became enormously popular from 1770 onwards into the 19th century. Though the play was intended to celebrate the Williamite victory and casts Saint-Ruhe firmly in the role of antagonist, it also portrays Sarsfield and his lieutenants as heroic figures and incorporates a &quot;lament for Catholic patriotism&quot;, so that &quot;both Catholics and Protestants were attracted to the play for generations&quot;. In 1804 it was noted of Ashton&#x27;s play that &quot;a more popular Production never appeared in Ireland; it is in the hands of every Peasant who can read English; and [...] is committed to memory and occasionally recited&quot;. In 1885, artist John Mulvany completed a painting of the battle; it was exhibited in Dublin in 2010. The Battle of Aughrim was also the subject of a long 1968 poem by Richard Murphy, who noted that he had ancestors fighting on both sides.

The Aughrim battlefield site became the subject of controversy in Ireland over plans to build the new M6 motorway through the former battlefield. Historians, environmentalists and members of the Orange Order objected to the plans; the motorway opened in 2009.

===Aughrim Interpretative Centre===
The Battle of Aughrim Interpretative Centre, in Aughrim village was opened in 1991. It is a collaboration between Aughrim Heritage Committee, Ireland West Tourism and Galway County Council. It houses artefacts found on the battlefield site, as well as three-dimensional displays and a documentary film that explains the course of the battle and its significance in the wider context of the history of Ireland.

==See also==
* List of conflicts in Ireland

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Boulger, Demetrius C., &quot;The Battle of the Boyne, Together with an Account Based on French &amp; Other Unpublished Records of the War in Ireland 1688–1691&quot; Martin Secker, London, 1911 (Available as pdf)
* Piers Wauchope, &quot;Patrick Sarsfield and the Williamite War&quot;, Dublin 1992.
* J. G. Simms, &quot;Jacobite Ireland&quot;, London 1969.
* G. A., Hayes-McCoy, &quot;Irish Battles&quot;, Belfast 1990.
* Eamonn O Ciardha, &quot;Ireland and the Jacobite cause – a Fatal Attachment&quot;, Dublin 2002.
* Padraig Lenihan, 1690, Battle of the Boyne, Tempus, 2003.
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
* Battle site on Mapviewer at Ordnance Survey of Ireland
* Interview with historian Padraig Lenihan on the battle.
* &quot;The Battle of Aughrim&quot; – traditional tune</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2887916" start="4" end="21" title="Battle of Aughrim" label="Battle of Aughrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320981" start="56" end="81" title="Williamite War in Ireland" label="Williamite War in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210889" start="117" end="122" title="Irish Army (Kingdom of Ireland)" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="123" end="131" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="146" end="154" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="173" end="184" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="202" end="211" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="old style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642247" start="267" end="289" title="Aughrim, County Galway" label="Aughrim, County Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="347" end="360" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="468" end="475" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="498" end="506" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="660" end="668" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="710" end="717" title="River Shannon" label="Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="739" end="744" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q369911" start="746" end="753" title="Athlone" label="Athlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="758" end="766" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713014" start="836" end="853" title="Siege of Limerick (1690)" label="besieged Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q644960" start="1086" end="1095" title="Battle of the Boyne" label="the Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531564" start="1234" end="1244" title="Richard Talbot, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell" label="Tyrconnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q336813" start="1362" end="1379" title="Patrick Sarsfield, 1st Earl of Lucan" label="Patrick Sarsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1590" end="1609" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q166023" start="1656" end="1663" title="James FitzJames, 1st Duke of Berwick" label="Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792781" start="1864" end="1873" title="Thomas Nugent, 1st Baron Nugent of Riverston" label="Riverston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257193" start="1875" end="1885" title="Denis Daly (judge)" label="Denis Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750100" start="2258" end="2287" title="Charles Chalmot de Saint-Ruhe" label="Charles Chalmot de Saint-Ruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378909" start="2467" end="2475" title="Philibert-Emmanuel de Froulay, chevalier de Tessé" label="de Tessé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910657" start="2745" end="2761" title="Godert de Ginkell, 1st Earl of Athlone" label="Godert de Ginkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q75581" start="2784" end="2795" title="Ferdinand Willem, Duke of Württemberg-Neuenstadt" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55308" start="3319" end="3328" title="Mullingar" label="Mullingar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076766" start="3383" end="3392" title="Ballymore, County Westmeath" label="Ballymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238739" start="3696" end="3708" title="Siege of Athlone" label="bloody siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="3899" end="3905" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q618056" start="4278" end="4289" title="Ballinasloe" label="Ballinasloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="4317" end="4323" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642247" start="4642" end="4649" title="Aughrim, County Galway" label="Aughrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210889" start="4842" end="4852" title="Irish Army (1661–1801)" label="Irish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455265" start="5276" end="5287" title="Royal Irish Regiment of Foot Guards" label="Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859413" start="5289" end="5295" title="Lord Grand Prior&amp;#x27;s Regiment" label="Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223915" start="5338" end="5344" title="John Burke, 9th Earl of Clanricarde" label="Boffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="5467" end="5474" title="dragoon" label="dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="5686" end="5697" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="5746" end="5754" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q61857515" start="6376" end="6389" title="John Hamilton (Jacobite)" label="John Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308477" start="6394" end="6412" title="William Dorrington" label="William Dorrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725196" start="6906" end="6914" title="Henry Luttrell (Jacobite commander)" label="Luttrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026090" start="6919" end="6926" title="Nicholas Purcell of Loughmoe" label="Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917426" start="6957" end="6972" title="Dominic Sheldon" label="Dominic Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128634" start="7182" end="7190" title="Claud Hamilton, 4th Earl of Abercorn" label="Abercorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378909" start="7264" end="7282" title="Philibert-Emmanuel de Froulay, chevalier de Tessé" label="chevalier de Tessé"/>
<link wikidata="Q336813" start="7328" end="7345" title="Patrick Sarsfield, 1st Earl of Lucan" label="Patrick Sarsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931614" start="8195" end="8206" title="Hugh Mackay (general)" label="Hugh Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789372" start="8663" end="8667" title="Thomas Erle" label="Erle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="9001" end="9007" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q248267" start="9103" end="9108" title="spiking the guns" label="spike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455265" start="9169" end="9175" title="Royal Irish Regiment of Foot Guards" label="Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167443" start="9688" end="9693" title="Percy Kirke" label="Kirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150949" start="9745" end="9752" title="Sir Francis Compton" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053108" start="9760" end="9778" title="Royal Horse Guards" label="Royal Horse Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q511089" start="10410" end="10425" title="Henri de Massue, Earl of Galway" label="Henri de Massue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206318" start="10448" end="10455" title="Robert Byerley" label="Byerley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="10943" end="10949" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="11179" end="11190" title="Decapitation" label="decapitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917426" start="11528" end="11535" title="Dominic Sheldon" label="Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192585" start="11540" end="11546" title="Piers Butler, 3rd Viscount Galmoye" label="Galmoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084038" start="12986" end="12992" title="James Talbot (Jacobite)" label="Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q22039005" start="13039" end="13063" title="Ulick Burke, 1st Viscount Galway" label="Ulick Burke, Lord Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080208" start="13437" end="13443" title="Charles Leslie (nonjuror)" label="Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="14723" end="14738" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520062" start="14823" end="14836" title="Lambay Island" label="Lambay Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="15455" end="15461" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q494840" start="15632" end="15643" title="siege of Limerick (1691)" label="short siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="15914" end="15928" title="Irish-language" label="Irish-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7665837" start="15934" end="15956" title="Séamas Dall Mac Cuarta" label="Séamas Dall Mac Cuarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181397" start="16296" end="16307" title="John Dunton" label="John Dunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691363" start="16327" end="16338" title="Teague Land" label="Teague Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="16958" end="16967" title="greyhound" label="greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555173" start="17231" end="17239" title="Loyalist" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="17254" end="17266" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q644960" start="17373" end="17392" title="Battle of the Boyne" label="Battle of the Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400710" start="17420" end="17431" title="the Twelfth" label="the Twelfth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="17449" end="17481" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="switch to the Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762279" start="17766" end="17774" title="The Sash" label="The Sash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421676" start="18619" end="18631" title="John Mulvany" label="John Mulvany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327955" start="18770" end="18784" title="Richard Murphy (poet)" label="Richard Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103802" start="18945" end="18956" title="M6 motorway (Ireland)" label="M6 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519483" start="19307" end="19328" title="Galway County Council" label="Galway County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q97382689" start="19566" end="19594" title="List of conflicts in Ireland" label="List of conflicts in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16782000" start="19635" end="19656" title="Demetrius Charles Boulger" label="Boulger, Demetrius C."/>
<link wikidata="Q63929057" start="19849" end="19863" title="Piers Wauchope" label="Piers Wauchope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549909" start="19992" end="20010" title="Gerard Anthony Hayes-McCoy" label="G. A., Hayes-McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355441" start="20291" end="20317" title="Ordnance Survey of Ireland" label="Ordnance Survey of Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266254" wikidata="Q675716" url="?curid=1266254" title="Jason Witten">
<text>Christopher Jason Witten (born May 6, 1982) is an American former professional football player who was a tight end for 17 seasons, primarily for the Dallas Cowboys of the National Football League (NFL). He currently is the head football coach at Liberty Christian School in Argyle, Texas. He played college football for the University of Tennessee, and was selected by the Cowboys in the third round of the 2003 NFL draft. Witten ranks second in all-time career receptions and receiving yards by an NFL tight end, trailing only Tony Gonzalez. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest tight ends of all time.

Initially retiring in 2018, he became a color analyst for ESPN&#x27;s &quot;Monday Night Football&quot;. After working as an ESPN color analyst for the 2018 season, Witten returned to the NFL for the 2019 season, reuniting with the Cowboys. Witten then joined the Las Vegas Raiders for the 2020 season. Witten afterward retired again but signed a one-day contract to retire as a member of the Cowboys.

==Early life==
Witten has one cousin, Triston Witten, and two older brothers, Ryan and Shawn. All were raised in Washington D.C., but attended Elizabethton High School in Elizabethton, Tennessee. Witten&#x27;s father, a 6&#x27;8&quot;, 300 lb. mailman, became addicted to alcohol and drugs when Witten was 6 and became abusive toward Witten&#x27;s mother, Kim, and Witten&#x27;s older brothers. When Witten was 11, he moved to Elizabethton to live with his grandparents. His grandfather, Dave Rider, was the coach of the football team where Witten was a two-way player, playing linebacker and tight end.

Witten became a three-year starter playing both linebacker and tight end, while helping his team reach the state semi-finals three times. As a senior linebacker, he finished the season with 163 tackles (registering a career school record 450), nine sacks, two interceptions, five forced fumbles, three fumble recoveries, and two blocked kicks. That year, he received several accolades: All-American, All-State (also as a junior), USA Today Player of the Year for Tennessee, East Tennessee Player of the Year, Region Defensive Player of the Year and runner-up for the Mr. Football award. He had 26 receptions and 14 touchdowns on offense. He also played basketball, where he averaged 15 points and 12 rebounds per game.

==College career==

===2000 season===

In 2000, Witten accepted a scholarship to the University of Tennessee, with the promise from head coach Phillip Fulmer that he would be played at defensive end. Witten began his first year playing special teams and also saw time as a second-string defensive end.

After injuries impacted the depth at the tight end position, he was moved to the offensive side midway through the season. Although Witten did not agree with the change and even considered transferring, he eventually came around and was used primarily as a blocker while he learned the position. He also started in his first two games. As a freshman, he appeared in 12 games and recorded one reception on the season, which went for 11 yards in a 70–3 victory over Louisiana–Monroe.

===2001 season===

Witten appeared in all 13 games as a sophomore, catching 28 passes for 293 yards and two touchdowns. He scored his first collegiate touchdown in a 35–24 victory over Alabama in their annual rivalry game. Witten had 125 receiving yards and a touchdown in Tennessee&#x27;s Citrus Bowl victory over Michigan. Witten&#x27;s performance in the 45–17 victory marked the third most receiving yards in a bowl game in Tennessee history.

===2002 season===

As a junior, Witten had a breakout year, setting school records for a tight end in receptions (39) and receiving yards (493) with five touchdowns, including one of the most memorable receptions in school history, a game-winning touchdown in the sixth overtime against Arkansas. He received All-SEC (SEC) and Academic All-SEC honors after leading the conference&#x27;s tight ends in receptions and receiving yards. He was a semifinalist for the John Mackey Tight End Award.

Even though he decided to enter the NFL draft after his junior season and had played the position in only 20 games, Witten left ranked third all-time among the school&#x27;s tight ends with 68 career receptions and fourth all-time with 797 receiving yards.

===Legacy===
Following the 2017 college football season, Witten&#x27;s name was placed on a college football award. The Jason Witten Collegiate Man of the Year award honors a player who shows strong leadership qualities on and off the field.

==Professional career==
===Dallas Cowboys (first stint)===
====2003 season====

Witten was selected by the Dallas Cowboys in the third round with the 69th overall pick in the 2003 NFL draft. He was the fifth tight end selected that year. Although the Cowboys had a first-round grade on Witten, when their turn came in the first and second rounds, they selected cornerback Terrence Newman and Al Johnson based on team needs. Undrafted free agent Tony Romo was another rookie who also arrived in Dallas in 2003 and would go on to become Witten&#x27;s teammate throughout their careers, as well as his roommate during future team training camps and travel games.

Entering the league as a 20-year-old rookie, one of the youngest players in the NFL, Witten started seven of the 15 games he played in. On September 7, he made his NFL debut in a 27–13 loss to the Atlanta Falcons, where he had one reception for 13 yards. Witten suffered a fractured jaw against the Arizona Cardinals, after being hit by Ronald McKinnon and Ray Thompson, which required surgery to have three plates inserted to help the healing. He only missed one game and continued to play through the injury. Head coach Bill Parcells complimented Witten on his toughness. Witten was named to the NFL All-Rookie Team for the 2003 season.

Witten finished his rookie year with 35 receptions for 347 receiving yards and a receiving touchdown. He made his playoff debut in the Wild Card Round against the Carolina Panthers. He had four receptions for 30 yards in the 29–10 loss.

====2004 season====

Witten had a breakout season in 2004, finishing with 87 receptions for 980 receiving yards and six receiving touchdowns. His 87 receptions led the NFC and were the 11th most in NFL history by a tight end and a Cowboys team record for the position. In Week 7, against the Green Bay Packers, he had eight receptions for 112 receiving yards and one touchdown in the 41–20 loss. On November 15, against the Philadelphia Eagles, he had nine receptions for 133 yards and two touchdowns in Week 10. He was selected to his first Pro Bowl.

====2005 season====

Witten finished sixth in the NFL among tight ends in total receptions and became the first Cowboys tight end to have at least 65 receptions in consecutive seasons. He had 66 receptions for 757 receiving yards and six touchdown receptions for the 9–7 Cowboys in 2005. As a result of his successful season, he was named to his second Pro Bowl.

====2006 season====

At the end of the 2006 season, Witten became just the tenth tight end in NFL history to post three consecutive seasons with at least 60 receptions. He registered 64 receptions for 754 yards and one touchdown, while being named to his third Pro Bowl in as many seasons.

On July 22, Witten signed a six-year, $29 million contract extension through 2012. The deal contained $12 million guaranteed, including a $6 million signing bonus and a $6 million option bonus in the second year.

====2007 season====

Witten had a career year in 2007, breaking his own single-season Cowboys tight end record for receptions with 96 and becoming the first franchise tight end to reach 1,000 receiving yards in a season. He became the third tight end in NFL history with 96 or more catches. He started the season off strong with six receptions for 116 receiving yards and a touchdown in a 45–35 victory over the New York Giants in Week 1. In the Week 9 game on November 4, while playing on the road against the Philadelphia Eagles, he made a 53-yard reception after losing his helmet. On December 9 against the Detroit Lions in Week 14, Witten&#x27;s 15 receptions tied an NFL record held by Hall of Famer Kellen Winslow Sr., for most receptions in a game by a tight end in NFL history. In the following game against the Eagles in Week 15, Witten became the first Dallas tight end ever to gain over 1,000 receiving yards in a season. Witten was also one of the NFL-record 13 Cowboys players selected to the Pro Bowl. He was named as a First-team All-Pro for the 2007 season. Witten was nominated for the 2007 Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award, which was won by Jason Taylor.

The Cowboys made the playoffs with a 13–3 record, winning the NFC East and earning the top seed in the NFC. In the Divisional Round against the New York Giants, he had seven receptions for 81 yards in the 21–17 loss.

====2008 season====

In Week 2, Witten recorded seven receptions for 110 receiving yards in the 41–37 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles. Witten made his 400th NFL reception in the Cowboys&#x27; Thanksgiving Day game against the Seattle Seahawks in Week 13 as part of a nine-reception, 115-yard, one-touchdown performance. On December 28, against the Eagles in Week 17, he completed a 42-yard pass to Terrell Owens for the first pass of his NFL career. Witten posted 81 receptions, which ranked 13th in the NFL for 2008, 952 yards, four touchdowns, and was named a starter for the 2008 Pro Bowl.

====2009 season====

Witten recorded his first 100-yard game of the 2009 season in Week 12 against the Oakland Raiders. In the 24–7 victory, he had five receptions for 107 receiving yards. In the following game, against the New York Giants, he had 14 receptions for 156 receiving yards in the 31–24 loss. In Week 16, against the Washington Redskins, he had six receptions for 117 receiving yards in the 17–0 victory. Overall, Witten recorded another Pro Bowl season, making 94 receptions for 1,030 yards and two touchdowns while starting all 16 games. He was given the NFL Iron Man Award.

The Cowboys finished with a 11–5 record and made the playoffs. In the Wild Card Round against the Philadelphia Eagles, he had four receptions for 27 receiving yards in the 34–14 victory. In the Divisional Round against the Minnesota Vikings, he had ten receptions for 98 receiving yards in the 34–3 loss.

====2010 season====

Witten banged his head on the turf after making a catch in a Week 2 loss against the Chicago Bears. He was forced to miss the rest of the game with a concussion.

In a Week 15 game against the Washington Redskins, Witten became the fastest tight end to make 600 receptions (125 games). He accomplished this with a 10-catch, 140-yard, one-touchdown day at home. He received his seventh consecutive Pro Bowl selection when he was named as the starting tight end for the NFC.

At the end of the season, Witten was named tight end of the Year by the NFL Alumni Association.

Overall, Witten finished the 2010 season with 94 receptions for 1,002 yards and nine touchdowns. He was named as a First-team All-Pro for the second time in his career. He was ranked No. 36 by his fellow players on the NFL Top 100 Players of 2011.

====2011 season====

Witten started the 2011 season with consecutive 100-yard receiving games in a loss to the New York Jets and a victory over San Francisco 49ers. On November 13, in Week 10 against the Buffalo Bills, Witten surpassed Ozzie Newsome to become the tight end with the third most receptions in NFL history with 663. Witten finished the season with 79 receptions for 942 receiving yards and five touchdowns playing in all 16 games. He was ranked 75th by his fellow players on the NFL Top 100 Players of 2012.

====2012 season====

On August 13, 2012, Witten suffered a lacerated spleen in the preseason opener against the Oakland Raiders and missed the rest of the preseason. There was talk that the seriousness of the injury could keep him out of action for a considerable time.

On September 5, Witten battled back and was able to play in the season opener, catching two passes for 10 yards in a 24–17 victory over the New York Giants. Witten&#x27;s availability for the game was in question due to the spleen injury he suffered during the preseason, but he was active for the game after being medically cleared to play.

During Week 2 against the Seattle Seahawks, Witten caught four passes for 58 yards. He finished the game with 702 career receptions to become just the second player in franchise history to reach 700 catches and the third tight end in NFL history to do so. Witten became the fastest tight end to reach 700 catches, reaching the milestone in 145 games. Witten became the youngest wide receiver/tight end to reach 700 catches at 30 years and 133 days. This record was later broken in Week 3 by Cardinals&#x27; wide receiver Larry Fitzgerald who totaled 707 career catches with 29 years, 23 days. His 58-yard performance gave him 7,977 receiving yards for his career passing former Cowboy Jackie Smith for fourth all-time in receiving yards among tight ends.

After Week 3, Witten passed Ozzie Newsome for third place all-time in receiving yards among tight ends. In Week 8, a 29–24 loss to the New York Giants, Witten caught a career-high 18 passes for a career-high 167 yards. This is also a record for receptions by a tight end; the previous record of 15 receptions was set by Kellen Winslow in 1984.

On November 4, in Week 9 against the Atlanta Falcons, Witten set the Cowboys&#x27; all-time receptions record of 754, surpassing Michael Irvin&#x27;s previous record of 750.

On December 23, in Week 16 against the New Orleans Saints, Witten set the NFL single-season record for receptions by a tight end (103), breaking the previous record of 102 receptions, which had been set by Tony Gonzalez in 2004. He extended the record to 110 in the season finale.

On December 26, Witten was selected to his eighth Pro Bowl. For the second time in his career, Witten was nominated for the Walter Payton Man of the Year Award, this time winning the award and the $25,000 donation to his charity. Overall, he finished the 2012 season with 110 receptions for 1,039 yards and three touchdowns. His 110 receptions were the second-most in franchise history behind Michael Irvin (111 in 1995) and ranked fifth in the NFL for the season. He was ranked 41st among his peers on the NFL Top 100 Players of 2013.

====2013 season====

In the regular season opener against the New York Giants, Witten had two receiving touchdowns in the 36–31 victory. In Week 2 against the Kansas City Chiefs, Witten surpassed Shannon Sharpe with the second most receptions as a tight end in NFL history. His three catches during the game brought his career total to 817. In Week 5, against the Denver Broncos, he had seven receptions for 121 receiving yards and one touchdown in the 51–48 shootout loss. In Week 12, in the second divisional game against the Giants, he added two more receiving touchdowns in the 24–21 victory. In the season finale against the Philadelphia Eagles, he had 12 receptions for 135 yards in the 24–22 loss. He finished the 2013 season with starts in all 16 games. He recorded 73 receptions for 851 yards and eight touchdowns. He was named to the Pro Bowl for the ninth time in his career. He was ranked 98th by his fellow players on the NFL Top 100 Players of 2014.

====2014 season ====


In a Week 5 game against the Houston Texans on October 5, Witten became only the third tight end with 10,000 career receiving yards, joining Shannon Sharpe and Tony Gonzalez.

Witten became the all-time leader for consecutive starts by a tight end after he started against the Seattle Seahawks in Week 6. In that same game, he also became the second tight end in NFL history to reach 900 receptions.

In Week 7, Witten had 27 yards against the New York Giants to move his career receiving yards to 10,065 to pass Shannon Sharpe (10,060) for the second-most receiving yards by an NFL tight end. In Week 16, Witten sprained his knee against the Indianapolis Colts but was still able to play in the season finale against the Washington Redskins.

That season, the Cowboys emphasized the running game and although his receiving production declined, his blocking was noticed while helping DeMarco Murray lead the NFL in rushing. Witten finished with 60 receptions for 654 yards and five touchdowns. He was named to his tenth career Pro Bowl for his 2014 season. He was ranked 93rd by his peers on the NFL Top 100 Players of 2015.

====2015 season====

In the regular season opener against the New York Giants, Witten had eight receptions for 60 receiving yards and two receiving touchdowns, including a go-ahead touchdown with only 13 seconds remaining, in the 27–26 victory. In Week 2 against the Philadelphia Eagles, Witten suffered a right knee injury and two sprained ankles but was able to only miss a play and a half. On November 22, against the Miami Dolphins he became the franchise&#x27;s iron man, playing his 196th consecutive game and surpassing Bob Lilly. Two weeks later, in a &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; game against the Washington Redskins, Witten became the 12th player and second tight end in NFL history to reach 1,000 receptions. The only other tight end with 1,000 or more catches is Tony Gonzalez. On December 27, in Week 16 against the Buffalo Bills, he set the Cowboys record with his 118th consecutive game with a reception, passing Michael Irvin.

During the 2015 season, Witten was asked to be more involved in the blocking than usual, because of the team playing with four different starting quarterbacks with varying degrees of knowledge of the offense. He started all 16 games and led the Cowboys with 77 receptions for 713 yards and three touchdowns.

====2016 season====

Against the Philadelphia Eagles in Week 8, Witten caught the game-winning touchdown in overtime, making him the first player in franchise history to score in 14 seasons. In Week 9, against the Cleveland Browns, he had eight receptions for 134 receiving yards and one touchdown in the 35–10 victory. He finished the season 16 receiving yards shy of Michael Irvin&#x27;s all-time franchise record. Overall, Witten started all 16 games and finished the regular season with 69 receptions for 673 receiving yards and three touchdowns. He caught his first career post-season touchdown from Dak Prescott in the Cowboys&#x27; 34–31 Divisional Round loss to the Green Bay Packers.

====2017 season====


On March 28, 2017, Witten signed a four-year contract extension with the Cowboys through the 2021 season.

During a Week 1 19–3 victory against the New York Giants on &quot;Sunday Night Football&quot;, Witten recorded the Cowboys&#x27; lone touchdown. In addition, he passed Michael Irvin for most career receiving yards in franchise history and also became the third player in NFL history to have at least 150 catches against one team, joining Jerry Rice and Larry Fitzgerald. On September 17, in Week 2 against the Denver Broncos, Witten had ten receptions for 97 yards and a touchdown in the 42–17 defeat. He started all 16 games and finished the season with 63 receptions for 560 yards and five touchdowns, on his way to his 11th Pro Bowl, which tied a Cowboys record with Bob Lilly.

===Initial retirement===

On April 26, 2018, reports surfaced that Witten was going to retire and accept a position as the lead analyst for ESPN&#x27;s &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; telecasts. A week later, Witten officially announced his retirement and confirmed he would be joining &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; for the 2018 season.

===Dallas Cowboys (second stint)===

On February 28, 2019, ESPN announced that Witten would return to the Cowboys on a one-year, $4.5 million deal, and leave his &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; position at the company. In his return to the gridiron, Witten had three receptions for 15 yards and a receiving touchdown in the 35–17 victory over the New York Giants in the Cowboys&#x27; 2019 regular season opener. Overall, in the 2019 season, Witten started all 16 games and recorded 63 receptions for 529 receiving yards and four receiving touchdowns.

===Las Vegas Raiders===

On March 25, 2020, Witten signed a one-year contract with the Las Vegas Raiders. In Week 4, against the Buffalo Bills, he had his first touchdown as a Raider on a three-yard reception from quarterback Derek Carr. He was fined by the NFL on October 5, 2020, for attending a maskless charity event hosted by teammate Darren Waller during the COVID-19 pandemic in violation of the NFL&#x27;s COVID-19 protocols for the 2020 season. In the 2020 season, he started seven games and recorded 13 receptions for 69 receiving yards and two receiving touchdowns.

===Second retirement===
On January 27, 2021, Witten once again announced his retirement from the NFL and stated his intention to sign a one-day contract to retire as a member of the Cowboys.

==NFL career statistics==
=== Regular season ===
=== Postseason ===
===NFL records and achievements===
* Most receptions in a single game by a tight end: 18 (October 28, 2012)
* 2012 Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award winner
* 4th in receptions in NFL history: 1,228 (as of 2021)
* Most consecutive games played by a tight end: 235 (243 including playoffs)
* Most consecutive games started by a tight end: 179 (186 including playoffs)
* Fastest tight end to make 600 receptions (125 games)

===Cowboys franchise records===
* Most career receptions: 1,215
* Most career receiving yards: 12,977
* Most receptions in a single game: 18 (October 28, 2012, against the New York Giants)
* Most games played: 255
* Most consecutive games started: 179
* First tight end to reach 1,000 receiving yards in a season
* First tight end to have at least 65 receptions in consecutive seasons
* First player in franchise history to score in 16 seasons

==Coaching career==
On February 1, 2021, Witten was named the head football coach at Liberty Christian School. In 2023 he would lead the school to the state football championship (its fourth and its first unbeaten season in school history), the first title (at any level) in his career. In 2024, the Warriors won a second straight state title.

==Personal life==

Witten resides in Westlake, Texas, located in the Dallas – Fort Worth Metroplex, with his wife Michelle, an emergency room nurse at Dallas&#x27;s Parkland Memorial Hospital, and their four children, C.J., Cooper, Landry, and Hadley Grace.
Witten is a Christian, and appears in a video on &quot;I Am Second&quot; in which he talks about his faith.

Witten wrote an opinion piece for ESPN, titled &quot;How Twitter has become NFL locker room poison&quot; in which he detailed the potential negative impact social media can have, particularly on younger players, from his personal experiences.

In 2021 and just days after his second retirement from the NFL, Witten spurned the overtures of several NFL and college teams to coach and was named the head football coach at Liberty Christian School in Argyle, Texas.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Tennessee Volunteers bio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q675716" start="0" end="24" title="Jason Witten" label="Christopher Jason Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="79" end="87" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153176" start="105" end="114" title="tight end" label="tight end"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="149" end="163" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="171" end="195" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541662" start="246" end="270" title="Liberty Christian School (Argyle, Texas)" label="Liberty Christian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q178424" start="274" end="287" title="Argyle, Texas" label="Argyle, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="299" end="315" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070759" start="324" end="347" title="Tennessee Volunteers football" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714946" start="407" end="421" title="2003 NFL draft" label="2003 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q729462" start="528" end="541" title="Tony Gonzalez" label="Tony Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="671" end="675" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="689" end="710" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="877" end="894" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Las Vegas Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389138" start="1159" end="1183" title="Elizabethton High School" label="Elizabethton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389138" start="1187" end="1210" title="Elizabethton, Tennessee" label="Elizabethton, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="1537" end="1545" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="1594" end="1604" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="1669" end="1679" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153176" start="1684" end="1693" title="tight end" label="tight end"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="2007" end="2019" title="All-American" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="2274" end="2284" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="2426" end="2449" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185676" start="2484" end="2498" title="Phillip Fulmer" label="Phillip Fulmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q903354" start="2526" end="2539" title="defensive end" label="defensive end"/>
<link wikidata="Q694589" start="2577" end="2590" title="special teams" label="special teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q903354" start="2628" end="2641" title="defensive end" label="defensive end"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597586" start="3108" end="3124" title="2000 Louisiana–Monroe Indians football team" label="Louisiana–Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598431" start="3312" end="3319" title="2001 Alabama Crimson Tide football team" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784946" start="3329" end="3348" title="Third Saturday in October" label="annual rivalry game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600088" start="3417" end="3428" title="2002 Citrus Bowl" label="Citrus Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598894" start="3442" end="3450" title="2001 Michigan Wolverines football team" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599724" start="3862" end="3870" title="2002 Arkansas Razorbacks football" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="3884" end="3891" title="Southeastern Conference" label="All-SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="3911" end="3918" title="Southeastern Conference" label="All-SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750919" start="4104" end="4113" title="National Football League draft" label="NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="4676" end="4690" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714946" start="4744" end="4758" title="2003 NFL draft" label="2003 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q869161" start="4930" end="4940" title="cornerback" label="cornerback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518321" start="4941" end="4956" title="Terrence Newman" label="Terrence Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704154" start="4961" end="4971" title="Al Johnson (guard)" label="Al Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="4993" end="5013" title="Undrafted free agent" label="Undrafted free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q14027" start="5014" end="5023" title="Tony Romo" label="Tony Romo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601111" start="5427" end="5442" title="2003 Atlanta Falcons season" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601094" start="5529" end="5546" title="2003 Arizona Cardinals season" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365108" start="5567" end="5582" title="Ronald McKinnon (American football)" label="Ronald McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="5752" end="5765" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6005" end="6020" title="2003–04 NFL playoffs#NFC: Carolina Panthers 29, Dallas Cowboys 10" label="Wild Card Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601200" start="6033" end="6050" title="2003 Carolina Panthers season" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q319007" start="6276" end="6279" title="National Football Conference" label="NFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602833" start="6400" end="6417" title="2004 Green Bay Packers season" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603209" start="6532" end="6551" title="2004 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="6650" end="6658" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609006" start="7942" end="7957" title="2007 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901405" start="8041" end="8060" title="2007 Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608321" start="8141" end="8154" title="2007 Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q449472" start="8236" end="8254" title="Kellen Winslow" label="Kellen Winslow Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q771139" start="8639" end="8678" title="Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award" label="Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786087" start="8697" end="8709" title="Jason Taylor (American football)" label="Jason Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8827" end="8843" title="2007–08 NFL playoffs#NFC: New York Giants 21, Dallas Cowboys 17" label="Divisional Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901406" start="9049" end="9068" title="2008 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438868" start="9127" end="9143" title="NFL on Thanksgiving Day" label="Thanksgiving Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611888" start="9161" end="9177" title="2008 Seattle Seahawks season" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395269" start="9333" end="9346" title="Terrell Owens" label="Terrell Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415281" start="9513" end="9526" title="2008 Pro Bowl" label="2008 Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880356" start="9632" end="9647" title="2009 Oakland Raiders season" label="Oakland Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614454" start="9753" end="9768" title="2009 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4615132" start="9858" end="9877" title="2009 Washington Redskins season" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10189" end="10204" title="2009–10 NFL playoffs#NFC: Dallas Cowboys 34, Philadelphia Eagles 14" label="Wild Card Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901407" start="10217" end="10236" title="2009 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10313" end="10329" title="2009–10 NFL playoffs#NFC: Minnesota Vikings 34, Dallas Cowboys 3" label="Divisional Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972688" start="10342" end="10359" title="2009 Minnesota Vikings season" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616906" start="10531" end="10544" title="2010 Chicago Bears season" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618824" start="10639" end="10658" title="2010 Washington Redskins season" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932241" start="10992" end="11014" title="National Football League Alumni" label="NFL Alumni Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096372" start="11236" end="11263" title="NFL Top 100 Players of 2011" label="NFL Top 100 Players of 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621999" start="11377" end="11390" title="2011 New York Jets season" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622319" start="11410" end="11429" title="2011 San Francisco 49ers season" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620572" start="11470" end="11483" title="2011 Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q555608" start="11502" end="11515" title="Ozzie Newsome" label="Ozzie Newsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096388" start="11759" end="11786" title="NFL Top 100 Players of 2012" label="NFL Top 100 Players of 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880360" start="11901" end="11916" title="2012 Oakland Raiders season" label="Oakland Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626339" start="12200" end="12215" title="2012 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953624" start="12429" end="12445" title="2012 Seattle Seahawks season" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q918224" start="12781" end="12794" title="wide receiver" label="wide receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q944199" start="12924" end="12940" title="Larry Fitzgerald" label="Larry Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677297" start="13088" end="13100" title="Jackie Smith" label="Jackie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q555608" start="13187" end="13200" title="Ozzie Newsome" label="Ozzie Newsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q449472" start="13479" end="13493" title="Kellen Winslow" label="Kellen Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611422" start="13497" end="13501" title="1984 NFL season" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953440" start="13541" end="13556" title="2012 Atlanta Falcons season" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q952676" start="13633" end="13646" title="Michael Irvin" label="Michael Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626332" start="13718" end="13736" title="2012 New Orleans Saints season" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q729462" start="13885" end="13898" title="Tony Gonzalez" label="Tony Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q952676" start="14354" end="14367" title="Michael Irvin" label="Michael Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096398" start="14468" end="14495" title="NFL Top 100 Players of 2013" label="NFL Top 100 Players of 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656933" start="14560" end="14575" title="2013 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656675" start="14657" end="14675" title="2013 Kansas City Chiefs season" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378223" start="14694" end="14708" title="Shannon Sharpe" label="Shannon Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656619" start="14862" end="14876" title="2013 Denver Broncos season" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656969" start="15128" end="15147" title="2013 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096408" start="15433" end="15460" title="NFL Top 100 Players of 2014" label="NFL Top 100 Players of 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731087" start="15515" end="15529" title="2014 Houston Texans season" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378223" start="15627" end="15641" title="Shannon Sharpe" label="Shannon Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q729462" start="15646" end="15659" title="Tony Gonzalez" label="Tony Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15700" end="15733" title="List of most consecutive starts and games played by National Football League players#Offensive skilled" label="consecutive starts by a tight end"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711360" start="15763" end="15779" title="2014 Seattle Seahawks season" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859184" start="15930" end="15945" title="2014 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996882" start="16129" end="16147" title="2014 Indianapolis Colts season" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015966" start="16208" end="16227" title="2014 Washington Redskins season" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703887" start="16370" end="16384" title="DeMarco Murray" label="DeMarco Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096421" start="16582" end="16609" title="NFL Top 100 Players of 2015" label="NFL Top 100 Players of 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702430" start="16674" end="16689" title="2015 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q19402667" start="16879" end="16898" title="2015 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702374" start="17033" end="17047" title="2015 Miami Dolphins season" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q250725" start="17139" end="17148" title="Bob Lilly" label="Bob Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="17178" end="17199" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866360" start="17223" end="17242" title="2015 Washington Redskins season" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153176" start="17285" end="17294" title="tight end" label="tight end"/>
<link wikidata="Q18701983" start="17446" end="17459" title="2015 Buffalo Bills season" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q952676" start="17545" end="17558" title="Michael Irvin" label="Michael Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="17707" end="17718" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q22024759" start="17903" end="17922" title="2016 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022129" start="18084" end="18100" title="2016 Cleveland Browns season" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235747" start="18475" end="18487" title="Dak Prescott" label="Dak Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18515" end="18531" title="2016–17 NFL playoffs#NFC: Green Bay Packers 34, Dallas Cowboys 31" label="Divisional Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022639" start="18544" end="18561" title="2016 Green Bay Packers season" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206969" start="18734" end="18749" title="2017 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q505423" start="19031" end="19041" title="Jerry Rice" label="Jerry Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q944199" start="19046" end="19062" title="Larry Fitzgerald" label="Larry Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448362" start="19103" end="19117" title="2017 Denver Broncos season" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q250725" start="19363" end="19372" title="Bob Lilly" label="Bob Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="19515" end="19519" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="19533" end="19554" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q60525884" start="20068" end="20083" title="2019 New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="20360" end="20377" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Las Vegas Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q80810284" start="20402" end="20415" title="2020 Buffalo Bills season" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261870" start="20499" end="20509" title="Derek Carr" label="Derek Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q21038865" start="20613" end="20626" title="Darren Waller" label="Darren Waller"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="20638" end="20655" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="20687" end="20695" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q771139" start="21226" end="21265" title="Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award" label="Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q104765108" start="21322" end="21326" title="2021 NFL season" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21330" end="21374" title="List of most consecutive starts and games played by National Football League players#Consecutive games played" label="Most consecutive games played by a tight end"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21407" end="21452" title="List of most consecutive starts and games played by National Football League players#Offensive skilled" label="Most consecutive games started by a tight end"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541662" start="22069" end="22093" title="Liberty Christian School (Argyle, Texas)" label="Liberty Christian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q982660" start="22366" end="22381" title="Westlake, Texas" label="Westlake, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="22398" end="22427" title="Dallas – Fort Worth Metroplex" label="Dallas – Fort Worth Metroplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896131" start="22494" end="22520" title="Parkland Memorial Hospital" label="Parkland Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="22599" end="22608" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845838" start="22642" end="22653" title="I Am Second" label="I Am Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541662" start="23116" end="23140" title="Liberty Christian School (Argyle, Texas)" label="Liberty Christian School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266263" wikidata="Q16460360" url="?curid=1266263" title="IN3">
<text>IN3, or similar, may refer to:
* cubic inch (in3), a unit of volume
* Indiana State Road 3, a road in the eastern part of the U.S. state of Indiana.
* Indiana&#x27;s 3rd congressional district, a congressional district in the U.S. state of Indiana
* Internet Interdisciplinary Institute, the research body of the Open University of Catalonia
*Iodine azide, chemical formula IN3</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2140397" start="33" end="43" title="cubic inch" label="cubic inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q760038" start="70" end="90" title="Indiana State Road 3" label="Indiana State Road 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022946" start="151" end="192" title="Indiana&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Indiana&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042433" start="250" end="286" title="Internet Interdisciplinary Institute" label="Internet Interdisciplinary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624428" start="343" end="355" title="Iodine azide" label="Iodine azide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266285" wikidata="Q2186839" url="?curid=1266285" title="Malcolm Wells">
<text>Malcolm Wells (March 11, 1926 – November 27, 2009) was an American architect who is regarded as &quot;the father of modern earth-sheltered architecture.&quot; Wells lived on Cape Cod, Massachusetts in a modern earth-sheltered building of his own design. Wells was also a writer, illustrator, draftsman, lecturer, cartoonist, columnist, and solar energy consultant.

Wells retired from architecture in June 2004, but continued his advocacy for underground living to the end of his life.

Wells&#x27; work in architecture and design began in 1953. After 10 years &quot;spent spreading corporate asphalt on America in the name of architecture,&quot; he began to feel that the Earth&#x27;s surface was &quot;made for living plants, not industrial plants;&quot; and went into underground architecture. This was reflected in his semi-underground offices at the corner of East Cuthbert Blvd and North Park Drive and at 6 Dale Avenue in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, adjacent to the Cooper River. His interests were in energy efficiency, aesthetics, land preservation and restoration &quot;A Regeneration-based Checklist for Design and Construction&quot;, and durability of materials.

Wells&#x27; books have sold over 120,000 copies.

Wells died Friday, November 27, 2009. He left behind his wife Karen North Wells and son John Wells.

==Bibliography==
*How to buy solar heating ... without getting burnt! (1978)
*The Children&#x27;s Solar Energy Book (1982)
*Underground Designs (1981)
*Classic Architectural Birdhouses and Feeders (1988)
*Architects Sketchbook of Underground Buildings: Drawings and Photographs (1990)
*How to Build an Underground House (1991)
*Infra Structures (1994)
*Passive Solar Energy: The Homeowner&#x27;s Guide to Natural Heating and Cooling (with Bruce Anderson) (1996)
*Sandtiquity (with Kappy Wells, Connie Simo) (1999)
*Designing Your Natural House (with Charles G. Woods) (1999)
*Recovering America: A More Gentle Way to Build (2001)
*A Tiny Underground House
*Bipad (1995)
*Underground Plans Book (1980)
*Liquid Gold: The Lore and Logic of Using Urine to Grow Plants (2007)

==Notes==
==External links==
*www.malcolmwells.com
*British Earth Sheltering Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2186839" start="0" end="13" title="Malcolm Wells" label="Malcolm Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="174" end="182" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="184" end="197" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q110453750" start="210" end="234" title="Earth sheltering" label="earth-sheltered building"/>
<link wikidata="Q683754" start="292" end="301" title="draftsman" label="draftsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="313" end="323" title="cartoonist" label="cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="340" end="352" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463341" start="443" end="461" title="underground living" label="underground living"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="593" end="600" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710598" start="929" end="952" title="Cherry Hill, New Jersey" label="Cherry Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167805" start="970" end="982" title="Cooper River (New Jersey)" label="Cooper River"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="1006" end="1023" title="Efficient energy use" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="1025" end="1035" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266289" wikidata="Q3303940" url="?curid=1266289" title="Bombardier Turbostar">
<text>The Bombardier Turbostar (sold as the ADtranz Turbostar until 2001) is a family of diesel multiple unit (DMU) passenger trains that was built by ADtranz and later Bombardier Transportation at Derby Litchurch Lane Works in the United Kingdom between 1997 and 2011. The Turbostar was the first new train type to be introduced after the privatisation of British Rail. The first units were ordered by Chiltern Railways in 1996 and were designated Class 168 (also known as &quot;Clubman&quot;). Since then the family has grown with the addition of the Class 170, Class 171, and the Class 172.

== Description and technical details ==

The Turbostar and Electrostar platforms are a modular design, which share the same basic design, bodyshell and core structure, and are optimised for speedy manufacture and easy maintenance. They consist of a common underframe, which is created by seam-welding a number of aluminium alloy extrusions, upon which bodyside panels are mounted followed by a single piece roof, again made from extruded sections. The car ends (cabs) are made from glass-reinforced plastic and steel, and are Huck-bolted onto the main car bodies. Underframe components are collected in ‘rafts’, which are bolted into slots on the underframe extrusion. The mostly aluminium alloy body gives light weight to help acceleration and energy efficiency.

Much of the design of the Class 168/170/171 is derived from the Networker Turbo Class 165 and Class 166 trains built by British Rail Engineering Limited&#x27;s Holgate Road carriage works. Notable features shared are the aluminium alloy frame and two-stage Voith T211r hydrodynamic transmission system. The diesel engine has changed to an MTU 6R 183TD13H. A cardan shaft links the output of the gearbox to ZF final drives (instead of Gmeinder in the Networkers) on the inner bogie of each vehicle. The engine and transmission are situated under the body; one bogie per car is powered, the other bogie unpowered.

The Class 172 differs mechanically to its older relations in several ways. The engine used is the more powerful and cleaner MTU 6H1800R83, the transmission is the mechanical 6-speed ZF Ecomat-Rail, and lighter Bombardier FLEXX-ECO bogies and hollow axles are used as well as half-height airdams. The exhaust system is also quieter and does not have the distinctive note of that of the Class 168/170/171.

Turbostars have been acquired for use by several train operating companies, each with different specifications. One of the more noticeable differences with later units compared to earlier ones are the larger headlights now specified for safety reasons.

Units are numbered 168 xxx, 170 xxx, 171 xxx, or 172 xxx, where xxx is the serial number of the unit. Individual carriages are numbered 50xxx and 79xxx for driving motor cars, and 54xxx, 55xxx and 56xxx for centre cars.

=== Working in multiple ===
One factor which contributes to the popularity of the Turbostars is that Class 170 units are fully capable of working in multiple with older types from the Class 15x &quot;Sprinter&quot; series of units as well as other units of the same class, unlike all other types built since privatisation, giving them greater flexibility. However, there are issues with so-called &quot;sandwich&quot; formations, formed either as 170-15x-170 or 15x-170-15x, which causes problems with empty stock movements where up to four units of various types coupled together is common. A possible side effect of this is that Turbostars&#x27; performance is in line with the second generation 15x units, in fact being somewhat slower than a Class 150 or Class 156 on &quot;short hop&quot; workings, and slower than a Class 158 on longer distance workings unless there is enough 100 mph running to take advantage of the 10 mph higher top speed of the Class 170.

The Class 171 units are fitted with Dellner couplers rather than BSI (&quot;Bergische Stahl Industrie&quot;) couplers, which means that they can mechanically couple with Southern&#x27;s Class 377 &quot;Electrostar&quot; EMUs for rescue purposes.

== Variants ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
*

== External links ==

*Detailed description of the Turbostars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3303940" start="4" end="24" title="Bombardier Turbostar" label="Bombardier Turbostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303940" start="38" end="55" title="Bombardier Turbostar" label="ADtranz Turbostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567915" start="83" end="103" title="diesel multiple unit" label="diesel multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q378767" start="145" end="152" title="ADtranz" label="ADtranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="163" end="188" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261424" start="192" end="218" title="Derby Litchurch Lane Works" label="Derby Litchurch Lane Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="226" end="240" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404257" start="334" end="363" title="privatisation of British Rail" label="privatisation of British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q567000" start="397" end="414" title="Chiltern Railways" label="Chiltern Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303646" start="443" end="452" title="British Rail Class 168" label="Class 168"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303833" start="547" end="556" title="British Rail Class 170" label="Class 170"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303824" start="558" end="567" title="British Rail Class 171" label="Class 171"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970742" start="577" end="586" title="British Rail Class 172" label="Class 172"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341962" start="845" end="855" title="underframe" label="underframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q139143" start="918" end="927" title="extrusion" label="extrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="1071" end="1095" title="glass-reinforced plastic" label="glass-reinforced plastic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1115" end="1126" title="Huck bolt" label="Huck-bolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="1334" end="1351" title="Efficient energy use" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001262" start="1418" end="1433" title="Networker (train)" label="Networker Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303631" start="1434" end="1443" title="British Rail Class 165" label="Class 165"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303637" start="1448" end="1457" title="British Rail Class 166" label="Class 166"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303533" start="1474" end="1506" title="British Rail Engineering Limited" label="British Rail Engineering Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160582" start="1514" end="1541" title="Holgate Road carriage works" label="Holgate Road carriage works"/>
<link wikidata="Q126944" start="1611" end="1616" title="Voith" label="Voith"/>
<link wikidata="Q749213" start="1623" end="1648" title="Turbo-transmission" label="hydrodynamic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="1661" end="1674" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q548006" start="1693" end="1696" title="MTU Friedrichshafen" label="MTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q862003" start="1712" end="1718" title="universal joint" label="cardan"/>
<link wikidata="Q136119" start="1760" end="1762" title="ZF Friedrichshafen" label="ZF"/>
<link wikidata="Q870024" start="1788" end="1796" title="Gmeinder" label="Gmeinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102188" start="2421" end="2446" title="Train operating company" label="train operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581317" start="3047" end="3055" title="British Rail Sprinter" label="Sprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303653" start="3593" end="3602" title="British Rail Class 150" label="Class 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303716" start="3606" end="3615" title="British Rail Class 156" label="Class 156"/>
<link wikidata="Q844331" start="3669" end="3678" title="British Rail Class 158" label="Class 158"/>
<link wikidata="Q16774936" start="3850" end="3866" title="Dellner coupling" label="Dellner couplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501648" start="3879" end="3882" title="BSI coupling" label="BSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393575" start="3890" end="3915" title="Bergische Stahl Industrie" label="Bergische Stahl Industrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975712" start="4000" end="4033" title="British Rail Class 377" label="Class 377 &amp;quot;Electrostar&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266297" wikidata="Q25464" url="?curid=1266297" title="Larry Allen">
<text>Larry Christopher Allen Jr. (November 27, 1971 – June 2, 2024) was an American professional football player who was a guard in the National Football League (NFL) for 14 seasons, primarily with the Dallas Cowboys. He played college football for the Butte Roadrunners and the Sonoma State Cossacks, and was selected by the Cowboys in the second round of the 1994 NFL draft. A player capable of using his speed against defenders, Allen was regarded as one of the strongest players to ever play in the NFL.

Spending his first 12 seasons with the Cowboys, Allen earned ten Pro Bowl selections and six first-team All-Pro honors. He was also part of the team that won a Super Bowl title in Super Bowl XXX over the Pittsburgh Steelers. Allen played his final two seasons with the San Francisco 49ers, where he received his 11th Pro Bowl selection. He was inducted to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2013.

==Early life==
Allen grew up in Compton, California, and had a troubled childhood, including contracting meningitis and almost dying at six weeks old, as well as being stabbed 12 times in the head, shoulder, and neck by a young neighbor while trying to protect his brother at the age of 10. He attended a different school in each of his four years of high school. As a freshman at Centennial High School in Compton, Allen lettered in football. For his sophomore year, he attended Tokay High School in Lodi. As a junior, Allen transferred to Edison High School in Stockton. He finished high school at Vintage High School in Napa, California, but did not graduate.

==College career==

Allen was not academically eligible to play NCAA Division I football, so he attended Butte College in Oroville, California. In each of his two years at Butte, the team went 10–1 while winning the Golden Valley Conference, and Allen was named to the All-Conference and All-State teams both seasons. Allen was also recognized as a J.C. All-American after his sophomore year. Allen did not attend any school the following year. After a year away from school, he enrolled at Sonoma State University, a Division II school north of San Francisco. In two years with the Cossacks, Allen gave up just one sack and was a two-time All-American. The Cossacks were primarily a passing team and established 10 new school records, including most yards gained, most touchdown passes, best gain-per-completion rate and highest passing efficiency. During Allen&#x27;s senior season, the team set a school mark with 334 rushing yards against Cal State Hayward. As a senior, he participated in the East–West Shrine Game and the Senior Bowl.

==Professional career==
===1994 NFL Draft===
Allen&#x27;s stock dropped in the 1994 NFL draft because of his small-school background and a rotator cuff injury. Allen was the tenth offensive lineman selected in the draft and the first player ever chosen from Sonoma State. He was selected in the second round (46th overall), which marked the highest offensive lineman selection by the Cowboys since Howard Richards in 1981.

===Dallas Cowboys===

====1990s====

In 1994, Allen started 10 regular-season games rotating between guard and tackle. During the season, he tied Burton Lawless in 1975 and Kevin Gogan in 1987, for the most starts on the offensive line as a rookie in club history at the time; Flozell Adams broke the record in 1998. Allen helped Dallas establish a then team record by allowing just 20 sacks totaling just 93 yards (fewest in the NFL) while earning all-rookie honors.

Allen was forced into a starting spot just four games into his rookie season when Mark Tuinei suffered back spasms on the road against the Washington Redskins. He received the game ball for helping keep the Redskins sackless for the game. He recorded his first NFL start at left tackle, replacing an injured Tuinei against the Arizona Cardinals. This marked the first time a rookie offensive lineman had started for Dallas since November 24, 1991, when Erik Williams started at right tackle against the Redskins. Allen returned to a back-up role for the next two weeks, but early in the morning on October 24, Williams was injured in an automobile accident and was out for the rest of the season, after which Allen was permanently moved into the starting lineup at Williams&#x27; right tackle position beginning with a game at Cincinnati on October 30. He received the game ball, along with Tuinei, for helping hold the New Orleans Saints without a sack in a Monday night win in New Orleans on December 19. In that Monday night contest, the 325-lb. Allen shocked the Saints by running down linebacker Darion Conner from behind on an interception return early in the game, with Allen was beginning from a standing start at the moment of the interception. The game&#x27;s announcers (Al Michaels, Frank Gifford, and Dan Dierdorf) talked more about Allen&#x27;s amazing feat than the actual interception. In his first playoffs, Allen received the game ball against the Green Bay Packers on January 8, when the Dallas offense recorded 450 total yards and Troy Aikman completed 23 of 30 passes for 337 yards. Allen sprained his left ankle during the game, but he returned to play. In the NFC Championship Game at San Francisco, he struggled playing through three quarters on his injured ankle before leaving the game.

In 1995, Allen, after just one year of experience as a starting guard, earned his first of seven consecutive trips to the Pro Bowl. He was one of a club record four Dallas offensive linemen named to the Pro Bowl, with Ray Donaldson, Nate Newton, and Mark Tuinei being the others. The team finished fifth in the league in total offense with Emmitt Smith gaining a franchise record 1,773 rushing yards, his fourth NFL rushing title in five years. Smith also scored a then NFL record 25 rushing touchdowns.

Allen made his first NFL start at right guard in the season opener at the Meadowlands against the New York Giants on September 4, helping the Dallas offense record 459 yards, including 230 rushing yards. In the regular-season finale, on the road against the Cardinals on Christmas Day, the offensive line enabled Dallas to record 474 yards of total offense for the most yardage by a Cowboys team since September 15, 1985.

On January 28, 1996, Allen earned his first start in a Super Bowl as well as his only Super Bowl ring when the Cowboys defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 27–17 in Super Bowl XXX.

In 1996, Allen earned a second consecutive trip to the Pro Bowl, along with earning consensus All-Pro and All-NFC honors. The Dallas offensive line led the league by allowing just 19 sacks, one shy of the team record set the previous year. For the third consecutive season behind Allen, Emmitt Smith ran for over 1,200 yards while eclipsing 100 rushing yards four times, including a season-high 155 yards and three touchdowns against the Redskins on November 28.

In 1997, Allen, despite being moved between guard and tackle during the season, was selected to his third consecutive Pro Bowl at guard and earned first-team All-Pro honors. He also spent part of training camp working at left tackle and returned to his right guard position for the first 13 games of the season.

Allen started his third season at right guard at Pittsburgh and helped Dallas gain 380 total yards, including 295 passing yards, while not allowing a sack. He left the September 15 win over the Philadelphia Eagles after suffering a strained left hamstring in the second quarter and did not return. Allen returned to the starting lineup following the bye week against the Chicago Bears on September 28, but was forced to leave in the second quarter with insufficient strength in his left leg to block effectively. He was back in the starting lineup the following week at the Giants, where he was forced to move to left tackle after the loss of Tuinei during a game at Washington on October 13. Allen remained at left tackle in third-down passing situations against the Eagles and Redskins on October 26 and November 16. He became a full-time starter at left tackle against the upstart Carolina Panthers on December 8 and remained there the final three weeks of the season.

In 1998, Allen was slated to start at left tackle. In his first full season guarding Troy Aikman&#x27;s , he earned consensus All-Pro and All-NFC honors. Allen became just the third player in league history to be selected to the Pro Bowl at more than one offensive line position when peers voted him to NFC Pro Bowl team at tackle. He earned recognition as part of an offensive line that allowed just 19 sacks for 110 yards in 493 pass plays for a season, the fewest in the NFL. Allen&#x27;s blocking helped Emmitt Smith to record seven 100-yard rushing games and 1,332 yards on the season.

He debuted at his new position in the season opener against the Arizona Cardinals and helped Dallas gain 444 total yards (188 rushing); both totals were the team&#x27;s highest since 1996. He helped lead the way as two running backs topped the 100-yard mark for just the third time in franchise history at Washington on October 4; Smith finishing with 120 yards and one touchdown while Chris Warren recorded 104 yards and two touchdowns. In November, he faced four of the NFC&#x27;s top defensive ends in Hugh Douglas, Chad Bratzke, Simeon Rice, and John Randle. Allen&#x27;s no-sacks-allowed streak started at Philadelphia on November 2, when he limited Douglas to one tackle and no sacks. The following week against the Giants and Bratzke, his blocking helped Emmitt Smith rush for 163 yards on 29 carries, a 5.6 average. The Dallas offensive line allowed no sacks to the Giants defense that led NFL in sacks in 1998. In Arizona, Allen limited Rice to one tackle and was part of an offensive line that allowed no sacks to the Cardinals defense as well. He led the way for Smith&#x27;s 118 rushing yards and three touchdowns. The Seattle Seahawks had the AFC&#x27;s top sacking defense of 1998 (11 sacks for 22 yards) and came away with just one sack (on an Aikman fumble), while the Cowboys ran for 173 yards. He also limited Randle to one tackle and no sacks in 81 offensive plays against the Minnesota Vikings on November 26. Allen helped set a franchise record for pass attempts in a game without a sack (57) and led the way as Smith rushed for three touchdowns to tie Marcus Allen&#x27;s NFL record of 123 career rushing touchdowns. In the regular-season finale against the Redskins on December 27, Allen was part of an offensive line that saw Smith run for two more touchdowns to break the NFL&#x27;s all-time rushing touchdown record.

In 1999, despite starting in his third offensive line position in as many years and missing five games due to injury, Allen was selected to his fifth consecutive Pro Bowl while earning consensus All-Pro honors at guard.

Allen earned recognition as part of an offensive line that allowed the second-fewest sacks (24) in the league, behind Indianapolis who allowed just 14, and one or fewer sacks in nine of 16 games. He helped lead the way as the Cowboys gained 541 total yards while giving up only one sack in 50 pass plays in his first career start at left guard at Washington on September 12. He helped lead the way as Emmitt Smith became just the third player in the last 29 games to rush for over 100 yards against the Atlanta Falcons on September 20, when he rushed for 109 yards. Allen&#x27;s blocking helped the Cowboys offensive line allow only one sack in 40 pass plays in Philadelphia on October 10. Allen gave up no sacks to the Redskins on 32 pass plays on October 24. His blocking helped Smith to rush for 140 yards and two touchdowns in the first half as the Dallas offense recorded 205 rushing yards in Minnesota on November 8. Allen helped the Cowboys running backs record 149 yards before leaving the game in the third quarter with a sprained medial collateral ligament (MCL) in his right knee against the Packers on November 14. He missed his first career game in Arizona on November 21, snapping strings of 97 consecutive games played and 90 consecutive starts. He missed the next four games with a sprained knee. He returned to the starting lineup in New Orleans on Christmas Eve and helped the Cowboys offensive line give up no sacks on 39 pass plays while helping Smith to rush for his eighth 100-yard game of the season. In the season finale against the Giants on New Year&#x27;s Day, he blocked for Smith as the latter recorded his ninth 100-yard game of the season. Allen was part of an offensive line that did not allow a sack in 33 pass plays during the game. In the NFC Wild Card Playoff Game in Minnesota on January 9, he opened holes for Smith to rush for 99 yards, including a Dallas postseason record 65-yarder.

====2000s====
In 2000, Allen was selected to his sixth consecutive Pro Bowl and earned consensus All-Pro and All-NFC honors. He was part of an offensive line unit that allowed just 35 sacks in 480 pass plays on the season. Six times during the season, opponents were held to one sack-or-less.

Despite suffering a fractured right hand in practice on June 20, Allen returned to play by the end of the preseason and started all 16 games. His blocking helped limit the Cardinals to one sack while protecting Randall Cunningham as he completed 24-of-34 passes for 243 yards and three touchdowns on September 10. His blocking against Arizona on October 22 was key to the offense as it recorded 347 total yards, including 200 rushing yards. He allowed just one sack. He helped limit Warren Sapp to two tackles for the game in Tampa Bay, on December 3, while the entire Tampa Bay starting defensive line was limited to six tackles. He was also part of an offensive line that helped Smith rush for 150 yards and a touchdown against the Redskins and the NFL&#x27;s fourth-ranked defense on December 10. The Cowboys rushed for 242 yards against the Redskins for most by Dallas offense since recording 271 rushing yards in Philadelphia on Halloween 1993.

In 2001, Allen was named All-Pro by the Associated Press for the seventh consecutive season. He was also named a Pro Bowl starter at guard. However, he was unable to attend the game in Hawaii due to elbow surgery that was performed after the season ended. This marked his seventh consecutive Pro Bowl selection.

Allen played a key role in Dallas’ third rank in the league in rushing at 136.5 yards per game. The season rushing total of 2,184 yards was the second-best total by a Cowboys team in last 20 years (1995, 2,201). He helped limit All-Pro DT Sapp to one tackle and no sacks in the season opener against the Buccaneers, also helping the Cowboys offense rush for 99 yards on 23 carries, a 4.3 average. He led the way for Emmitt Smith to his first 100-yard rushing game of the season, 107 yards, and offense to 211 total rushing yards in the Cowboys Monday night win over the Redskins on October 15. He played a part in helping Troy Hambrick gain 127 rushing yards as well as Michael Wiley gain 85 en route to the Cowboys gaining 207 rushing yards (6.3 avg.) at Atlanta on November 11. He played a key role in Dallas&#x27; 20–14 win over the Redskins on December 2, as the Cowboys recorded their third 200-plus yard rushing game of the season as the team rushed the ball 44 times for 215 yards, a 4.9 average, including 102 yards by Smith.

It is believed 2002 was the first time an NFL franchise had five African-American starters on their offensive line, when the Cowboys lined up rookie center Andre Gurode, tackles Flozell Adams and Solomon Page, guards Allen and Kelvin Garmon. Allen had a challenging season due to injuries. He played through off-season surgery and a nagging early-season ankle sprain that limited him to five starts on the season between left guard and right tackle. Due to his off-season rotator cuff surgery on his left shoulder, and was limited in training camp and played in just the final two preseason games. He was selected as an offensive captain by his teammates, entering the regular season.

Allen sprained his left ankle in the second quarter against the Tennessee Titans on September 15. He attempted to return in the second half but lasted just two plays before returning to the sideline. He was inactive at Philadelphia on September 22, due to his ankle injury. He moved to right tackle during practice the week leading up to St. Louis Rams game on September 29, and opened the game at that position before re-aggravating his sprained left ankle. He then left the game in the first quarter. He returned to the starting lineup at right tackle against the New York Giants on October 6, but came out during first drive after aggravating left ankle. He fought the pain and was in and out of the game in the second half at left guard for Kelvin Garmon who suffered a hip injury. Following the trade of Garmon to the Chargers, Allen returned to left guard against the Panthers on October 13, but left the game in the second quarter with an ankle pain. He was then inactive next the three games to let the injury heal. He returned to practice the week against the Colts on November 17 but was inactive for a fourth straight game. He was placed on injured reserve on November 21, and underwent successful surgery on December 3, to remove bone spurs from left ankle.

In 2003, Allen returned after missing most of the 2002 season with a sprained left ankle that required off-season surgery to remove bone spurs. He returned and started all 16 regular-season games and the playoff game at Carolina on January 3. Despite missing parts of four games with injuries, he returned and was honored for play with eighth Pro Bowl selection at guard.

He began the season by straining his hamstring during practice four days before the season opener. However, he still started against the Falcons, but aggravated his hamstring in the second quarter and sat out remainder of half before coming back for the second half as offense recorded 403 total yards. He played at the New York Giants on September 15, and helped protect Quincy Carter, allowing him to throw for 321 yards in leading Dallas to a come-from-behind overtime win. He suffered a sprained left knee in the second quarter against the Cardinals on October 5, but returned in the second half to help Dallas total 365 yards of offense. Despite playing sporadically against the Washington on November 2, due to a sprained left knee suffered in the first quarter, he helped the Cowboys record 400 yards of total offense, including 208 rushing yards. Allen also helped hold DT Kris Jenkins to zero sacks, while the Dallas line allowed only one sack for zero yards in 45 pass plays against the Panthers on November 23. He also helped lead way for Troy Hambrick to run for 189 yards against the Redskins on December 14.

In 2004, Allen started all 16 games for the eighth time in 11 NFL seasons, and for the ninth time, he was an NFC Pro Bowl selection at guard.

In the season opener in Minnesota, Allen&#x27;s blocking helped the Cowboys offense record 423 yards of total offense. In the home-opening win over the Cleveland Browns on September 19, the Cowboys recorded a season-high 441 total yards, and Vinny Testaverde passed for 322 yards with only one sack in 36 passes. The Cowboys also rushed for 126 yards. He helped the Cowboys record 166 rushing yards for the game against the Giants on October 10. On Thanksgiving Day, in a win over Chicago, he was part of a line that led the way for Julius Jones to rush for 150 yards. In a Monday night win at Seattle on December 6, the Cowboys offensive line&#x27;s blocking opened holes for Jones to run for 198 yards, the third-best rushing game in franchise history and the second-best ever by a Cowboys rookie. In the season finale loss at the Giants, the Cowboys offensive line ended the season by opening holes for Jones to rush the ball 29 times for 149 yards a 5.1 average and a touchdown.

In 2005, Allen was selected to his 10th Pro Bowl. He played every offensive snap for the Cowboys in 2005, starting all 16 games at left guard.

He started his 11th season as a full-time starter and his seventh consecutive season opener at left guard at San Diego on September 11. He helped the Cowboys offense record 28 points and 301 yards of total offense. He started against the Eagles on October 9, and helped the Cowboys offense record a season-high 456 yards of total offense. His blocking helped protect Drew Bledsoe and allowed him to complete 26-of-37 passes for 312 yards against the Giants on October 16. Allen helped the Cowboys running backs record 164 yards averaging 4.2 yard-per-carry in Seattle on October 23. He helped lead way as Marion Barber III rushed for 127 yards and two touchdowns on 27 carries against the Cardinals on October 30. He was part of an offensive line that allowed Bledsoe time to throw for 332 yards and three touchdowns while the running backs recorded 129 yards and a touchdown against the Kansas City Chiefs on December 11, the 445 yards of total offense was the second-best of the season. His run blocking allowed Julius Jones to rush for 194 yards, the fourth-best performance in franchise history in Carolina on Christmas Eve. The Cowboys&#x27; offense recorded 22 first downs, 394 total yards, including a season-high 214 rushing, and 24 points in the come-from-behind win. During the Pro Bowl weekend in Honolulu, Hawaii, he won ESPN&#x27;s &quot;Strongest Man Award&quot; during the Pro Bowl weekend in 2006 by bench pressing 43 reps with 225 pounds.

On March 21, 2006, Allen was released by the Dallas Cowboys, after spending his first 12 seasons with the organization from 1994 to 2005.

===San Francisco 49ers===

In 2006, three days after being released by the Dallas Cowboys, Allen was signed by the San Francisco 49ers as an unrestricted free agent. Along with changing teams, he also changed numbers, from the only number he had worn in his professional career, 73, to number 71. For the season, he played and started in 11 games and was inactive for five with sprained medial collateral ligament (MCL). He was voted to his 11th career Pro Bowl after blocking for RB Frank Gore&#x27;s franchise record 1,695 rushing yards on the season.

Allen started at left guard, but left the game due to a sprained medial collateral ligament suffered in the first quarter in Arizona on September 10, and was replaced by Tony Wragge. He was then inactive for the next five weeks due to the sprained MCL. He returned to the starting lineup in Chicago on October 29. The entire offensive line was awarded game balls by Head Coach Mike Nolan, in part for their job blocking for the running back, who rushed for 198 yards against the Lions on November 12. He started at left guard against the Seahawks on November 19, and played with an offensive line that blocked for Gore&#x27;s single-game franchise record 212 rushing yards. The 49ers accumulated 262 total rushing yards in the game, the eighth-most in franchise history. The last time they rushed for that many yards was against Detroit on December 14, 1998, when they ran for a then-franchise-record 328 yards. Gore, who was awarded a game ball by Nolan, in turn gave game balls to the entire offensive line. Allen started at left guard in Seattle on December 14. In one of the best offensive line performances of the season, QB Alex Smith was not sacked once and the 49ers ran for 228 yards, 144 of which were by Gore. Allen was named as a reserve guard for the NFC in the Pro Bowl during the game week to mark his 11th Pro Bowl selection. He started in Denver on New Year&#x27;s Eve and blocked for Frank Gore to break the 49ers franchise&#x27;s single-season rushing record and franchise combined yardage record (2,180). During the Pro Bowl weekend he successfully defended his ESPN&#x27;s &quot;Strongest Man Award&quot; title at the 2007 Pro Bowl.

In 2007, Allen started all 16 games at left guard. He was also voted as an alternate to the Pro Bowl.

===Retirement===
On August 29, 2009, the Dallas Cowboys signed Allen to a one-day contract so he could retire as a Cowboy. The following day, the Cowboys placed him on the retired list.

===Career summary===
Allen was chosen as a member of the NFL&#x27;s All-Decade Team for the 1990s and the 2000s. Also, he has been widely recognized as one of the NFL&#x27;s all-time best offensive linemen, and one of the most powerful men to play the game. In his 14 seasons in the National Football League, he was named to the Pro Bowl 11 times, including his last as a 49er in 2006. He was also named All-Pro seven times, six times at guard (1995–1997, 1999–2001) and once at tackle (1998). With his Pro Bowl selection at tackle in 1998, he became just the third player in league history to be selected to the Pro Bowl at more than one offensive line position during his career, joining Bruce Matthews of the Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans (guard/center) and Chris Hinton of the Atlanta Falcons/Indianapolis Colts/Minnesota Vikings (guard/tackle). He played all but one position along the offensive line in his 11 seasons in Dallas, moving between right tackle (1994), right guard (1995–1997), left tackle (1997–1998) and left guard (1999–2003).

During the half-time show of the Cowboys-Seahawks game, November 6, 2011, Allen, Drew Pearson, and Charles Haley were inducted into the Dallas Cowboys Ring of Honor.

On February 2, 2013, Allen was voted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Cowboys owner Jerry Jones was his presenter at the induction ceremony.

==Personal life==
Allen resided in Danville, California, after his retirement. His son, Larry Allen III, played guard for the Harvard Crimson football team. He was later signed by Dallas Cowboys in 2019 as an undrafted player. His nephew is Dakarai Allen, a professional basketball player in the NBA G League.

Allen died on June 2, 2024, while on vacation with his family in Mexico, at the age of 52. The cause of death is currently undetermined.

==References==
==External links==

* Jerry Jones presents Larry Allen at profootballhof.com
* ESPN.com bio
* Yahoo! Sports bio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25464" start="0" end="27" title="Larry Allen" label="Larry Christopher Allen Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="92" end="100" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="118" end="123" title="Guard (gridiron football)" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="131" end="155" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="197" end="211" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="223" end="239" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002793" start="248" end="265" title="Butte College" label="Butte Roadrunners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191950" start="274" end="295" title="Sonoma State Cossacks football" label="Sonoma State Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714935" start="356" end="370" title="1994 NFL draft" label="1994 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="569" end="577" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706900" start="608" end="615" title="All-Pro" label="All-Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="664" end="674" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065229" start="684" end="698" title="Super Bowl XXX" label="Super Bowl XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590587" start="708" end="727" title="1995 Pittsburgh Steelers season" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="773" end="792" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="864" end="889" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="932" end="951" title="Compton, California" label="Compton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="1005" end="1015" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059155" start="1281" end="1303" title="Centennial High School (Compton, California)" label="Centennial High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="1307" end="1314" title="Compton, California" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916171" start="1322" end="1330" title="Varsity letter" label="lettered"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="1334" end="1342" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813522" start="1380" end="1397" title="Tokay High School" label="Tokay High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q852647" start="1401" end="1405" title="Lodi, California" label="Lodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338391" start="1441" end="1459" title="Edison High School (Stockton, California)" label="Edison High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="1463" end="1471" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932827" start="1500" end="1519" title="Vintage High School" label="Vintage High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60537" start="1523" end="1539" title="Napa, California" label="Napa, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="1598" end="1619" title="NCAA eligibility" label="academically eligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="1628" end="1643" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002793" start="1669" end="1682" title="Butte College" label="Butte College"/>
<link wikidata="Q850972" start="1686" end="1706" title="Oroville, California" label="Oroville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="1918" end="1929" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q624571" start="2055" end="2078" title="Sonoma State University" label="Sonoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="2082" end="2093" title="NCAA Division II" label="Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2110" end="2123" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191950" start="2147" end="2155" title="Sonoma State Cossacks football" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854464" start="2180" end="2184" title="Quarterback sack" label="sack"/>
<link wikidata="Q650807" start="2334" end="2343" title="touchdown" label="touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026916" start="2507" end="2524" title="Cal State Hayward" label="Cal State Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331047" start="2562" end="2583" title="East–West Shrine Game" label="East–West Shrine Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450654" start="2592" end="2603" title="Senior Bowl" label="Senior Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714935" start="2685" end="2699" title="1994 NFL draft" label="1994 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q694589" start="2786" end="2803" title="Offensive Lineman" label="offensive lineman"/>
<link wikidata="Q624571" start="2864" end="2876" title="Sonoma State University" label="Sonoma State"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2901" end="2928" title="1994 NFL Draft#Round two" label="second round (46th overall)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14951466" start="3004" end="3019" title="Howard Richards (American football)" label="Howard Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714920" start="3023" end="3027" title="1981 NFL draft" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589329" start="3070" end="3074" title="1994 Dallas Cowboys season" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="3131" end="3136" title="Offensive guard" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="3141" end="3147" title="Offensive tackle" label="tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845807" start="3176" end="3190" title="Burton Lawless" label="Burton Lawless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559002" start="3194" end="3198" title="1975 NFL season" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845820" start="3203" end="3214" title="Kevin Gogan" label="Kevin Gogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406048" start="3218" end="3222" title="1987 NFL season" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q448951" start="3307" end="3320" title="Flozell Adams" label="Flozell Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q507929" start="3341" end="3345" title="1998 NFL season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900482" start="3581" end="3592" title="Mark Tuinei" label="Mark Tuinei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589802" start="3638" end="3657" title="1994 Washington Redskins season" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="3773" end="3784" title="left tackle" label="left tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589223" start="3826" end="3843" title="1994 Arizona Cardinals season" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q283348" start="3952" end="3965" title="Erik Williams" label="Erik Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="3977" end="3989" title="right tackle" label="right tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589303" start="4326" end="4336" title="1994 Cincinnati Bengals season" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589615" start="4419" end="4437" title="1994 New Orleans Saints season" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="4458" end="4470" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday night"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222885" start="4600" end="4613" title="Darion Conner" label="Darion Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589472" start="4965" end="4982" title="1994 Green Bay Packers season" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q525002" start="5050" end="5061" title="Troy Aikman" label="Troy Aikman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784597" start="5182" end="5203" title="NFC Championship Game" label="NFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5207" end="5220" title="1994-95 NFL playoffs#NFC championship" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590295" start="5316" end="5320" title="1995 Dallas Cowboys season" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591642" start="5395" end="5400" title="1996 Pro Bowl" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="5435" end="5443" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297408" start="5531" end="5544" title="Ray Donaldson" label="Ray Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697311" start="5546" end="5557" title="Nate Newton" label="Nate Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338802" start="5653" end="5665" title="Emmitt Smith" label="Emmitt Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q225108" start="5892" end="5903" title="Meadowlands Sports Complex" label="Meadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590528" start="5916" end="5931" title="1995 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="6089" end="6102" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="6296" end="6306" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="6373" end="6392" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065229" start="6402" end="6416" title="Super Bowl XXX" label="Super Bowl XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591313" start="6422" end="6426" title="1996 Dallas Cowboys season" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592733" start="6474" end="6482" title="1997 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q319007" start="6529" end="6532" title="National Football Conference" label="NFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592339" start="6886" end="6890" title="1997 Dallas Cowboys season" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593917" start="7001" end="7009" title="1998 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308853" start="7079" end="7092" title="National Football League training camp" label="training camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592728" start="7245" end="7255" title="1997 Pittsburgh Steelers season" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592723" start="7390" end="7409" title="1997 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592305" start="7567" end="7580" title="1997 Chicago Bears season" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592896" start="7863" end="7873" title="1997 Washington Redskins season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592296" start="8080" end="8097" title="1997 Carolina Panthers season" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593484" start="8172" end="8176" title="1998 Dallas Cowboys season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q525002" start="8254" end="8265" title="Troy Aikman" label="Troy Aikman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595032" start="8476" end="8484" title="1999 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593349" start="8825" end="8842" title="1998 Arizona Cardinals season" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108422" start="9147" end="9159" title="Chris Warren (American football)" label="Chris Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q903354" start="9248" end="9261" title="defensive end" label="defensive end"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930574" start="9266" end="9278" title="Hugh Douglas (American football)" label="Hugh Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066175" start="9280" end="9292" title="Chad Bratzke" label="Chad Bratzke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961036" start="9294" end="9305" title="Simeon Rice" label="Simeon Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680136" start="9311" end="9322" title="John Randle" label="John Randle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="9892" end="9908" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="10157" end="10174" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q379491" start="10335" end="10347" title="Marcus Allen" label="Marcus Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="10441" end="10449" title="Washington Redskins" label="Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594622" start="10608" end="10612" title="1999 Dallas Cowboys season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597778" start="10767" end="10775" title="2000 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="10944" end="10956" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338802" start="11227" end="11239" title="Emmitt Smith" label="Emmitt Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="11329" end="11344" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="11488" end="11500" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241072" start="11866" end="11892" title="medial collateral ligament" label="medial collateral ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q37425" start="11912" end="11916" title="knee" label="knee"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="11929" end="11936" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="12177" end="12188" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="12192" end="12205" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="12383" end="12389" title="New York Giants" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="12393" end="12412" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597305" start="12768" end="12772" title="2000 Dallas Cowboys season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599035" start="12818" end="12826" title="2001 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120022" start="13065" end="13073" title="fracture" label="fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="13075" end="13085" title="right hand" label="right hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q142656" start="13256" end="13274" title="Randall Cunningham" label="Randall Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q180342" start="13528" end="13539" title="Warren Sapp" label="Warren Sapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="13571" end="13580" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="13979" end="13988" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598616" start="13999" end="14003" title="2001 Dallas Cowboys season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="14036" end="14052" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600410" start="14109" end="14117" title="2002 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="14181" end="14187" title="Honolulu, Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q42586" start="14195" end="14200" title="elbow" label="elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550304" start="14545" end="14547" title="Defensive tackle" label="DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338802" start="14725" end="14737" title="Emmitt Smith" label="Emmitt Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="14853" end="14865" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday night"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="14879" end="14887" title="Washington Redskins" label="Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846838" start="14931" end="14944" title="Troy Hambrick" label="Troy Hambrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835341" start="14979" end="14992" title="Michael Wiley (American football)" label="Michael Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="15065" end="15072" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960114" start="15359" end="15363" title="2002 NFL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="15386" end="15389" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060160" start="15444" end="15458" title="offensive line" label="offensive line"/>
<link wikidata="Q25075" start="15493" end="15499" title="Center (gridiron football)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q493153" start="15500" end="15512" title="Andre Gurode" label="Andre Gurode"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="15514" end="15520" title="Tackle (American and Canadian football)" label="tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q448951" start="15522" end="15535" title="Flozell Adams" label="Flozell Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558722" start="15540" end="15552" title="Solomon Page" label="Solomon Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="15554" end="15559" title="Guard (gridiron football)" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386655" start="15571" end="15584" title="Kelvin Garmon" label="Kelvin Garmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764136" start="15816" end="15828" title="rotator cuff" label="rotator cuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308853" start="15878" end="15891" title="National Football League training camp" label="training camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="16094" end="16110" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="16368" end="16382" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="16596" end="16611" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386655" start="16775" end="16788" title="Kelvin Garmon" label="Kelvin Garmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="16853" end="16861" title="San Diego Chargers" label="Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="16904" end="16912" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="17099" end="17104" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663627" start="17182" end="17197" title="injured reserve" label="injured reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384176" start="17272" end="17281" title="bone spur" label="bone spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q168002" start="17293" end="17298" title="ankle" label="ankle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601276" start="17304" end="17308" title="2003 Dallas Cowboys season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603227" start="17644" end="17652" title="2004 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q196002" start="17711" end="17720" title="hamstring" label="hamstring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272121" start="18046" end="18059" title="Quincy Carter" label="Quincy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="18137" end="18145" title="Overtime (sports)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q37425" start="18179" end="18183" title="knee" label="knee"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="18218" end="18227" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550304" start="18552" end="18554" title="Defensive tackle" label="DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437191" start="18555" end="18567" title="Kris Jenkins" label="Kris Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602680" start="18800" end="18804" title="2004 Dallas Cowboys season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604781" start="18910" end="18918" title="2005 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="18964" end="18973" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="19092" end="19108" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q584532" start="19182" end="19198" title="Vinny Testaverde" label="Vinny Testaverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="19389" end="19405" title="Thanksgiving Day" label="Thanksgiving Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="19421" end="19428" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189854" start="19473" end="19485" title="Julius Jones (American football)" label="Julius Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="19514" end="19526" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday night"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="19534" end="19541" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604171" start="19927" end="19931" title="2005 Dallas Cowboys season" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606831" start="19964" end="19972" title="2006 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="20177" end="20186" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="20306" end="20312" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q927434" start="20435" end="20447" title="Drew Bledsoe" label="Drew Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q354761" start="20673" end="20690" title="Marion Barber III" label="Marion Barber III"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="20956" end="20974" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="21170" end="21178" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="21182" end="21195" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="21376" end="21392" title="Honolulu, Hawaii" label="Honolulu, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="21401" end="21405" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604781" start="21456" end="21464" title="2005 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606890" start="21694" end="21698" title="2006 San Francisco 49ers season" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="21779" end="21798" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="21805" end="21828" title="unrestricted free agent" label="unrestricted free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241072" start="22051" end="22077" title="medial collateral ligament" label="medial collateral ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609159" start="22117" end="22125" title="2007 Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="22145" end="22147" title="running back" label="RB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374970" start="22148" end="22158" title="Frank Gore" label="Frank Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531935" start="22389" end="22400" title="Tony Wragge" label="Tony Wragge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246315" start="22585" end="22595" title="Head Coach" label="Head Coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249544" start="22596" end="22606" title="Mike Nolan" label="Mike Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="22698" end="22703" title="Detroit Lions" label="Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="23346" end="23348" title="Quarterback" label="QB"/>
<link wikidata="Q717897" start="23349" end="23359" title="Alex Smith" label="Alex Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="23575" end="23581" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="23585" end="23604" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609159" start="23858" end="23871" title="2007 Pro Bowl" label="2007 Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609227" start="23877" end="23881" title="2007 San Francisco 49ers season" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="23966" end="23974" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q735302" start="24256" end="24261" title="National Football League 1990s All-Decade Team" label="1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727189" start="24270" end="24275" title="National Football League 2000s All-Decade Team" label="2000s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="24327" end="24330" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="24447" end="24471" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="24493" end="24501" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706900" start="24568" end="24575" title="All-Pro" label="All-Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="24667" end="24675" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="24777" end="24785" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q25514" start="24854" end="24868" title="Bruce Matthews (American football)" label="Bruce Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="24876" end="24890" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964738" start="24927" end="24939" title="Chris Hinton" label="Chris Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="24947" end="24962" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="24963" end="24981" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="24982" end="24999" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258755" start="25296" end="25308" title="Drew Pearson (American football)" label="Drew Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q551136" start="25314" end="25327" title="Charles Haley" label="Charles Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157994" start="25351" end="25379" title="Dallas Cowboys Ring of Honor" label="Dallas Cowboys Ring of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="25428" end="25453" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280022" start="25469" end="25480" title="Jerry Jones" label="Jerry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q846586" start="25562" end="25582" title="Danville, California" label="Danville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676339" start="25653" end="25677" title="Harvard Crimson football" label="Harvard Crimson football"/>
<link wikidata="Q47467105" start="25768" end="25781" title="Dakarai Allen" label="Dakarai Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="25798" end="25808" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="25823" end="25835" title="NBA G League" label="NBA G League"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266301" wikidata="Q288146" url="?curid=1266301" title="Helen Shaver">
<text>Helen Shaver (born February 24, 1951) is a Canadian actress and film and television director. After appearing in a number of Canadian movies, she received a Canadian Screen Award for Best Actress for her performance in the romantic drama &quot;In Praise of Older Women&quot; (1978). She later appeared in the films &quot;The Amityville Horror&quot; (1979), &quot;The Osterman Weekend&quot; (1983), &quot;Desert Hearts&quot; (1985), &quot;The Color of Money&quot; (1986), &quot;The Believers&quot; (1987), &quot;The Craft&quot; (1996),&quot;Tremors 2: Aftershocks&quot; (1996) and &quot;Down River&quot; (2013). She received another Canadian Screen Award for Best Actress nomination for the 1986 drama film &quot;Lost!&quot;, and won a Best Supporting Actress for &quot;We All Fall Down&quot; (2000). Shaver also starred in some short-lived television series, including &quot;United States&quot; (1980) and &quot;Jessica Novak&quot; (1981), and from 1996 to 1999 starred in the Showtime horror series, &quot;&quot;, for which she received a Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television nomination.

In the mid-1990s, Shaver began working as a television director, directing more than 50 shows. She won three Directors Guild of Canada Awards, one Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film, two Canadian Screen Awards, and three Women&#x27;s Image Network Awards. She was nominated for an Emmy Award for directing the 1999 television movie &quot;Summer&#x27;s End&quot; and in 2020 made her big screen debut with the drama film &quot;Happy Place&quot;. In 2004, Shaver was inducted into Canada&#x27;s Walk of Fame.

==Early life==
Shaver was born and raised with five sisters in St. Thomas, Ontario, Canada.

==Career==
After roles in such Canadian features as &quot;Outrageous!&quot; (1977), &quot;Starship Invasions&quot; (1977), &quot;Who Has Seen the Wind&quot; (1977) and &quot;High Ballin″&quot; (1978), Shaver won a Canadian Film Award as Best Lead Actress opposite Tom Berenger (for her performance as &quot;Ann MacDonald&quot;) in &quot;In Praise of Older Women&quot; (1978).

Shaver was one of the stars of director Sam Peckinpah&#x27;s final film, 1983&#x27;s &quot;The Osterman Weekend&quot;. In 1985, Shaver starred in &quot;Desert Hearts&quot; as a 1950s university professor who falls in love with another woman. Her performance, with co-star Patricia Charbonneau, drew critical praise and Shaver won the Bronze Leopard Award at the Locarno International Film Festival. Another prominent film performance during that time came in 1986 as the love interest of Paul Newman in his Oscar-winning portrayal of &quot;Fast&quot; Eddie Felson in Martin Scorsese&#x27;s &quot;The Color of Money&quot;, a sequel to 1961&#x27;s &quot;The Hustler&quot;.

In 1980, Shaver starred with Beau Bridges in the short-lived NBC television series &quot;United States&quot; developed by Larry Gelbart. A year later she starred in the short-lived drama series &quot;Jessica Novak&quot;. She was in the 1984 Canadian-made &quot;Countdown to Looking Glass&quot;. She subsequently appeared on such television shows as &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot; and &quot;T. J. Hooker&quot;. In 1990, she guest-starred as the murderer in &quot;Rest in Peace, Mrs. Columbo&quot;, and later that year co-starred on the short-lived series &quot;WIOU&quot;, playing a television journalist (as she also did on &quot;Jessica Novak&quot;). From 1996-1999, Shaver co-starred on the television series &quot;&quot;, playing Dr. Rachel Corrigan, a widowed psychiatrist with an eight-year-old daughter who is helped by the Legacy in the pilot episode; her performance earned a Saturn Award nomination. In 2000, she won a Genie Award for her portrayal of a drug-addicted prostitute in the independent feature &quot;We All Fall Down&quot;.

Shaver made her feature-length directorial debut in 1999 with the television film &quot;Summer&#x27;s End&quot;, which won an Emmy and earned her a directorial nomination. Shaver has also directed a number of television shows and cable movies, including &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;, &quot;Judging Amy&quot;, &quot;Joan of Arcadia&quot;, &quot;Medium&quot;, &quot;The OC&quot;, &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;, &quot;The L Word&quot;, &quot;Jericho&quot;, &quot;Journeyman&quot;, &quot;Private Practice&quot;, &quot;The Unit&quot;, &quot;Crusoe&quot;, &quot;Orphan Black&quot;, Vikings (2013 TV series), &quot;13 Reasons Why&quot;, and &quot;Westworld&quot;. In 2003 she won a Gemini award for Best Direction in a Dramatic Series for the &quot;Just Cause&quot; television series episode &quot;Death&#x27;s Details&quot;.

In 2004, Shaver was inducted into Canada&#x27;s Walk of Fame.

&quot;Happy Place&quot;, her first theatrical feature film after directing for television, premiered at the Cinéfest Sudbury International Film Festival, and was screened at the 2020 Vancouver International Film Festival.

In 2021, Shaver picked up The Living Legend Tribute at the 23rd Women&#x27;s Image Network Awards with fellow honoree JoJo Siwa its Rising Musical Star recipient.

In 2023, Shaver won the DGA award for directing episode 8 (&quot;Who&#x27;s There?&quot;) of &quot;Station Eleven&quot;.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
===Director===
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
*
*Canadian Film Encyclopedia: A publication of The Film Reference Library/a division of the Toronto International Film Festival Group</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q288146" start="0" end="12" title="Helen Shaver" label="Helen Shaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q547316" start="157" end="195" title="Canadian Screen Award for Best Actress" label="Canadian Screen Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010467" start="244" end="268" title="In Praise of Older Women (1978 film)" label="In Praise of Older Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q472512" start="321" end="342" title="The Amityville Horror (1979 film)" label="The Amityville Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170020" start="363" end="383" title="The Osterman Weekend (film)" label="The Osterman Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q430767" start="404" end="417" title="Desert Hearts" label="Desert Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q470916" start="438" end="456" title="The Color of Money" label="The Color of Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170186" start="477" end="490" title="The Believers" label="The Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q937005" start="511" end="520" title="The Craft (film)" label="The Craft"/>
<link wikidata="" start="540" end="562" title="Tremors 2: Aftershocks" label="Tremors 2: Aftershocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q64864009" start="586" end="596" title="Down River (2013 film)" label="Down River"/>
<link wikidata="Q64864050" start="712" end="717" title="Lost! (film)" label="Lost!"/>
<link wikidata="Q19819292" start="735" end="758" title="Canadian Screen Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4342114" start="769" end="785" title="We All Fall Down (2000 film)" label="We All Fall Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965121" start="875" end="888" title="United States (TV series)" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187389" start="912" end="925" title="Jessica Novak" label="Jessica Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263057" start="1040" end="1083" title="Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television" label="Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280706" start="1206" end="1238" title="Directors Guild of Canada" label="Directors Guild of Canada Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280678" start="1244" end="1326" title="Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film" label="Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459735" start="1332" end="1354" title="Canadian Screen Awards" label="Canadian Screen Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030933" start="1366" end="1399" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Image Network Awards" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Image Network Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="1426" end="1436" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167695" start="1483" end="1500" title="Summer&amp;#x27;s End (film)" label="Summer&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858743" start="1571" end="1582" title="Happy Place (film)" label="Happy Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q857933" start="1624" end="1650" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078072" start="1716" end="1735" title="St. Thomas, Ontario" label="St. Thomas, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522064" start="1836" end="1854" title="Starship Invasions" label="Starship Invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q299317" start="2010" end="2022" title="Tom Berenger" label="Tom Berenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010467" start="2083" end="2107" title="In Praise of Older Women (1978 film)" label="In Praise of Older Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q51461" start="2163" end="2176" title="Sam Peckinpah" label="Sam Peckinpah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170020" start="2214" end="2234" title="The Osterman Weekend (film)" label="The Osterman Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q430767" start="2275" end="2288" title="Desert Hearts" label="Desert Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418333" start="2395" end="2415" title="Patricia Charbonneau" label="Patricia Charbonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q502053" start="2485" end="2520" title="Locarno International Film Festival" label="Locarno International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="2611" end="2622" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="2690" end="2705" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q470916" start="2719" end="2737" title="The Color of Money" label="The Color of Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130084" start="2775" end="2786" title="The Hustler" label="The Hustler"/>
<link wikidata="Q309640" start="2824" end="2836" title="Beau Bridges" label="Beau Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965121" start="2884" end="2897" title="United States (TV series)" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806065" start="2917" end="2930" title="Larry Gelbart" label="Larry Gelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187389" start="2995" end="3008" title="Jessica Novak" label="Jessica Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176861" start="3056" end="3082" title="Countdown to Looking Glass" label="Countdown to Looking Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247241" start="3150" end="3167" title="Hill Street Blues" label="Hill Street Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q178724" start="3184" end="3196" title="T. J. Hooker" label="T. J. Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965188" start="3256" end="3283" title="Rest in Peace, Mrs. Columbo" label="Rest in Peace, Mrs. Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832856" start="3354" end="3358" title="WIOU (TV series)" label="WIOU"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="3678" end="3690" title="Saturn Award" label="Saturn Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502249" start="3722" end="3733" title="Genie Award" label="Genie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="3771" end="3781" title="prostitute" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4342114" start="3815" end="3831" title="We All Fall Down (2000 film)" label="We All Fall Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167695" start="3928" end="3945" title="Summer&amp;#x27;s End (film)" label="Summer&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="3966" end="3970" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621450" start="4100" end="4116" title="The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247192" start="4130" end="4141" title="Judging Amy" label="Judging Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q260654" start="4155" end="4170" title="Joan of Arcadia" label="Joan of Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q470111" start="4184" end="4190" title="Medium (TV series)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q194427" start="4204" end="4210" title="The OC" label="The OC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4224" end="4261" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q216792" start="4275" end="4285" title="The L Word" label="The L Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q221237" start="4299" end="4306" title="Jericho (2006 TV series)" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q251904" start="4320" end="4330" title="Journeyman (TV series)" label="Journeyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q283393" start="4344" end="4360" title="Private Practice (TV series)" label="Private Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q676544" start="4374" end="4382" title="The Unit" label="The Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388988" start="4396" end="4402" title="Crusoe (TV series)" label="Crusoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103920" start="4416" end="4428" title="Orphan Black" label="Orphan Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579463" start="4436" end="4460" title="Vikings (2013 TV series)" label="Vikings (2013 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18464203" start="4468" end="4482" title="13 Reasons Why" label="13 Reasons Why"/>
<link wikidata="Q17572811" start="4500" end="4509" title="Westworld (TV series)" label="Westworld"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4535" end="4547" title="18th Gemini Awards#Best Direction in a Dramatic Series" label="Gemini award"/>
<link wikidata="Q940555" start="4602" end="4612" title="Just Cause (TV series)" label="Just Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q857933" start="4714" end="4740" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858743" start="4749" end="4760" title="Happy Place (film)" label="Happy Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121154" start="4851" end="4895" title="Cinéfest Sudbury International Film Festival" label="Cinéfest Sudbury International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854901" start="4921" end="4963" title="2020 Vancouver International Film Festival" label="2020 Vancouver International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030933" start="5030" end="5063" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Image Network Awards" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Image Network Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q24174947" start="5084" end="5093" title="JoJo Siwa" label="JoJo Siwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280678" start="5154" end="5163" title="Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film" label="DGA award"/>
<link wikidata="Q85803299" start="5229" end="5243" title="Station Eleven (miniseries)" label="Station Eleven"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266316" wikidata="Q1282988" url="?curid=1266316" title="Dear Boss letter">
<text>The &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter was a message allegedly written by the notorious unidentified Victorian serial killer known as Jack the Ripper. Addressed to the Central News Agency of London and dated 25 September 1888, the letter was postmarked and received by the Central News Agency on 27 September. The letter itself was forwarded to Scotland Yard on 29 September.

Although many dispute its authenticity, the &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter is regarded as the first piece of correspondence signed by one Jack the Ripper, ultimately resulting in the unidentified killer being known by this name.

==Content==
The &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter was written in red ink, was two pages long and contains several spelling and punctuation errors. The overall motivation of the author was evidently to mock investigative efforts and to allude to future murders. The letter itself reads:

==Media publication==
Initially, the letter was considered to be just one of many hoax letters purporting to be from the murderer. However, following the discovery of the body of Catherine Eddowes in Mitre Square on 30 September, investigators noted a section of the auricle and earlobe of her right ear had been severed, giving credence to the author&#x27;s promise within the letter to &quot;clip the lady&#x27;s ears off&quot;. In response, the Metropolitan Police published numerous handbills containing duplicates of both this letter and the &quot;Saucy Jacky&quot; postcard in the hope that a member of the public would recognise the handwriting of the author. Numerous local and national newspapers also reprinted the text of the &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter in whole or in part. These efforts failed to generate any significant leads.

===Perpetrator pseudonym===
Following the publication of the &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter and the &quot;Saucy Jacky&quot; postcard, both forms of correspondence gained worldwide notoriety. These publications were the first occasion in which the name &quot;Jack the Ripper&quot; had been used to refer to the killer. The term captured the imagination of the public. In the weeks following their publication, hundreds of hoax letters claiming to be from &quot;Jack the Ripper&quot; were received by police and press alike, most of which copied key phrases from these letters.

==Authenticity==
In the years following the Ripper murders, police officials stated that they believed both the &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter and the &quot;Saucy Jacky&quot; postcard were elaborate hoaxes most likely penned by a local journalist. Initially, these suspicions received little publicity, with the public believing the press articles that the unknown murderer had sent numerous messages taunting the police and threatening further murders. This correspondence became one of the enduring legends of the Ripper case. However, the opinions of modern scholars are divided upon which, if any, of the letters should be considered genuine. The &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter is one of three named most frequently as potentially having been written by the killer, and a number of authors have tried to advance their theories as to the Ripper&#x27;s identity by comparing handwriting samples of suspects to the writing within the &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter.

Like many documents related to the Ripper case, the &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter disappeared from the police files shortly after the investigation into the murders had ended. The letter may have been kept as a souvenir by one of the investigating officers. In November 1987, the letter was returned anonymously to the Metropolitan Police, whereupon Scotland Yard recalled all documents relating to the Whitechapel Murders from the Public Record Office, now The National Archives, at Kew.

===Journalist&#x27;s confession===
In 1931, a journalist named Fred Best was reported to have confessed that he and a colleague at &quot;The Star&quot; newspaper named Tom Bullen had written the &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter, the &quot;Saucy Jacky&quot; postcard, and other hoax messages purporting to be from the Whitechapel Murderer—whom they together had chosen to name Jack the Ripper—in order to maintain acute public interest in the case and generally maintain high sales of their publication.

==Calligraphy and linguistic analysis==
In 2018, a forensic linguist based at the University of Manchester named Andrea Nini stated his conviction that both the &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter and the &quot;Saucy Jacky&quot; postcard had been written by the same individual. Commenting upon his conclusions, Dr Nini stated: &quot;My conclusion is that there is very strong linguistic evidence that these two [pieces of correspondence] were written by the same person. People in the past had already expressed this tentative conclusion, on the basis of similarity of handwriting, but this had not been established with certainty.&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==Cited works and further reading==
*
* 
*

==External links==

* The &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter at &quot;casebook.org&quot;
* Jack the Ripper letters: &quot;Dear Boss&quot; at &quot;whitechapeljack.com&quot;
* &quot;Dear Boss&quot; letter: How Jack the Ripper got his name at &quot;britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1282988" start="4" end="32" title="Dear Boss letter" label="&amp;quot;Dear Boss&amp;quot; letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="95" end="104" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="105" end="118" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43963" start="128" end="143" title="Jack the Ripper" label="Jack the Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061519" start="162" end="181" title="Central News Agency (London)" label="Central News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="185" end="191" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="339" end="352" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="963" end="967" title="hoax" label="hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q263112" start="1060" end="1077" title="Catherine Eddowes" label="Catherine Eddowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939750" start="1081" end="1093" title="Mitre Square" label="Mitre Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q379858" start="1148" end="1155" title="Auricle (anatomy)" label="auricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778517" start="1160" end="1167" title="earlobe" label="earlobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="1329" end="1348" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q327611" start="1368" end="1377" title="Flyer (pamphlet)" label="handbills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290493" start="1428" end="1460" title="Saucy Jacky postcard" label="&amp;quot;Saucy Jacky&amp;quot; postcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11602707" start="3163" end="3184" title="Questioned document examination" label="comparing handwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q392703" start="3719" end="3740" title="The National Archives (United Kingdom)" label="The National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740301" start="3745" end="3748" title="Kew" label="Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q71534807" start="3888" end="3896" title="The Star (1888)" label="The Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q938318" start="4302" end="4319" title="forensic linguistics" label="forensic linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="4333" end="4357" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266321" wikidata="Q3817729" url="?curid=1266321" title="Muelle">
<text>Juan Carlos Argüello (23 September 1965 - 1 July 1995), known as Muelle , was a Spanish graffiti artist from Campamento, Madrid.

==Career==
Around 1980, during the &quot;Movida Madrileña&quot;, Argüello started reproducing the logo he had designed on walls and public spaces of Madrid. It consisted of the word &quot;Muelle&quot; (Spanish for &quot;spring&quot;), or an R with an enclosing circle (®) and a line in the shape of a coiled spring ending in an arrowhead. At first, he used an ink marker and later spraypainted his signature extensively around Madrid (and to a lesser extent, in other Spanish localities). In the eighties, he improved his technique, using several colours in a technique labelled &quot;relleno&quot;, wider borders known as &quot;grosor&quot;, and 3-D effects.

==Influence==
His innovative style, along with the profusion of his tags, made his work popular. Many other Madrilenian youths, known as &quot;flecheros&quot; created their tags inspired by Muelle&#x27;s, often ending strokes with arrowheads (&quot;flechas&quot;). The &quot;flechero&quot; scene developed at a time of cultural isolation, its practitioners being largely unaware of graffiti in the New York style. The spread of hip-hop culture in Spain in the late 1980s introduced the new graffiti styles developed in the United States. But, variations in Muelle&#x27;s work basically kept his original design. Argüello appeared on Spanish television and in newspapers.

==Death==
Argüello died of liver cancer on 1 July 1995 at the age of 29. His obituary appeared in &quot;El País&quot;. 

==Legacy==
In 2022, the Spanish graffiti brand Montana Colors released a special edition aerosol can featuring Muelle&#x27;s tag alongside a short documentary about him.

At the behest of local PSOE politicians a tag of Argüello‘s in La Latina, threatened with obliteration by building renovations, was officially protected by the Government of the Community of Madrid in 2024. 

== See also ==
* Akim Hoste

== References ==
==External links==
*Photographs at Madrid Old School Graffiti, an &quot;aficionado&quot;&#x27;s web. 
* &quot;Muelle, The Madrid Graffiti Legend&quot;. Montana Colors documentary about the artist.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3817729" start="0" end="20" title="Muelle" label="Juan Carlos Argüello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817729" start="65" end="71" title="Muelle" label="Muelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="88" end="96" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q31169" start="109" end="119" title="Campamento (Madrid)" label="Campamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="121" end="127" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347824" start="171" end="187" title="Movida Madrileña" label="Movida Madrileña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="228" end="232" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="279" end="285" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="332" end="339" title="Spanish (language)" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102836" start="350" end="356" title="spring (device)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="399" end="400" title="trademark" label="®"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529977" start="964" end="968" title="Tag (graffiti)" label="tags"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132127" start="1219" end="1234" title="hip-hop culture" label="hip-hop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1314" end="1327" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="1432" end="1442" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="1450" end="1459" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="1567" end="1574" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="1778" end="1782" title="PSOE" label="PSOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845152" start="1818" end="1827" title="Barrio de La Latina (Madrid)" label="La Latina"/>
<link wikidata="Q578788" start="1915" end="1952" title="Government of the Community of Madrid" label="Government of the Community of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221337" start="1981" end="1991" title="Akim Hoste" label="Akim Hoste"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266326" wikidata="Q667825" url="?curid=1266326" title="E2 European long distance path">
<text>The E2 European long distance path or E2 path is a 4850 km (3010-mile) series of long-distance footpaths that is intended to run from Galway in Ireland to France&#x27;s Mediterranean coast and currently runs through Scotland, England, Belgium, Luxembourg and France, with an alternative midsection equally designated via the Netherlands and east coast of England. It is one of the network of European long-distance paths.

The paths are aimed at walkers; alternative routes exist in some parts for horse riders and cyclists.

== Route ==

The route has two alternative midsections, reuniting in north-east England and northern Belgium: the first devised route includes Oxford, Reading, Bruges and Antwerp and does not include the southern part of the Dutch coast. The corollary midsection, listed as the alternative route, includes Hull, Lincoln, Cambridge and Bergen op Zoom.

In Belgium the route starts from Ostend on the GR5A (Grote Route 5A) via Bruges and Antwerp. After a few kilometres in the mid-northern municipality (district) of Zoersel in Belgium it joins the GR 5 (Grande Randonnée 5), which continues to Luxembourg at Ouren. In Luxembourg the E2 follows a series of paths to Schengen after which it joins the GR5 in France. At La Cure a short section in Switzerland begins, where the route is signposted to Nyon, or La Cure if heading north. From Nyon ferries cross Lake Geneva to St Gingolph where the GR5 forms the remainder of the route through the French Alps to finish at Nice.

The highest point of the route is at Col de l&#x27;Iseran at .

== Ireland ==

The Irish section of the route is not yet open.

== United Kingdom ==

In Scotland the route starts from Stranraer and follows the Southern Upland Way, to Melrose, and St. Cuthbert&#x27;s Way, from Melrose to Kirk Yetholm, and on to the Anglo-Scottish border via the Pennine Way. An alternative route from Melrose is being developed to John o&#x27;Groats via the Pentland Way, John Muir Way, West Highland Way, Great Glen Way and John o&#x27; Groats Trail.

In England the route continues on the Pennine Way from the border to Standedge, the Oldham Way from Standedge to Mossley, the Tameside Trail from Mossley to Broadbottom, the Etherow/Goyt Valley Way from Broadbottom to Compstall, the Goyt Way from Compstall to Disley, the Peak Forest Canal from Disley to Marple, the Gritstone Trail from Disley to Rushton Spencer, the Staffordshire Way from Rushton Spencer to Cannock Chase, the Heart of England Way from Cannock Chase to Bourton on the Water, the Oxfordshire Way from Bourton on the Water to Kirtlington, the Oxford Canal from Kirtlington to Oxford, the Thames Path from Oxford to Weybridge, the Wey Navigation Path from Weybridge to Guildford, and the North Downs Way from Guildford to Dover.

In England, the alternative midsection begins on the Pennine Way at Middleton-in-Teesdale. It then follows the Teesdale Way, the Cleveland Way, the Yorkshire Wolds Way, the Viking Way, the Hereward Way, the Fen Rivers Way, the Icknield Way Path, the Stour Valley Path and the Essex Way to Harwich International Port. Urban highlights are Lincoln and Cambridge.

== Netherlands ==

In the Netherlands the eastern route begins at the ferry port of Hook of Holland (where ferries from Harwich International Port arrive) and passes over islands and dams and through Bergen op Zoom on the LAW 5-1 Nederlands Kustpad. This corollary section picks up the main route at Sint Antonius, Zoersel in northern Belgium.

== Luxembourg ==

In Luxembourg the E2 follows four paths: Sentier de l’ Our, Sentier Maurice Cosyn, Sentier de la Basse Sûr and Sentier de la Moselle. Apart from the Sentier Maurice Cosyn, they all follow river valleys. Unlike the GR5 and LAW 5-1 which are waymarked by red and white stripes, the paths in Luxembourg are marked with yellow circles in the north and yellow rectangles in the south.

== References ==
==External links==
* Waymarked Trails
* &quot;E2&quot; - map and information by traildino
* European Ramblers Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q667825" start="4" end="34" title="E2 European long distance path" label="E2 European long distance path"/>
<link wikidata="Q667825" start="38" end="45" title="E2 European long distance path" label="E2 path"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="134" end="140" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="144" end="151" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="155" end="161" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="169" end="182" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="216" end="224" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="226" end="233" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="235" end="242" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="244" end="254" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="259" end="265" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="325" end="336" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q849854" start="392" end="420" title="European long-distance paths" label="European long-distance paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="446" end="453" title="hiking" label="walkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="498" end="510" title="horseback riding" label="horse riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="515" end="523" title="cyclists" label="cyclists"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="669" end="675" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="677" end="684" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="686" end="692" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="697" end="704" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="832" end="836" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="838" end="845" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="847" end="856" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q192508" start="861" end="875" title="Bergen op Zoom" label="Bergen op Zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="911" end="917" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="962" end="969" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q218253" start="1041" end="1048" title="Zoersel" label="Zoersel"/>
<link wikidata="Q753119" start="1073" end="1077" title="GR 5" label="GR 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968687" start="1133" end="1138" title="Ouren" label="Ouren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208028" start="1242" end="1249" title="La Cure" label="La Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q64027" start="1322" end="1326" title="Nyon" label="Nyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="1381" end="1392" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462335" start="1396" end="1407" title="St Gingolph" label="St Gingolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="1492" end="1496" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q547474" start="1536" end="1556" title="Col de l&amp;#x27;Iseran" label="Col de l&amp;#x27;Iseran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001935" start="1683" end="1692" title="Stranraer" label="Stranraer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746530" start="1709" end="1728" title="Southern Upland Way" label="Southern Upland Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q632993" start="1733" end="1740" title="Melrose, Scottish Borders" label="Melrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592918" start="1746" end="1769" title="St. Cuthbert&amp;#x27;s Way" label="St. Cuthbert&amp;#x27;s Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415554" start="1787" end="1799" title="Kirk Yetholm" label="Kirk Yetholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991077" start="1815" end="1836" title="Anglo-Scottish border" label="Anglo-Scottish border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478622" start="1845" end="1856" title="Pennine Way" label="Pennine Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q987766" start="1914" end="1932" title="John o&amp;#x27;Groats" label="John o&amp;#x27;Groats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249716" start="1955" end="1968" title="John Muir Way" label="John Muir Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q965998" start="1970" end="1987" title="West Highland Way" label="West Highland Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q380086" start="1989" end="2003" title="Great Glen Way" label="Great Glen Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997567" start="2008" end="2033" title="John o&amp;#x27; Groats Trail" label="John o&amp;#x27; Groats Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496598" start="2105" end="2114" title="Standedge" label="Standedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q613847" start="2149" end="2156" title="Mossley" label="Mossley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972048" start="2193" end="2204" title="Broadbottom" label="Broadbottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425786" start="2210" end="2217" title="Etherow" label="Etherow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157117" start="2254" end="2263" title="Compstall" label="Compstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q54817791" start="2269" end="2277" title="Goyt Way" label="Goyt Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q23063" start="2296" end="2302" title="Disley" label="Disley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157817" start="2308" end="2325" title="Peak Forest Canal" label="Peak Forest Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772452" start="2341" end="2347" title="Marple, Greater Manchester" label="Marple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092959" start="2353" end="2368" title="Gritstone Trail" label="Gritstone Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113748" start="2384" end="2399" title="Rushton Spencer" label="Rushton Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596714" start="2405" end="2422" title="Staffordshire Way" label="Staffordshire Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936429" start="2447" end="2460" title="Cannock Chase" label="Cannock Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692261" start="2466" end="2486" title="Heart of England Way" label="Heart of England Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q895264" start="2509" end="2529" title="Bourton on the Water" label="Bourton on the Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115606" start="2535" end="2550" title="Oxfordshire Way" label="Oxfordshire Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416254" start="2580" end="2591" title="Kirtlington" label="Kirtlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q238725" start="2597" end="2609" title="Oxford Canal" label="Oxford Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="2630" end="2636" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324561" start="2642" end="2653" title="Thames Path" label="Thames Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754096" start="2669" end="2678" title="Weybridge" label="Weybridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903161" start="2684" end="2703" title="Wey and Godalming Navigations" label="Wey Navigation Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="2722" end="2731" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000593" start="2741" end="2756" title="North Downs Way" label="North Downs Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="2775" end="2780" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478622" start="2836" end="2847" title="Pennine Way" label="Pennine Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305523" start="2851" end="2872" title="Middleton-in-Teesdale" label="Middleton-in-Teesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694560" start="2894" end="2906" title="Teesdale Way" label="Teesdale Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100806" start="2912" end="2925" title="Cleveland Way" label="Cleveland Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600857" start="2931" end="2950" title="Yorkshire Wolds Way" label="Yorkshire Wolds Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929488" start="2956" end="2966" title="Viking Way" label="Viking Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738314" start="2972" end="2984" title="Hereward Way" label="Hereward Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442957" start="2990" end="3004" title="Fen Rivers Way" label="Fen Rivers Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060665" start="3010" end="3027" title="Icknield Way Path" label="Icknield Way Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620574" start="3033" end="3050" title="Stour Valley Path" label="Stour Valley Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399826" start="3059" end="3068" title="Essex Way" label="Essex Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677860" start="3072" end="3098" title="Harwich International Port" label="Harwich International Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="3121" end="3128" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="3133" end="3142" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q990130" start="3229" end="3244" title="Hook of Holland" label="Hook of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677860" start="3265" end="3291" title="Harwich International Port" label="Harwich International Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q218253" start="3460" end="3467" title="Zoersel" label="Zoersel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266333" wikidata="Q1984633" url="?curid=1266333" title="Niavaran Complex">
<text>The Niavaran Palace Complex ( – &quot;Majmue-ye Kākh-e Niāvarān&quot;) is a historical palace complex situated in Shemiran (northern Tehran), Iran. It consists of several palace buildings and monuments dating back to the Qajar and Pahlavi eras.

==History==

During the reign of Mohammad Reza Shah, a new palace named &quot;Niavaran&quot; was constructed for the imperial family. The palace was designed in 1958 and completed in 1967. It served a variety of purposes for the imperial court including as a home for the Shah and Shahbanu Farah as well a place to entertain visiting foreign heads of state. On New Year&#x27;s Eve 1977, the reception and state banquet for US President Jimmy Carter took place here.

The Shah and Shahbanu left basically everything behind when they left Iran in January 1979. All of the peripheral buildings of the Sahebgharaniyeh Palace, with the exception of the Ahmad Shahi Pavilion, were demolished, and the present-day structures were built to the north of the Sahebgharaniyeh. The Ahmad Shahi Pavilion was then used as an exhibition centre for presents from world leaders to the Iranian shahs.

==Private library==

The library was publicly inaugurated in 1994, on the occasion of International Museum Day.

===Construction===
The interior designing of the library was designed by architect Aziz Farmanfarmayan.

===Features===
The building is allocated to libraries in three separate levels; the , the main library, and the audio visual room. Other sections of the library include sets of artwork, which number over 350. The works reflect parts of modern art history, particularly the modern tendencies of Iranian art in the 1950s and 1960s.

===Gallery===
==Gallery==

==See also==
*Architecture of Iran
*Cultural Heritage Organization of Iran
*Golestan Palace
*Sa&#x27;dabad Complex

== References ==
==External links==

* Niavaran Cultural Historic Complex</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1984633" start="4" end="27" title="Niavaran Complex" label="Niavaran Palace Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q565405" start="114" end="122" title="Shemiran" label="Shemiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="133" end="139" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="142" end="146" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="221" end="226" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Qajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207991" start="231" end="238" title="Pahlavi dynasty" label="Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="279" end="297" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="305" end="311" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q164111" start="527" end="541" title="Farah Pahlavi" label="Shahbanu Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="682" end="694" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394129" start="844" end="866" title="Sahebgharaniyeh Palace" label="Sahebgharaniyeh Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949128" start="894" end="914" title="Ahmad Shahi Pavilion" label="Ahmad Shahi Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q478079" start="1216" end="1240" title="International Museum Day" label="International Museum Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821326" start="1326" end="1345" title="Abdol-Aziz Mirza Farmanfarmaian" label="Aziz Farmanfarmayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="1584" end="1594" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718840" start="1642" end="1653" title="Iranian art" label="Iranian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501585" start="1720" end="1740" title="Architecture of Iran" label="Architecture of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q85976400" start="1742" end="1780" title="Cultural Heritage Organization of Iran" label="Cultural Heritage Organization of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q210610" start="1782" end="1797" title="Golestan Palace" label="Golestan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969012" start="1799" end="1820" title="Sa&amp;#x27;dabad Complex" label="Sa&amp;#x27;dabad Complex"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266339" wikidata="Q1546541" url="?curid=1266339" title="Pinus ayacahuite">
<text>Pinus ayacahuite, also called ayacahuite pine and Mexican white pine, (family Pinaceae) is a species of pine native to the mountains of southern Mexico and western Central America, in the Sierra Madre del Sur mountains and the eastern end of the Eje Volcánico Transversal, between 14° and 21°N latitude in the Mexican states of Guerrero, Oaxaca, Puebla, Veracruz and Chiapas, and in Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras. It grows on relatively moist areas with summer rainfalls, however specimens from its eastern and southern distribution live under really wet conditions; it needs full sun and well drained soils. Its temperature needs fluctuate between 19 and 10 °C on average a year. This tree accepts from subtropical to cool climate.

&quot;Pinus ayacahuite&quot; is a large tree, regularly growing to 30–45 m and exceptionally up to 50 m tall. It is a member of the white pine group, &quot;Pinus&quot; subgenus &quot;Strobus&quot;, and like all members of that group, the leaves (&#x27;needles&#x27;) are in fascicles (bundles) of five, with a deciduous sheath. The needles are finely serrated, and 9–16 cm long. The cones are long and slender, 15–40 cm long and 4–6 cm broad (closed), opening to 6–10 cm broad; the scales are thin and flexible. The seeds are small, 6–8 mm long, and have a long slender wing 18–25 mm long.

It is moderately susceptible to white pine blister rust (&quot;Cronartium ribicola&quot;), but in cultivation has proved somewhat less susceptible than most other American white pines (see e.g. western white pine, sugar pine).

==Cultivation and uses==
It has been planted with ornamental and commercial purposes for paper industry at different latitudes and altitudes in different parts of the world:
In Equatorial and tropical regions- Commercial production: On the high elevations of Kenya, Tanzania and Angola.
In temperate subtropical regions- Commercial production: It is planted on the highlands of South Africa. On the highest elevations of Southern Brazil. Northern India.
In temperate regions at middle and low altitudes: Argentine provinces of Salta, Tucumán and Córdoba; at 500 to 1500 m above sea level.
At low elevations near sea level: Commercial production: Australia (Queensland and New South Wales), New Zealand. As ornamental: It has been successfully planted in the British Isles. The largest tree in Germany (height 2013: 20.5 m) is growing in the arboretum Sequoiafarm Kaldenkirchen.

Despite its tropical origins (the natural range is entirely south of the Tropic of Cancer), it is surprisingly tolerant of cold, having survived temperatures down to nearly -30 °C in cultivation in Scotland and Pennsylvania, United States. It is grown as an ornamental tree in parks for its attractive foliage and very long cones, among the longest that can be grown in many temperate areas.

The wood is valuable, used for general indoor construction work.

==Notes==
==References==

*Dvorak, W. S., G. R. Hodge, E. A. Gutiérrez, L. F. Osorio, F. S. Malan and T. K. Stanger. 2000. Pinus tecunumanii. In: Conservation and Testing of Tropical and Subtropical Forest Species by the CAMCORE Cooperative. College of Natural Resources, NCSU. Raleigh, NC. USA.
*Richardson D.M. (Ed) 2005. Ecology and biogeography of Pinus. Department of Conservation. South Island Wilding Conifer Strategy. New Zealand.
*Chandler, N.G. Pulpwood plantations in South Africa. Proc. Aust. Paper Indus. Tech. Ass.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1546541" start="30" end="45" title="Pinus ayacahuite" label="ayacahuite pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546541" start="50" end="68" title="Pinus ayacahuite" label="Mexican white pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101680" start="78" end="86" title="Pinaceae" label="Pinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="104" end="108" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="164" end="179" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029702" start="188" end="208" title="Sierra Madre del Sur" label="Sierra Madre del Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q278070" start="246" end="271" title="Eje Volcánico Transversal" label="Eje Volcánico Transversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60158" start="328" end="336" title="Guerrero" label="Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="338" end="344" title="Oaxaca (state)" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q79923" start="346" end="352" title="Puebla (state)" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="354" end="362" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="367" end="374" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="383" end="392" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="394" end="405" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="410" end="418" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="780" end="784" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924659" start="872" end="882" title="Pinus classification" label="white pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="896" end="901" title="Pinus" label="Pinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924659" start="923" end="930" title="Strobus" label="Strobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="978" end="984" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="1123" end="1128" title="conifer cone" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301438" start="1363" end="1386" title="white pine blister rust" label="white pine blister rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q261309" start="1525" end="1543" title="western white pine" label="western white pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q227779" start="1545" end="1555" title="sugar pine" label="sugar pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="1818" end="1823" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="1825" end="1833" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="1838" end="1844" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1937" end="1949" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1989" end="1995" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q44803" start="2086" end="2091" title="Salta Province" label="Salta"/>
<link wikidata="Q44829" start="2093" end="2100" title="Tucumán Province" label="Tucumán"/>
<link wikidata="Q44759" start="2105" end="2112" title="Córdoba Province, Argentina" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="2216" end="2226" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2231" end="2246" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="2317" end="2330" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271909" start="2410" end="2435" title="Sequoiafarm Kaldenkirchen" label="Sequoiafarm Kaldenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="2511" end="2527" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2649" end="2661" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="2835" end="2839" title="wood" label="wood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266340" wikidata="Q449618" url="?curid=1266340" title="Anatolijs Gorbunovs">
<text>Anatolijs Gorbunovs, also known as Anatoly Valeryanovich Gorbunov (; born 10 February 1942), is a Latvian politician who served as the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet during the final years of the Soviet regime in Latvia and as Chairman of the Supreme Council of Latvia during the first years after the country regained its independence.

In the latter capacity he was effectively the acting head of state before the election of the Fifth Saeima in 1993. He continued to serve as the Speaker of the Saeima until 1995.

== Political career ==
From 1974 to 1988, he held various positions in the Communist Party of Latvia, with his highest position being the Secretary of the Central Committee. Unlike many other Communist Party members in Latvia, Gorbunovs supported the Latvian independence movement. From 1988 to 1990 he was also Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. In 1990, he presided over a session of the Supreme Soviet that declared the Soviet Union an occupying power, voided Latvia&#x27;s accession to the Soviet Union, and began a transitional period to independence. Gorbunovs remained as chairman of the body, renamed the Supreme Council of Latvia, until 1993. When Latvian independence was restored &quot;de facto&quot; in 1991. As speaker of the parliament, Gorbunovs became State President per the 1922 Constitution until 1993, when Guntis Ulmanis was elected president.

Gorbunovs joined the Latvian Way party in 1993 and was elected as Speaker of the Saeima, a post he held until 1995. He remained a member of parliament until 2002. Between 1995 and 2002, he served as Minister of Regional Development, Minister of Transportation and Deputy Prime Minister.




== Awards ==
* Order of the Badge of Honour (USSR, 1981) 
* Order of the Three Stars, 2nd Class (1995) 
* Order of the Dannebrog, Commander 1st Class (Denmark, 1997) 
* Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class (Estonia, 2002) 
* Medal of the Baltic Assembly (2011)
* The Cicero Award () of the Latvian Academy of Sciences (2012)

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* Biography of Anatolijs Gorbunovs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q449618" start="0" end="19" title="Anatolijs Gorbunovs" label="Anatolijs Gorbunovs"/>
<link wikidata="Q449618" start="35" end="65" title="Anatolijs Gorbunovs" label="Anatoly Valeryanovich Gorbunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426254" start="135" end="165" title="List of Chairmen of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Chairman of the Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192180" start="196" end="219" title="Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Soviet regime in Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109069" start="243" end="258" title="Supreme Council of the Republic of Latvia" label="Supreme Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="391" end="404" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q822919" start="438" end="444" title="Saeima" label="Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630529" start="483" end="504" title="Speaker of the Saeima" label="Speaker of the Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780610" start="593" end="618" title="Communist Party of Latvia" label="Communist Party of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190652" start="673" end="690" title="Central Committee" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11794703" start="830" end="877" title="List of Chairmen of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091483" start="942" end="950" title="On the Restoration of Independence of the Republic of Latvia" label="declared"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109069" start="1145" end="1170" title="Supreme Council of Latvia" label="Supreme Council of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218014" start="1300" end="1315" title="president of Latvia" label="State President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143464" start="1324" end="1341" title="Constitution of Latvia" label="1922 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q60106" start="1359" end="1373" title="Guntis Ulmanis" label="Guntis Ulmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507032" start="1419" end="1430" title="Latvian Way" label="Latvian Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q960966" start="1704" end="1732" title="Order of the Badge of Honour" label="Order of the Badge of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q913910" start="1749" end="1773" title="Order of the Three Stars" label="Order of the Three Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872" start="1795" end="1817" title="Order of the Dannebrog" label="Order of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476" start="1858" end="1893" title="Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana" label="Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q670356" start="1937" end="1952" title="Baltic Assembly" label="Baltic Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615464" start="1989" end="2016" title="Latvian Academy of Sciences" label="Latvian Academy of Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266342" wikidata="Q331393" url="?curid=1266342" title="Superwoman">
<text>Superwoman is the name of several fictional characters from DC Comics. Most of them are, like Supergirl, women with powers similar to those of Superman, such as flight, invulnerability, and enhanced strength.

In 1942, DC Comics trademarked the name and an ashcan copy (publication produced solely for legal purposes) was created with the title of &quot;Superwoman&quot; to prevent competitors from using it. The cover was a reproduction of &quot;More Fun Comics&quot; #73 with the interior being a reprint of the third issue of &quot;Action Comics&quot;. The first true appearance of Superwoman was in &quot;Action Comics&quot; #60 (May 1943).

==Fictional character biography==
===Lois Lane===

The first appearance of &quot;Superwoman&quot; in a DC comic was in a May 1943 story in &quot;Action Comics&quot; #60 by Jerry Siegel and George Roussos, where Lois Lane dreams that she has gained superpowers from a blood transfusion from Superman and launches a career as Superwoman.

A 1947 &quot;Superman&quot; #45 (March–April 1947) comic revisits the theme in a story titled &quot;Lois Lane, Superwoman!&quot; in which a pair of fraudulent magicians cast a &quot;spell&quot; on Lane, making her believe she has superpowers. Circumstances force Superman to play along with the ruse temporarily by using super-speed to invisibly intervene in Lane&#x27;s adventures to support the illusion. She briefly sports a costume modeled on Superman&#x27;s before the spell is broken. A story from &quot;Action Comics&quot; has Lois actually gaining superpowers from one of Lex Luthor&#x27;s inventions and launching a short-lived career as &quot;Superwoman&quot;.

Later stories sporadically feature tales in which Lois gains superpowers and functioned as a &quot;Superwoman&quot; of sorts, but all of these are, like the 1951 tale, temporary. The powers always wear off by the end of the story. A typical example of this is &quot;The Turnabout Powers&quot; from &quot;Superman Family&quot; #207 (May–June 1981) where the Earth-Two Lois Lane gains powers from her husband (the Earth-Two Superman) through the unexpected effect of an exotic extraterrestrial plant Superman brings into their home. The plant&#x27;s death reverses the effect. Another example is the &quot;Batman/Superman: World&#x27;s Finest&quot; mini-series where Mr. Mxyzptlk briefly transforms Lois into a &quot;Superwoman&quot; with costume and powers.

At the end of &quot;All-Star Superman&quot; #2 Lois Lane is presented with a formula called &quot;Exo-Genes&quot; created by Superman that allows her to have his powers for 24 hours, and she becomes Superwoman. During her adventures with her new Kryptonian powers, she is wooed by two superhumans named &quot;Samson&quot; and &quot;Atlas&quot;, and she is captured by a time-Ultrasphinx. Her powers fade away at the end of the day. Her costume seems to be exactly the same as that of the Anti-Matter Universe&#x27;s Superwoman, but in Superman&#x27;s colors. Both outfits were designed by Frank Quitely.

In other pre-Crisis imaginary stories—set outside the main DC continuity within an alternate history or hypothetical future—Lois Lane gains superpowers. In one of these, Sam Lane is a scientist and astrophysicist. He discovers that Earth&#x27;s sun will go nova and obliterate the solar system. Sam and his wife Ella place their infant daughter Lois in a starship and send her to Krypton within a &quot;power beam&quot; that enables FTL travel and permanently modifies the baby&#x27;s molecular biology. This gives Lois super powers after she reaches her adopted world. Once there, adopted and raised as &quot;Kandi Khan&quot;, Lois becomes a zookeeper&#x27;s daughter in Kryptonville. Like Superman in mainstream DC continuity, Kandi/Lois establishes a superhero career, and like Lois and Superman in the mainstream continuity, Supermaid and Kal-El fall for one another. Like Superman in the mainstream DC continuity, Supermaid was also vulnerable to fragments of her perished homeworld (&quot;Earthite&quot;, in this version of events).

Another imaginary story has Clark Kent and Lois exchange places so that she is from Krypton and Kent is an ordinary human, inquisitive about whether or not Lois Lane was Krypton Girl&#x27;s secret identity.

In 2016, Lois again became Superwoman in the DC Rebirth initiative and appeared as Superwoman in the comic book series &quot;Superwoman&quot;. The series marks the first ongoing comic book series featuring the Superwoman character. In September 2011, The New 52 rebooted DC&#x27;s continuity. In this new timeline, Lois and Lana gained superpowers due to the solar energy explosion caused by the death of the New 52 Superman. This results in both Lois and Lana becoming Superwoman with Lois possessing all of Superman&#x27;s powers, while Lana has the ability to absorb solar energy and release it in other forms. Lois was later seemingly killed, in a similar fashion to the New 52 Superman, while fighting a female Bizarro.

Lois returned as Superwoman in DC Comics in the DC All In initiative in 2024. She first appeared as Superwoman in &quot;Superman&quot; vol 6 #19. During the &quot;Absolute Power&quot; storyline, Amanda Waller&#x27;s Amazo robots steal the metahumans&#x27; superpowers, and some have their powers swapped. It is revealed that General Zod is among those affected, and Lois gains his powers in &quot;Superwoman Special&quot; #1.

===Luma Lynai===
A woman from the distant planet of Staryl, Luma Lynai wins the heart of Superman. Just as Superman derives his powers from a yellow sun, Luma derived her gifts of super-strength and flight from an orange sun. Their romance does not last, as Luma becomes deathly ill under the rays of a yellow sun, and Superman cannot leave Earth undefended. She physically resembles an adult Kara Zor-El, with a similar costume, except instead of being blue-and-red with a pentagonal S shield, Luma&#x27;s costume is white-and-green with a circular S emblem.

===Superwoman (Crime Syndicate)===

Superwoman is the alias of several alternate universe counterparts of Wonder Woman from various versions of Earth-3, all of whom are supervillains and members of the Crime Syndicate of America. Unlike her heroic counterpart, this Superwoman is known for her ruthless and manipulative nature, often using her powers for personal gain, domination, and oppression.

===Gender-swapped Superman===

In &quot;Superman&quot; #349 (&quot;The Turnabout Trap!&quot;), Superman returns from an interstellar mission to find that everyone on Earth is of the opposite sex. Among them are Penny White (a female Perry White), Jenny Olsen (a female Jimmy Olsen), Louis Lane (a male Lois Lane), Batwoman (a female Batman, rather than the actual character), Wonder Warrior (a male Wonder Woman; DC Comics could not use the name Wonder Man at the time because Marvel Comics holds the trademark), Black Condor (a male Black Canary), Superlad (a male Supergirl), and Superwoman (his female counterpart) herself. Believing he crossed into a parallel universe, Superman flies back to space to find a dimensional portal but is blocked by an invisible barrier. He notices the parallelism fails when he sees Superwoman and Clara Kent (Superwoman&#x27;s presumed secret identity) are two separate people.

When he confronts Superwoman he discovers that he is regarded as a super-villain in this gender-reversed world, which leads to a battle with Superwoman, Superlad, and Wonder Warrior. They manage to trap Superman with Wonder Warrior on guard, but he manages to escape and takes Wonder Warrior&#x27;s magic lasso with him. Superman figures out that his foe Mr. Mxyzptlk is behind this gender-reversed world. This was partly due to the discrepancy of Clara Kent and Superwoman being different people. However, Mxyzptlk&#x27;s biggest mistake was being too vain to give himself a reverse-gender counterpart in Superwoman&#x27;s rogues gallery in The Daily Planet morgue; all of Superwoman&#x27;s foes were reverse-gender counterparts to Superman&#x27;s foes (Leslie Luthor (Lex Luthor), Bizaress (Bizarro) and the Toywoman (Toyman)) - except for Mxyzptlk. Superman discovers as well that he was never in a parallel universe, but rather on Earth, which Mxyzptlk had altered with his magic. After using Wonder Warrior&#x27;s magic lasso to make Mxyzptlk say his name backwards and thus returning him to his native dimension, the effects of Mxyzptlk&#x27;s magic (including the existence of Superwoman) vanish, returning the Earth to normal. Upon his return to his Clark Kent identity, he is startled to discover there is still a Louis Lane, but he turns out to be Lois Lane&#x27;s cousin.

Later stories, including &quot;Countdown&quot; and &quot;The Multiversity&quot; would revisit the concept of a gender-reversed Superman known as Superwoman, and designated those stories as taking place on Earth-11 of the DC Multiverse.

===Laurel Kent===
A new Superwoman named Laurel, apparently a female version of Superman from a parallel Earth (now identified as Earth-11), appeared for the first time in &quot;Superman/Batman&quot; #23-#24. In Earth 11&#x27;s alternate universe, much like in the one featured in &quot;The Turnabout Trap!&quot;, reversed-gender characters exist relative to that resident on New Earth: there is a Batwoman (female Batman), Superlad (male Supergirl), and a female Darkseid known as the &quot;Dark Queen&quot;. It is notable that in pre-Crisis continuity, &quot;Laurel Kent&quot; was the name of a 30th-century descendant of Superman who occasionally appeared in stories featuring the Legion of Super-Heroes, and was replaced in continuity by Laurel Gand.

In December 2007, Superwoman and Batwoman were featured in &quot;Countdown Presents: The Search for Ray Palmer: Superwoman/Batwoman&quot; #1. It features Earth-11 as part of the new DC Multiverse and presents a male version of Wonder Woman called Wonder Man, who originates from a society of male Amazons. It also depicts that world&#x27;s version of &quot;Amazons Attack!&quot;.

&quot;The Multiversity Guidebook&quot;, released as part of &quot;The Multiversity&quot; showed new versions of the characters from Earth-11, more closely resembling New Earth after the Flashpoint event, with equivalent costumes to their New Earth counterparts, indicating their world had also been affected by the Flashpoint storyline, though the exact nature of those changes is unrevealed. The Aquawoman of Earth-11 would become a member of Justice League Incarnate, a team which formed as a result of the Multiversity event. She would go on to help Superwoman of Earth-11 as well as a number of other Superman counterparts to escape from a being called Prophecy, who was attempting to drain their powers in order to fight an unknown future threat. Together with Aquawoman, Superman, The New Super-Man of China, and the Justice League Incarnate, Prophecy was defeated, and Superwoman and the other Superman counterparts would return to their worlds and times.

===Kristin Wells===

Another version of Superwoman, this one a heroic character, came about in the form of Kristin Wells, who was created by Superman comic writer Elliot S! Maggin. Wells first appeared in Maggin&#x27;s Superman novel &quot;Miracle Monday&quot;, but he later introduced her in the pages of &quot;DC Comics Presents&quot; as Superwoman. The character Wells is a 29th-century descendant of Jimmy Olsen. Wells time travels to the 20th century, where the technology she had brought from the future gives her superpowers. It is this iteration of the character which appears briefly in &quot;&quot; which creates a continuity problem in that she had already revealed Jimmy Olsen&#x27;s final fate: to become a great editor like Perry White.

===Dana Dearden===

Obsessed Superman fan Dana Dearden dated Jimmy Olsen to get close to Superman, and when that did not work she stole mystic artifacts which granted her the strength of Hercules, the speed (and flight) of Hermes, the thunderbolts of Zeus, and the sight of Heimdall. Dana donned a green-and-purple uniform, with &quot;Superwoman&quot; written down the leggings, and called herself Superwoman, and tried to get Superman to fall in love with her. He rejected her advances, and Jimmy called her &quot;Obsession&quot;. She vanished attempting to help Superman rescue people from a burning ship.

When Superman was split into his Red and Blue energy forms, Superwoman returned hoping that one of the Supermen would return her feelings, but Maxima intervened, and used her telepathy to convince Superwoman that she would destroy Superman with her love.

The telepathic illusion wore off and she would try to win Superman over again, this time in a red-and-blue costume very similar to his, and claimed to be his wife in response to a recent photograph of Superman wearing a wedding ring. During a subsequent attack of humans using the DMN drug—which turned the users into violent demons until the &quot;high&quot; was over—Superman convinced her to help him stop the DMN users, arguing that, if she truly loved him, she would help him do his duty rather than attack him for potentially picking someone else over her. She died trying to protect him from one of the DMN users when it almost struck him in the back while he was distracted since she knew he was vulnerable to magic.

===Lucy Lane===

Lucy Lane first appeared as Superwoman in &quot;Supergirl&quot; (vol. 5) #35 (January 2009), her costume a nod to that of the Bronze Age Superwoman Kristin Wells and containing a containment field that simulated Kryptonian powers. However, Lucy&#x27;s identity was not revealed until near the story arc&#x27;s end. During her tenure as Superwoman, she was blackmailed by her father, General Sam Lane, into performing acts of villainy such as murdering Agent Liberty, who had been spying on General Lane and Lex Luthor. This resulted in her being the focus of the &quot;Supergirl&quot; Faces of Evil issue.

Lucy Lane later attacks Reactron, which tipped off readers that Superwoman was not Kryptonian, since the villain&#x27;s Gold Kryptonite power source had no effect on her. Supergirl unmasks Superwoman, and accidentally kills her by rupturing the containment field of her suit, causing Lucy&#x27;s body to contort and explode.

In the Supergirl annual Lucy is brought back to life by the suit as it steals the life of another person. The suit is then revealed to be a magical creation of Mirabai of the Forlorn, ally of Sam Lane, who mystically infused in it the genetic abilities of several alien races of Kryptonian might: when Supergirl ruptured it, the backlash permanently altered Lucy Lane into being a composite alien being of human appearance herself, with inherent Kryptonian abilities. This Superwoman was last seen as a prisoner after Sam Lane&#x27;s machinations during the &quot;War of the Supermen&quot; storyline came to an end, though it was hinted she would escape at some point in the future. The launch of The New 52 however ended that storyline.

===Lana Lang===

When Superman died, Lana Lang and Lois Lane both absorbed energy released from his body and the two women developed superhuman powers. Lana gained the power to convert solar radiation into various forms of electromagnetic energy, while Lois developed powers similar to Superman&#x27;s. Both Lana and Lois became Superwoman. After Lois&#x27; death, Lana became the sole Superwoman.

During Superman Reborn, it was revealed that the powers Lois and Lana received were the leftover energy from the New-52 Superman. The Post-Crisis Superman took that energy into himself to become an amalgam leaving Lana seemingly powerless and confused. Some energy remained within her suit which was later found to be Red Kryptonite radiation. In &quot;Steelworks&quot; series, Lana regains her powers when John Henry Irons provides Metropolis with free energy using Genesis and accidentally re-ignited her powers.

==Other uses==
Various comic stories, pre- and post-&quot;Crisis&quot;, offer glimpses of possible futures assuming that one of the various incarnations of Supergirl would eventually change her codename to Superwoman upon reaching adulthood. One example is &quot;The Superman Family&quot; #200 (April 1980) in which all the stories are set in the then-near future 1999 or 2000 (the timeframe is cited only as &quot;the turn of the century&quot;) with the characters aged appropriately, including an older Linda Danvers (Kara Zor-El) who divides her time between her career as Superwoman and serving as governor of Florida.

Alternatively, some stories assume one of Superman&#x27;s female descendants would assume the name &quot;Superwoman&quot;, like his daughter Kara and great-granddaughter Lara from the Elseworlds series, &quot;Superman &amp; Batman: Generations&quot;.

==In other media==
===Television===
* A variation of Lois Lane / Superwoman called Ultra Woman appears in &quot;Lois and Clark: The New Adventures of Superman&quot; episode &quot;Ultra Woman&quot;, portrayed by Teri Hatcher. 
* Two incarnations of Superwoman, Lana Lang and Lois Lane, appear in &quot;Smallville&quot;, portrayed by Kristin Kreuk and Erica Durance respectively.
* The gender-swapped incarnation of Superwoman appears in the &quot;Justice League Action&quot; short &quot;True Colors&quot; as a brief transformation that Superman undergoes due to a secondary effect of Pink Kryptonite.
* A Bizarro-inspired variation of Lana Lang / Superwoman appears in &quot;Superman &amp; Lois&quot;, portrayed by Emmanuelle Chriqui. This version hails from Bizarro World.

===Film===
The Lois Lane incarnation of Superwoman appears in &quot;All-Star Superman&quot;, voiced by Christina Hendricks.

==References==
==External links==
* Maggin on the Kristin Wells Superwoman&#x27;s origins
* Supermanica Superwoman entry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331393" start="0" end="10" title="Superwoman" label="Superwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="60" end="69" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981293" start="94" end="103" title="Supergirl" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="143" end="151" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804740" start="257" end="268" title="ashcan copy" label="ashcan copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502364" start="447" end="462" title="More Fun Comics" label="More Fun Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="535" end="548" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="609" end="622" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="791" end="804" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q380113" start="818" end="830" title="Jerry Siegel" label="Jerry Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101880" start="835" end="849" title="George Roussos" label="George Roussos"/>
<link wikidata="Q845922" start="857" end="866" title="Lois Lane" label="Lois Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="913" end="930" title="blood transfusion" label="blood transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q520306" start="996" end="1004" title="Superman (comic book)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q694790" start="1563" end="1573" title="Lex Luthor" label="Lex Luthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302216" start="1959" end="1974" title="Superman Family" label="Superman Family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2012" end="2021" title="Multiverse (DC Comics)#Catalogued Earths" label="Earth-Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428427" start="2067" end="2085" title="Kal-L" label="Earth-Two Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178477" start="2259" end="2295" title="World&amp;#x27;s Finest Comics" label="Batman/Superman: World&amp;#x27;s Finest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754534" start="2320" end="2332" title="Mr. Mxyzptlk" label="Mr. Mxyzptlk"/>
<link wikidata="Q282494" start="2433" end="2450" title="All-Star Superman" label="All-Star Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6439708" start="2659" end="2669" title="Kryptonian" label="Kryptonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214648" start="2722" end="2728" title="Samson" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="2745" end="2750" title="Atlas (Mythology)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407862" start="3002" end="3015" title="Frank Quitely" label="Frank Quitely"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="3275" end="3279" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q623138" start="3398" end="3405" title="Krypton (comics)" label="Krypton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="4086" end="4096" title="Clark Kent" label="Clark Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647053" start="4311" end="4321" title="DC Rebirth" label="DC Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="4517" end="4527" title="The New 52" label="The New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q130492962" start="5040" end="5049" title="DC All In" label="DC All In"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421256" start="5155" end="5169" title="Absolute Power (comics)" label="Absolute Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113253" start="5479" end="5489" title="Luma Lynai" label="Luma Lynai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386945" start="5599" end="5613" title="Superhuman strength" label="super-strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q206021" start="5618" end="5624" title="flight" label="flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q738569" start="5812" end="5823" title="Supergirl (Kara Zor-El)" label="Kara Zor-El"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="6086" end="6098" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984524" start="6124" end="6131" title="Earth-Three" label="Earth-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498903" start="6149" end="6161" title="supervillain" label="supervillain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393736" start="6182" end="6208" title="Crime Syndicate of America" label="Crime Syndicate of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342943" start="6612" end="6623" title="Perry White" label="Perry White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689418" start="6648" end="6659" title="Jimmy Olsen" label="Jimmy Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48833172" start="6693" end="6701" title="Batwoman" label="Batwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="6712" end="6718" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="6778" end="6790" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="6856" end="6869" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="6913" end="6925" title="Black Canary" label="Black Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981293" start="6945" end="6954" title="Supergirl" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754534" start="7649" end="7661" title="Mister Mxyzptlk" label="Mr. Mxyzptlk"/>
<link wikidata="Q901233" start="7936" end="7952" title="The Daily Planet" label="The Daily Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q694790" start="8064" end="8074" title="Lex Luthor" label="Lex Luthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q59641" start="8087" end="8094" title="Bizarro" label="Bizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339828" start="8114" end="8120" title="Toyman" label="Toyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176860" start="8709" end="8718" title="Countdown (DC Comics)" label="Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17409116" start="8735" end="8751" title="The Multiversity" label="The Multiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504716" start="9093" end="9108" title="Superman/Batman" label="Superman/Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q430698" start="9379" end="9387" title="Darkseid" label="Darkseid"/>
<link wikidata="Q95031" start="9599" end="9621" title="Legion of Super-Heroes" label="Legion of Super-Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827884" start="9657" end="9668" title="Laurel Gand" label="Laurel Gand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9918" end="9928" title="Wonder Man (DC Comics)#Dane of Elysium" label="Wonder Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740912" start="10028" end="10043" title="Amazons Attack!" label="Amazons Attack!"/>
<link wikidata="Q17409116" start="10118" end="10134" title="The Multiversity" label="The Multiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644352" start="11123" end="11136" title="Kristin Wells" label="Kristin Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332266" start="11179" end="11195" title="Elliot S! Maggin" label="Elliot S! Maggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872429" start="11256" end="11270" title="Miracle Monday" label="Miracle Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q826367" start="11328" end="11346" title="DC Comics Presents" label="DC Comics Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689418" start="11420" end="11431" title="Jimmy Olsen" label="Jimmy Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689418" start="11829" end="11840" title="Jimmy Olsen" label="Jimmy Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="11955" end="11963" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="11991" end="11997" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="12019" end="12023" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131196" start="12042" end="12050" title="Heimdall" label="Heimdall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853105" start="12520" end="12526" title="Maxima (comics)" label="Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="12552" end="12561" title="telepathy" label="telepathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797402" start="13376" end="13385" title="Lucy Lane" label="Lucy Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977899" start="13424" end="13433" title="Supergirl (comic book)" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644352" start="13524" end="13537" title="Kristin Wells" label="Kristin Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703510" start="13767" end="13775" title="Sam Lane (comics)" label="Sam Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606423" start="13828" end="13841" title="Agent Liberty" label="Agent Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038570" start="13961" end="13974" title="Faces of Evil" label="Faces of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643808" start="14873" end="14892" title="War of the Supermen" label="War of the Supermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="15006" end="15016" title="The New 52" label="The New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q944728" start="15085" end="15094" title="Lana Lang" label="Lana Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005691" start="15854" end="15870" title="Steel (John Henry Irons)" label="John Henry Irons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302216" start="16226" end="16245" title="The Superman Family" label="The Superman Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="16577" end="16584" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643868" start="16629" end="16663" title="Superman dynasty" label="Superman&amp;#x27;s female descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q194712" start="16771" end="16781" title="Elseworlds" label="Elseworlds"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16796" end="16830" title="Superman &amp;amp; Batman: Generations" label="Superman &amp;amp; Batman: Generations"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16951" end="16997" title="Lois and Clark: The New Adventures of Superman" label="Lois and Clark: The New Adventures of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181490" start="17050" end="17062" title="Teri Hatcher" label="Teri Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q726851" start="17099" end="17108" title="Lana Lang (Smallville)" label="Lana Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8179758" start="17113" end="17122" title="Lois Lane (Smallville)" label="Lois Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q180228" start="17140" end="17150" title="Smallville" label="Smallville"/>
<link wikidata="Q195718" start="17171" end="17184" title="Kristin Kreuk" label="Kristin Kreuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q229747" start="17189" end="17202" title="Erica Durance" label="Erica Durance"/>
<link wikidata="Q22674166" start="17285" end="17306" title="Justice League Action" label="Justice League Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q59641" start="17443" end="17450" title="Bizarro" label="Bizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q93281114" start="17513" end="17532" title="Superman &amp;amp; Lois" label="Superman &amp;amp; Lois"/>
<link wikidata="Q298173" start="17553" end="17571" title="Emmanuelle Chriqui" label="Emmanuelle Chriqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021927" start="17597" end="17610" title="Bizarro World" label="Bizarro World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728320" start="17681" end="17698" title="All-Star Superman (film)" label="All-Star Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210462" start="17716" end="17735" title="Christina Hendricks" label="Christina Hendricks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266345" wikidata="Q6521407" url="?curid=1266345" title="Lemonjelly.ky">
<text>Lemonjelly.ky is the debut album by the British duo Lemon Jelly, released on 23 October 2000. It compiles all nine tracks originally released on the duo&#x27;s first three limited edition EPs: &quot;The Bath&quot;, &quot;The Yellow&quot; and &quot;The Midnight&quot;, although minor changes were made for the album release.

==Critical reception==
&quot;Lemonjelly.ky&quot; received a score of 79 out of 100 based on nine reviews on review aggregator Metacritic, including &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot; from critics.

==Track listing==

The recording details are in the EP articles:
* &quot;The Bath EP&quot; (1998)
* &quot;The Yellow EP&quot; (1999)
* &quot;The Midnight EP&quot; (2000)

==Usage==
The Track &quot;The Staunton Lick&quot; was used in the last scene of the finale of the tv-series Spaced.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1444372" start="52" end="63" title="Lemon Jelly" label="Lemon Jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="188" end="191" title="Extended play" label="EPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715800" start="199" end="207" title="The Bath (EP)" label="The Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776632" start="221" end="231" title="The Yellow" label="The Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751304" start="248" end="260" title="The Midnight (EP)" label="The Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="451" end="461" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715800" start="601" end="609" title="The Bath (EP)" label="The Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776632" start="634" end="644" title="The Yellow" label="The Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751304" start="669" end="681" title="The Midnight (EP)" label="The Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q114231" start="807" end="813" title="Spaced" label="Spaced"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266347" wikidata="Q4377472" url="?curid=1266347" title="Prodrive">
<text>Prodrive is an English motorsport and advanced engineering group based in Banbury, 
Oxfordshire.

==History==

Prodrive was founded in 1984 by Ian Parry and David Richards. 

Prodrive sold its 51% stake in Ford Performance Vehicles to Ford Australia in 2012. Prodrive also founded Ford Performance Racing in 2003, entering the V8 Supercar series in Australia after purchasing Glenn Seton Racing. This was sold in January 2013.

==Motorsport activities==

===Formula One===
On 28 April 2006, Prodrive were officially granted entry to F1 when the FIA announced the list of entrants to the 2008 Formula One World Championship. It was announced on 23 November 2007 that Prodrive F1 would not compete in the , as the legal situation left no time for the team to be set up for the start of the season.

On 23 April 2009, Prodrive issued a press release stating that they were considering an F1 entry for the 2010 season, possibly under the Aston Martin Racing brand. On 29 May 2009, it was reported that Prodrive had submitted a formal application for the 2010 season. However, Prodrive was not accepted to the final grid. Prodrive was one of two potential buyers considered by the Renault F1 Team to take-over the team prior to the 2010 season. In April 2010 Prodrive announced it would not apply for the 2011 Formula One season. The slot became available after US F1 Team collapsed.

==Facilities==
Prodrive had a facility at the former RAF Honiley airfield and LucasVarity proving ground near Wroxall, Warwickshire, together with Marcos and TRW.

In March 2006, Prodrive announced its intent to build a £200million, motorsport facility called &quot;The Fulcrum&quot;.

As of 3 August 2006, Prodrive has won the support of the Warwick District Council planning committee for development of The Fulcrum. The permission covers a highly advanced engineering research and development campus, a conference facility called the &quot;Catalyst Centre&quot; and new access road, a roundabout, infrastructure, parking and landscaping. The plans still have to be presented and agreed by the British government&#x27;s Department for Communities and Local Government. There is local opposition against Prodrive&#x27;s plans via the Fulcrum Prodrive Action Group (FPAG) to protect the rural nature of the community and the safety of the people that live within it.

In 2014 the site was sold to Jaguar Land Rover.

==See also==
* Aston Martin Racing
* Prodrive P2

==References==
===Other sources===
*Cropley, S (9 November 2004). Beauty and the beast. &quot;Autocar&quot; pp. 44–51.
*Cropley, S (30 November 2004). Out, but not down. &quot;Autocar&quot; pp. 72–73.

==External links==

*Prodrive&#x27;s website
*Subaru World Rally Team Homepage
*Aston Martin Racing Homepage
*American Le Mans Series Homepage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4377472" start="0" end="8" title="Prodrive" label="Prodrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="15" end="22" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="23" end="33" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q806160" start="74" end="81" title="Banbury" label="Banbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="84" end="95" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q173465" start="157" end="171" title="David Richards (racing)" label="David Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436952" start="206" end="231" title="Ford Performance Vehicles" label="Ford Performance Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436934" start="235" end="249" title="Ford Australia" label="Ford Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467893" start="281" end="304" title="Tickford Racing" label="Ford Performance Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="327" end="338" title="V8 Supercar" label="V8 Supercar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970156" start="376" end="394" title="Glenn Seton Racing" label="Glenn Seton Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="545" end="548" title="FIA" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q69913" start="587" end="622" title="2008 Formula One season" label="2008 Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q750016" start="934" end="953" title="Aston Martin Racing" label="Aston Martin Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="1176" end="1191" title="Renault F1" label="Renault F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q69934" start="1227" end="1238" title="2010 Formula One season" label="2010 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q173230" start="1357" end="1367" title="US F1 Team" label="US F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422043" start="1433" end="1444" title="RAF Honiley" label="RAF Honiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696066" start="1458" end="1469" title="LucasVarity" label="LucasVarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9378174" start="1490" end="1511" title="Wroxall, Warwickshire" label="Wroxall, Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637323" start="1527" end="1533" title="Marcos (automobile)" label="Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117943" start="1538" end="1541" title="TRW Automotive" label="TRW"/>
<link wikidata="Q611294" start="1723" end="1747" title="Warwick (district)" label="Warwick District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q601819" start="2102" end="2149" title="Department for Communities and Local Government" label="Department for Communities and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q750016" start="2412" end="2431" title="Aston Martin Racing" label="Aston Martin Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538515" start="2434" end="2445" title="Prodrive P2" label="Prodrive P2"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266360" wikidata="Q62826" url="?curid=1266360" title="Diederich Franz Leonhard von Schlechtendal">
<text>Diederich Franz Leonhard von Schlechtendal (27 November 1794, Xanten – 12 October 1866, Halle) was a German botanist. 

He studied in Berlin, in 1819 becoming curator of the Royal Herbarium. He was a professor of botany and director of the Botanical Gardens at the Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg from 1833 until his death in 1866.

The genus &quot;Schlechtendalia&quot; (Asteraceae), from Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina, was named in his honor.

He was editor of the botanical journal &quot;Linnaea&quot; (from 1826), and with Hugo von Mohl (1805–1872), was publisher of the &quot;Botanischen Zeitung&quot; (from 1843).

He conducted important investigations of the then largely unknown flora of Mexico, carried out in conjunction with Adelbert von Chamisso (1781–1838), and based on specimens collected by Christian Julius Wilhelm Schiede (1798–1836), and Ferdinand Deppe (1794–1861).

Schlechtendal was a critic of Darwinism but accepted a limited form of evolution. He advocated a form common descent of &quot;some groups of very similar species, which also inhabit a limited area&quot;.

== Written works ==
* &quot;Animadversiones botanicae in Ranunculaceas&quot;, Berlin 1819–1820.
* &quot;Flora berolinensis&quot;, Berlin 1823–1824.
* &quot;Adumbrationes plantarum&quot;, 1825–1832.
* &quot;Flora von Deutschland&quot;, Jena 1840–1873 (with Christian Eduard Langethal and Ernst Schenk; fifth edition by Ernst Hallier 1880–1887).
* &quot;Hortus halensis&quot;, Halle 1841–1853.

== References ==
==External links==
* Biography @ Meyers Konversations-Lexikon
* Biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62826" start="0" end="42" title="Diederich Franz Leonhard von Schlechtendal" label="Diederich Franz Leonhard von Schlechtendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162890" start="62" end="68" title="Xanten" label="Xanten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="88" end="93" title="Halle an der Saale" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="108" end="116" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="134" end="140" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q674426" start="159" end="166" title="curator" label="curator"/>
<link wikidata="Q163255" start="174" end="189" title="Botanical Garden in Berlin" label="Royal Herbarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="213" end="219" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q32120" start="265" end="309" title="Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg" label="Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21300210" start="362" end="377" title="Schlechtendalia (plant)" label="Schlechtendalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="411" end="418" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61635" start="540" end="553" title="Hugo von Mohl" label="Hugo von Mohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="700" end="705" title="Flora (plants)" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="709" end="715" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q154782" start="749" end="770" title="Adelbert von Chamisso" label="Adelbert von Chamisso"/>
<link wikidata="Q67359" start="820" end="852" title="Christian Julius Wilhelm Schiede" label="Christian Julius Wilhelm Schiede"/>
<link wikidata="Q66077" start="870" end="885" title="Ferdinand Deppe" label="Ferdinand Deppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="930" end="939" title="Darwinism" label="Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="971" end="980" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="1002" end="1016" title="common descent" label="common descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150" start="1340" end="1344" title="Jena" label="Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q67415" start="1361" end="1387" title="Christian Eduard Langethal" label="Christian Eduard Langethal"/>
<link wikidata="Q73100" start="1423" end="1436" title="Ernst Hallier" label="Ernst Hallier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138512" start="1548" end="1576" title="Meyers Konversations-Lexikon" label="Meyers Konversations-Lexikon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266367" wikidata="Q7234420" url="?curid=1266367" title="Postolar Tripper">
<text>Postolar Tripper was a hip hop-ethno-ska-reggae band from Zadar, Croatia.
It consists of band members:

* Davor Valčić - vocal 
* Darko Predragović-Dabi – vocal 
* Renato Babić – guitar 
* Pave Ruić – bass guitar 
* Ivan Bačinić-Bačko – percussion 
* Dinko Habuš – trumpet 
* Goran Šućurović–Macko – drums 
* Zvonko Ćoso - Management
They first appeared on the music scene by posting their song &quot;Aaaaaaaaa.!?&quot; on the 057 radio station from Zadar in 2002. The song &quot;Tužna priča o selu&quot; followed, confirming the band&#x27;s hip-hop/ethno style (speaking in the rural dialect of Dalmatia&#x27;s Ravni kotari better known as &quot;Zaleđe&quot;). This song was No. 1 in the charts of HTV&#x27;s teen show &quot;Briljanteen&quot; for months in 2005.

Their third single was &quot;Balada o Viliju i Vesni&quot;, for which a video was made by video artist Mara Milin, after which their debut album was released. 
Humour and eccentric usage of the rural elements in their music was also a characteristic of their fourth single, &quot;Čuvaj se sinjske ruke&quot;, also used in the film of the same name, by Bore Lee.

A duet in the beginning, Postolar Tripper became a band of eight musicians. Their album &quot;Popravni&quot; was released in 2008, with single &quot;Na rubu ponora&quot; recorded in ska/reggae style.

Postolar Tripper disbanded in 2017.

== Discography ==

*&quot;Sve što iman san ukra&quot; (2005, Menart Records)

# &quot;Intro... uzavrela atmosfera - skit&quot;
# &quot;Vuci, vile i balave sopile&quot;
# &quot;Metuzalemska&quot;
# &quot;Drukanje - skit&quot;
# &quot;Sve što iman san ukra&quot;
# &quot;Superdeka&quot;
# &quot;Brackanova žienska&quot;
# &quot;Diskografija i - skit&quot;
# &quot;Ljubio se bijeli golub&quot; feat. Lidija Bajuk
# &quot;Uvod u baladu - skit&quot;
# &quot;Balada o viliju i vesni&quot;
# &quot;Patlidžani &amp; češnjaci (štorija Dubravka Mataković)&quot;
# &quot;Prijatelj iz bosanskog grahova&quot;
# &quot;Čuvaj se sinjske ruke&quot;
# &quot;Tužna priča o selu&quot;
# &quot;Debela&quot;

*&quot;Zamisli Zivot u Ritmu Cipela za Ples&quot; (2007)

# &quot;Brackanova žienska&quot;
# &quot;Fa - Fa&quot;
# &quot;Natasa&quot;
# &quot;Ena&quot;
# &quot;Obicna Ljubavna Pjesma&quot; feat. Shot
# &quot;Andjeli nas zovu da im skinemo krila&quot;
# &quot;Zamisli Zivot u Ritmu Muzike za Ples&quot;
# &quot;Jamo Rasta&quot;
# &quot;Mali Motorin&quot;
# &quot;Sretno Dijete&quot;

*&quot;Popravni&quot; (2008, Menart Records)

# &quot;Ona Za Ribara Neće&quot;
# &quot;Brate brate gospođo&quot;
# &quot;Gradelada&quot;
# &quot;Kolcem priko škine - skit &quot;
# &quot;Marijana&quot;
# &quot;Palma U Pitaru&quot;
# &quot;Pobro&quot;
# &quot;Na Rubu Ponora&quot;
# &quot;Pejstejšn dva - skit&quot;
# &quot;Disko Taliban&quot;
# &quot;Soren I Sam&quot;
# &quot;Čudo&quot;

*&quot;Čujem ja netko šuti&quot; (2012)

# &quot;Kruva bez motike&quot;
# &quot;Burza rada&quot;
# &quot;Zorane, vrati se kući&quot;
# &quot;Moga konja&quot;
# &quot;Loše društvo i labilan karakter&quot;
# &quot;Tabletoman&quot;
# &quot;Problem, reakcija, rješenje&quot;
# &quot;Ska, ska, ska!&quot;
# &quot;Trieste&quot;
# &quot;Gaeta (feat. Libar)&quot;
# &quot;Na kolodvoru&quot;
# &quot;Largo&quot;
# &quot;Uno, due, tre...&quot;
# &quot;Redar Zeljko (feat. Zebrax) - bonus track&quot;

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7234420" start="0" end="16" title="Postolar Tripper" label="Postolar Tripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="23" end="30" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="37" end="40" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="41" end="47" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="58" end="63" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="65" end="72" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="427" end="430" title="057" label="057"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="596" end="604" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q912735" start="699" end="702" title="Croatian Radiotelevision" label="HTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263894" start="1117" end="1125" title="Bore Lee" label="Bore Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q109940" start="1130" end="1134" title="duet" label="duet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116209" start="1427" end="1441" title="Menart Records" label="Menart Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q299466" start="1763" end="1775" title="Lidija Bajuk" label="Lidija Bajuk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266369" wikidata="Q3379588" url="?curid=1266369" title="Ziti">
<text>Ziti () or zite () is a shape of extruded pasta originating from the Italian regions of Campania and Sicily. It is shaped into long, wide tubes, about long, that generally need to be broken by hand into smaller pieces before cooking. Ziti has similarities to bucatini but is much thicker.

==Etymology==
 is the plural form of and , respectively meaning &#x27;bride&#x27; and &#x27;groom&#x27; in Sicilian. For this reason, &quot;ziti&quot; may also be rendered as in Italian (with the regular plural form for feminine nouns in &quot;-a&quot;).

==Composition and usage==
Ziti strands are made of long and wide tubes, each around . Ziti has similarities to bucatini, rigatoni and penne. Ziti is created from durum wheat flour and water.

It is also used to make .

In Sicily, it is traditionally served at a wedding feast.

&quot;Zitoni&quot;, or &quot;zitone&quot;, has a thicker cut than ziti, being in-between ziti and rigatoni.

==Gallery==
==Baked ziti==

Baked ziti is a casserole with ziti pasta and a Neapolitan-style tomato sauce. It is characteristic of Italian-American cuisine. It is a form of .

Typically, the pasta is first boiled separately until it is nearly, but not completely, done. The almost-cooked pasta is added to a tomato-based sauce. The sauce-coated pasta is then combined with cheese, typically a mixture of ricotta, mozzarella, and Parmesan. Other ingredients can be added to the cheese, such as ground meat, sausage, mushrooms, peppers, and onions. The combined ingredients are placed in a baking dish, covered with mozzarella cheese, baked in the oven, and served hot. If unavailable, ziti may be substituted for other tubular kinds of pasta such as penne or rigatoni.

==In popular culture==
In the crime-drama series &quot;The Sopranos&quot;, the phrase &quot;box of ziti&quot; is used as a euphemism for $1,000. This term has spread to become colloquial in New York. The term was used in Albany by Andrew Cuomo during the sentencing of &quot;Percoco v. United States&quot; in February 2018.

==See also==
* List of pasta
* List of casserole dishes

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3379588" start="0" end="4" title="Ziti" label="Ziti"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="42" end="47" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="69" end="76" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="88" end="96" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="101" end="107" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q20007" start="259" end="267" title="bucatini" label="bucatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="397" end="405" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="468" end="475" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20007" start="657" end="665" title="bucatini" label="bucatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q20024" start="667" end="675" title="rigatoni" label="rigatoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063736" start="680" end="685" title="penne" label="penne"/>
<link wikidata="Q618324" start="708" end="713" title="durum" label="durum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="768" end="774" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501890" start="977" end="986" title="casserole" label="casserole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699131" start="1064" end="1088" title="Italian-American cuisine" label="Italian-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216781" start="1337" end="1344" title="ricotta" label="ricotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088" start="1346" end="1356" title="mozzarella" label="mozzarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q155922" start="1362" end="1370" title="Parmesan" label="Parmesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400960" start="1426" end="1437" title="ground meat" label="ground meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131419" start="1439" end="1446" title="sausage" label="sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q654236" start="1448" end="1457" title="Edible mushroom" label="mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="1459" end="1466" title="Bell pepper" label="peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="1472" end="1477" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063736" start="1682" end="1687" title="penne" label="penne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20024" start="1691" end="1699" title="rigatoni" label="rigatoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="1757" end="1769" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="1923" end="1929" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="1933" end="1945" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q124801636" start="1977" end="2001" title="Percoco v. United States" label="Percoco v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625877" start="2042" end="2055" title="List of pasta" label="List of pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716867" start="2058" end="2082" title="List of casserole dishes" label="List of casserole dishes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266370" wikidata="Q2603413" url="?curid=1266370" title="Pretty Vacant">
<text>&quot;Pretty Vacant&quot; is a song by the English punk rock band the Sex Pistols. It was released on 1 July 1977 as the band&#x27;s third single and was later featured on their only album, &quot;Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&#x27;s the Sex Pistols&quot;, released during that same year.

== Composition ==
According to bassist Glen Matlock, the song&#x27;s main riff was inspired by hearing &quot;SOS&quot; by ABBA. A reversed variant of this riff can be heard in &quot;I&#x27;m So Bored With The U.S.A.&quot; by The Clash, recorded one month later but released three months earlier than the Sex Pistols record. The B-side of the single was a cover of the Stooges&#x27; &quot;No Fun&quot;, which the band played on the spot without a proper rehearsal. It was taken from demo sessions recorded by producer Dave Goodman. In an interview for the June 2022 issue of &quot;Uncut&quot;, Matlock said that ”Pretty Vacant, which is my song and my lyrics, I took inspiration from Richard Hell’s Blank Generation. But I kind of misunderstood what his song was all about. You gotta put the songs in the context of what was going on for a bloke like me in mid-70s London, with the three-day week and the IRA bombings and power cuts, against the fact I was a young man who met some interesting people who was trying to form a rock’n’roll band. Pretty Vacant is a primal scream kind of thing: we don’t know what we’re gonna do, but we’re gonna do it anyway.”

The band made a video for &quot;Pretty Vacant&quot; (as well as one for &quot;God Save the Queen&quot;) on 11 and 12 July 1977 at the studios of ITN in Wells Street, London. They were thrown out after throwing cans of lager at the cameramen on the 11th, but came back on the 12th to finish the recording.

==Charts==
The song reached No. 6 on the UK Singles Chart and marked the band&#x27;s first appearance on the British chart music TV programme &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;. The song gained attention for vocalist John Lydon&#x27;s phrasing of the word &quot;vacant&quot;, emphasising the last syllable to sound like the vulgar word &quot;cunt&quot;. 
==Certifications==


== Reception ==
&quot;NME&quot; magazine made it their Single of the Year in 1977. 

In March 2005, &quot;Q&quot; magazine placed the song 26th in its list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Tracks. &quot;NME&quot; named it the 132nd-greatest song of all time in 2014. &quot;Billboard&quot; said that the lyrics are milder than some of the group&#x27;s other songs, &quot;the intense energy level never falters&quot; but that the &quot;bombastic guitar riffs&quot; make the lyrics difficult to hear. 

&quot;Cash Box&quot; said of the single edit that &quot;Rotten&#x27;s vocals are rhythmic, double-edged and snarling but also cleaned up for airplay&quot; and that it &quot;is a straight forward rocker with upfront drumming, slashing guitar licks and a brash attitude.&quot; &quot;Record World&quot; called it &quot;great rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll.&quot;

== Legacy ==
A live version of the track from &quot;Filthy Lucre Live&quot; was released as a single in 1996, and a 7-inch picture disc was released in 2012. 

Pretty Vacant was rerecorded for the in-game soundtrack for the 2007 skateboarding videogame Skate, and was included in 2008 rhythm game Guitar Hero: World Tour.

==Covers and samples==
&quot;Pretty Vacant&quot; was covered by Paul Jones in 1978. Joan Jett released a cover version on single, and Joey Ramone used the lead riff in his cover of &quot;What a Wonderful World&quot;. This opening riff has been used as a punk trope on several songs of the genre, for instance in Eskorbuto&#x27;s &quot;Eskizofrenia&quot; (1984).

The song was used in the 1981 film &quot;American Pop&quot;. An Irish-language version of the song, entitled &quot;Folamh go Deas&quot; (a literal translation), was also performed by Irish band Na Magairlí in 1981. In 1996 Black Grape released a cover version (very similar to the original) on their single &quot;Fat Neck&quot;. South African pop group Shikisha also released a cover version of the song in 1996.

The group the Ukrainians perform a Ukrainian language version of the song on their EP &quot;Anarchy in the UK&quot; and album &quot;Respublika&quot;. The French band Les Négresses Vertes, as well as grime MC Lady Sovereign, have both covered &quot;Pretty Vacant&quot; and performed live versions of the song. Lady Sovereign&#x27;s version is featured in the popular TV show, &quot;The O.C.&quot; and the cover version is featured on one of the six &quot;The O.C.&quot; soundtracks called &quot;Music from The O.C.: Mix 6 – Covering Our Tracks&quot;. Kathy Hampson&#x27;s Free Elastic Band feature a slow acoustic folk-music style version in their live shows.

Producer Mike Thorne who was involved in the first recordings of the Sex Pistols made his own version of &quot;Pretty Vacant&quot; on his album &quot;Sprawl&quot; in 2005, with vocals by Lene Lovich.

The song is also the opening theme for the Canadian short-lived comedy sketch show The Vacant Lot.

==Books==
* Matlock, Glen with Silverton, Pete (1990). &quot;I was a teenage Sex Pistol&quot;. Omnibus Press 
* Lydon, John (1993). &quot;&quot;. Hodder &amp; Stoughton 
* Lydon, John (2014). &quot;Anger Is an Energy: My Life Uncensored&quot;. Simon &amp; Schuster 
* Sex Pistols (2017). &quot;Never Mind the Bollocks, Here’s the Sex Pistols, 1977: The Bollocks Diaries&quot;. Octopus Publishing Group Ltd 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2603413" start="6" end="19" title="Pretty Vacant" label="Pretty Vacant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="51" end="60" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="70" end="81" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q457275" start="196" end="248" title="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols" label="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q51319" start="328" end="340" title="Glen Matlock" label="Glen Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585621" start="392" end="407" title="SOS (ABBA song)" label="&amp;quot;SOS&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="411" end="415" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645585" start="471" end="504" title="I&amp;#x27;m So Bored with the USA" label="I&amp;#x27;m So Bored With The U.S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="514" end="523" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="653" end="664" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228847" start="806" end="818" title="Dave Goodman (record producer)" label="Dave Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q795422" start="863" end="880" title="Uncut (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Uncut&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473255" start="972" end="984" title="Richard Hell and the Voidoids" label="Richard Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640860" start="987" end="1003" title="Blank Generation (song)" label="Blank Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q891878" start="1193" end="1205" title="Birmingham pub bombings" label="IRA bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q685575" start="1525" end="1543" title="God Save the Queen (Sex Pistols song)" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="1592" end="1595" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q38186640" start="1599" end="1611" title="Wells Street" label="Wells Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1613" end="1619" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q253481" start="1665" end="1670" title="lager" label="lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1794" end="1810" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="1901" end="1916" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="1963" end="1973" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600" start="2088" end="2092" title="cunt" label="cunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2144" end="2147" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="2228" end="2229" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="2389" end="2398" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="2622" end="2630" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="2897" end="2909" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q851477" start="3022" end="3039" title="Filthy Lucre Live" label="Filthy Lucre Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758398" start="3093" end="3105" title="picture disc" label="picture disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517141" start="3223" end="3228" title="Skate (2007 video game)" label="Skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759208" start="3267" end="3290" title="Guitar Hero World Tour" label="Guitar Hero: World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q123870" start="3357" end="3367" title="Paul Jones (singer)" label="Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="3377" end="3386" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q312387" start="3427" end="3438" title="Joey Ramone" label="Joey Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q944632" start="3480" end="3502" title="What a Wonderful World" label="What a Wonderful World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446529" start="3605" end="3614" title="Eskorbuto" label="Eskorbuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559102" start="3697" end="3709" title="American Pop" label="American Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="3720" end="3734" title="Irish language" label="Irish-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q276942" start="4080" end="4094" title="the Ukrainians" label="the Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="4105" end="4123" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q276942" start="4202" end="4212" title="Respublika (album)" label="Respublika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820571" start="4236" end="4256" title="Les Négresses Vertes" label="Les Négresses Vertes"/>
<link wikidata="Q230754" start="4278" end="4292" title="Lady Sovereign" label="Lady Sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q194427" start="4451" end="4459" title="The O.C." label="The O.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6942416" start="4564" end="4612" title="Music on The O.C." label="Music from The O.C.: Mix 6 – Covering Our Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977684" start="4620" end="4633" title="Charlestown (Manning album)" label="Kathy Hampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14703482" start="4739" end="4750" title="Mike Thorne" label="Mike Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q450618" start="4917" end="4928" title="Lene Lovich" label="Lene Lovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771878" start="5014" end="5028" title="The Vacant Lot" label="The Vacant Lot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266372" wikidata="Q1441855" url="?curid=1266372" title="R100">
<text>His Majesty&#x27;s Airship R100 was a privately designed and built British rigid airship made as part of a two-ship competition to develop a commercial airship service for use on British Empire routes as part of the Imperial Airship Scheme. The other airship, the R101, was built by the British Air Ministry, but both airships were funded by the Government.

R100 was built by the Airship Guarantee Company, a specially created subsidiary of the armaments firm Vickers-Armstrongs, led by Commander Dennis Burney. The design team was headed by Barnes Wallis, later famous for his invention of the bouncing bomb. The design team also included Nevil Shute Norway as the senior stress engineer.

R100 first flew in December 1929. It made a series of trial flights and a successful return crossing of the Atlantic in July–August 1930, but following the crash of R101 in October 1930 the Imperial Airship Scheme was terminated and R100 was broken up for scrap.
==Background==
R100 was built as part of a British government programme to develop airships to provide passenger and mail transport between Britain and the countries of the British Empire, including India, Australia and Canada. This had its origin in Dennistoun Burney&#x27;s 1922 proposal for a civil airship development programme to be subsidised by the Government and carried out by a specially established subsidiary of Vickers. When the General Election of 1923 brought Ramsay MacDonald’s Labour administration to power, the new Air Minister, Lord Thomson formulated the Imperial Airship Scheme in its place. This called for the building of two experimental airships: one, R101, to be designed and constructed under the direction of the Air Ministry, and the other, R100, to be built by the Vickers subsidiary under a fixed price contract.

==Design and development==

R100 was constructed at the former RNAS Air Station Howden in Yorkshire, a remote location from Howden and from Hull. Design work began in 1925 while at the same time the somewhat rundown site was put in order and a hydrogen-generating plant installed.

The specially established subsidiary of Vickers, the Airship Guarantee Company, faced substantial difficulties. The contract for R100&#x27;s construction was a fixed price one and it was obvious from very early on that the project would incur a loss, and so economies were made; for instance, only a dozen machine tools were in use for construction of the airship. There were also difficulties in finding skilled workers due to the remoteness of the location, and a large proportion of the workers were local people who had to be trained. Conditions in the unheated airship shed were also poor: the roof leaked, ice formed on the girders in winter, and condensation caused corrosion of the airship&#x27;s duralumin structure, so that the girders had to be varnished. For three years the assembly work was close behind that of the designers, and the progress of the design work was the determining factor in speed of construction.

===Airframe===
Since wind tunnel tests showed that a 16-side transverse section had about the same drag as a circular one, both R100 and R101 used a smaller number of longitudinal girders than previous airships to simplify stress calculations. Even so, the calculations for the transverse frames required hand computation that took two or three months to produce a solution for each frame. The thoroughness of the stressing calculations was a consequence of new Air Ministry criteria for the strengths required of airships, formulated after the catastrophic structural failure of R38 in 1921. Fewer longitudinal girders resulted in larger unsupported panels of fabric in the envelope, and flight trials were to prove that the R100&#x27;s covering was barely adequate. The envelope of R101 was also unsatisfactory and a failure in its cover was possibly a cause of its crash.

Barnes Wallis created the frame of the airship using only 11 standard components. The 16 longitudinal girders were formed of three tubes each, formed from strips of Duralumin wound into a helix and riveted together. These connected 15 polygonal transverse frames, which were held in shape by wire bracing connected to a central longitudinal girder running the length of the ship. A further consequence of the new rules for airframe stress design was that a new way of harnessing the lifting force of the gasbags had to be found. Wallis&#x27;s solution to this problem later led to his innovative geodesic airframe fuselage and wing design for the Wellesley, Wellington, Warwick and Windsor bombers.

The elevators were aerodynamically balanced but the rudders were unbalanced. When the designers learned that R101 had been fitted with servo motors at a substantial cost in weight and money they thought that they had made a mistake and rechecked their calculations. They eventually concluded that their calculations had been correct: when R100 was flown the controls proved both light and effective, and its control characteristics were compared favourably with those of R101 by Nöel Atherstone, First Officer of R101. R100 was built suspended from the roof of its shed. The individual transverse frames were assembled horizontally then lifted up and slung from roof-mounted trackways before being slid into position and attached to the adjacent frames by the longitudinal girders. The ship remained suspended until the gasbags were inflated with hydrogen.

By mid-1929 the ship&#x27;s structure was nearly complete and its gasbags were inflated. Following inflation of the gasbags, the outer covering of linen fabric painted with aluminium aircraft dope was put in place, and it was completed at the beginning of November. Lift and trim trials were carried out on 11 November: empty weight was and gasbag volume was , giving a standard gross lift of and so a disposable lift of . Deducting for the service load (crew, stores and ballast) this meant the weight available for fuel and payload was .

=== Propulsion ===
It had originally been intended to design special engines for R100 which would be fuelled by hydrogen and kerosene but after a year&#x27;s work it was realised that the engine would not be developed in time and it was decided to fit the Beardmore Tornado diesel engine that was being developed for the Air Ministry for installation in R101. At an early stage the Tornado was judged unsuitable because of its weight and other problems, and Wallis settled on the use of six reconditioned Rolls-Royce Condor petrol engines even though the fuel, with its lower flash point, was considered to be a fire risk under tropical conditions. The engines were contained in three gondolas, each with one engine driving a 17 ft (5.18 m) diameter tractor propeller, a second driving a 15 ft (4.57 m) diameter pusher propeller, and a third smaller engine in the middle of the car driving a dynamo for electrical power. The engines driving the pusher propellers were fitted with a gearbox to provide reverse thrust for docking the airship.

===Passenger and crew accommodation===

The passenger and crew accommodation were arranged on three decks occupying a single bay of the structure and entirely contained within the airship&#x27;s envelope. The lower deck contained the crew accommodation. The second deck had a dining room, which doubled as the passenger lounge, plus the kitchen, 18 four-berth passenger cabins and a gallery on either side for passengers to enjoy the view through the windows built into the skin. The third deck consisted of a gallery running around the dining room and 14 two-berth cabins.

==Operational history==

===First flights===

R100 made its maiden flight in the morning of 16 December 1929. After departing Howden at 07:53, it flew slowly to York then set course for the Royal Airship Works at Cardington, Bedfordshire, running on five engines since one of the engines had to be shut down because of a cracked water jacket, and completing the mooring process at 13:40.
A second flight was made the next day, with the intention of making a flight to London, but shortly after slipping the mast, a strip of fabric became detached from the lower fin, and the flight was limited to a cruise around Bedfordshire to test control response, lasting 6 hr 29 min. The following day, R100 was taken from the mast to No.2 shed at Cardington and work on modifying the wiring holding the cover in place begun: this took until 11 January 1930.

During a test on 16 January 1930, R100 achieved a speed of . At speed, a problem with the outer covering became apparent: it tended to ripple and flap excessively in the form of a standing wave. During a fourth flight on 20 January, a film was taken of this phenomenon, which occurred because of the large areas of unsupported fabric; the effect is also visible in some photographs.

A further short flight was made on 20 January before an endurance flight, starting at 09:38 on 27 January when R100 slipped the mast at Cardington and ending at 15:26 on 29 January after more than 53 hours in the air. Following this flight, the airship was returned to the shed for work on the cover to be carried out. At the same time, the original reconditioned Condor IIIA engines were replaced by six new Condor IIIBs and some weight was eliminated by reducing the amount of passenger accommodation. The work was complete by the end of April, but on 24 April, R100 was caught by a gust while being walked out of the shed, damaging the tail surfaces. The wind prevented the ship being returned to the shed, so it was moored to the mast. It was not possible to return the R100 to the shed for repairs until the morning of 27 April. Repairs took longer than expected, and the airship remained in the shed until 21 May, when it made a 24-hour flight intended to test the new engine installation and modifications to the cover.

R100&#x27;s contract had originally called for a demonstration flight to India. The decision to use gasoline engines resulted in a change in destination to Canada, as it was considered that a flight to the tropics with gasoline aboard would be too hazardous. Barring any difficulties, the R100 was scheduled to set off for Canada on 25 May; however, during the flight of 21 May, the conical tail section of the airship collapsed due to unexpected aerodynamic pressure, and the R100 was returned to the shed where the original tail section was replaced by a hemispherical cap designed and made by the Royal Airship Works, reducing the airship&#x27;s length by 

===Transatlantic voyage to Canada===
Shortly before R101&#x27;s flights in June 1930, the Cardington engineers suggested that the long flights of the R100 to Canada and R101 to India might be postponed until 1931 on the grounds that neither of the airships was fit to make a lengthy flight at their current developmental stage. The R100 team replied that their airship was perfectly capable of flying to Canada, and that the Canadian flight was a part of their contract. R100 departed for Canada on 29 July 1930, reaching its mooring mast at the St-Hubert, Quebec Airport (outside Montreal) in 78 hours, having covered the great circle route of at an average ground speed of . The R100 remained in Montreal for 12 days with over 100,000 people visiting the airship each day while it was moored there, and a song was composed by La Bolduc to mock the people&#x27;s fascination with the airship.

While in Canada, the R100 also made a 24-hour passenger-carrying flight to Ottawa, Toronto, and Niagara Falls. On 13 August, the airship departed Montreal on its return flight, reaching Cardington 57½ hours later. Nevil Shute Norway later suggested in &quot;Slide Rule: Autobiography of an Engineer&quot; that the success of R100&#x27;s Canadian flight indirectly led to the R101 disaster. Prior to the transatlantic flight, R100&#x27;s engineers could have suggested that neither airship was ready for a performance of such duration; however, when R100 returned from Canada in triumph, the R101 team had to either make the flight to India or admit defeat – which would have meant discredit with the consequent danger of losing their jobs. Shute Norway later said that R100&#x27;s team &quot;guessed that their ship (R101) was a bad airship, but did not realise&quot; (because of secrecy at Cardington) &quot;how bad the other ship was.&quot;

===The end of the British airships===

The tale of the design of R100 and its claimed superiority to R101 is told in Shute Norway&#x27;s &quot;Slide Rule: Autobiography of an Engineer&quot;, first published in 1954. Although flawed and not quite as overwhelmingly superior as Shute Norway implied, R100 represented the best that conventional airship technology in Britain had to offer at the time. R101 suffered in comparison partly because of its many groundbreaking but ultimately dubious innovations, and also because of the weight of its diesel engines. In lifting efficiency, both dirigibles were inferior to the smaller LZ 127 &quot;Graf Zeppelin&quot;. After R101 crashed and burned in France, en route to India on 5 October 1930, the Air Ministry ordered R100 grounded. The airship remained in its shed at Cardington for over a year whilst three options were considered: a complete refit of R100 and continuation of tests for the eventual construction of R102; static testing of R100 and retention of about 300 staff to keep the programme &quot;ticking over&quot;; or retention of staff and the scrapping of the airship. In December 1931, the R100 was broken up and sold for scrap. The framework of the ship was dismantled, flattened by a steamroller and cut up into sections, and sold for less than £600 (approximately $2,720)

==Specifications (as first flight)==

== See also ==

==References==

===Notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===

* Anderson, John. &quot;Airship on a Shoestring: The Story of R-100&quot;. Bedfordshire, UK: Bright Pen, 2014. .
* Gilbert, James. &quot;The World&#x27;s Worst Aircraft.&quot; Walton-on-Thames, UK: Michael Joseph, Third Edition 1975. .
* Griehl, Manfred and Joachim Dressel. &quot;Zeppelin! The German Airship Story&quot; London: Arms &amp; Armour, 1991. .
* Hartcup, Guy. &quot;The Achievement of the Airship: A History of the Development of Rigid, Semi-rigid, and Non-rigid Airships.&quot; London: David &amp; Charles, 1974. .
* Higham, Robin. &quot;The British Rigid Airship, 1908-1931&quot; London: Foulis, 1961.
* Masefield, P. &quot;To Ride The Storm&quot;. London: William Kimber, 1982. .
* Morpurgo, J.E. &quot;Barnes Wallis: A Biography&quot;. London: Longman, 1972. .
* Mowthorpe, Ces. &quot;Battlebags: British Airships of the First World War: An Illustrated History.&quot; London: Alan Sutton Publishing, Ltd., 1995. .
* Pratt, Michel. &quot;Airships R-100 and R-101: The Success of the R-100&#x27;s trip to Canada and the Tragedy of the R-101 in France &quot;. Éditions Histoire Québec.
* Ventry, Lord and Eugene Kolesnik. &quot;Airship Development&quot; (Jane&#x27;s Pocket Book 7). Durham, UK: Macdonald Press, 1976. .
* Ventry, Lord and Eugene Kolesnik. &quot;Airship Saga: The History of Airships Seen Through the Eyes of the Men who Designed, Built, and Flew Them.&quot; Poole, Dorset, UK: Blandford Press, 1982. .
* Ward, Ian and Brian Innes, eds. &quot;The World of Automobiles: An Illustrated Encyclopedia of the Motor Car.&quot; London: Orbis, 1974.
==External links==

* The R100 in Canada (PDF)
* Airship Heritage Trust webpage on and documents relating to the R100</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1441855" start="0" end="31" title="R100" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Airship R100"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="81" end="88" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="179" end="193" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006354" start="216" end="239" title="Imperial Airship Scheme" label="Imperial Airship Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q926227" start="264" end="268" title="R101" label="R101"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="287" end="307" title="Air Ministry" label="British Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q763052" start="461" end="479" title="Vickers-Armstrongs" label="Vickers-Armstrongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259130" start="498" end="511" title="Charles Dennistoun Burney" label="Dennis Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q719717" start="543" end="556" title="Barnes Wallis" label="Barnes Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583515" start="596" end="609" title="bouncing bomb" label="bouncing bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q356639" start="641" end="659" title="Nevil Shute Norway" label="Nevil Shute Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408487" start="674" end="689" title="stress engineer" label="stress engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q732410" start="784" end="808" title="crossing of the Atlantic" label="crossing of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259130" start="1206" end="1223" title="Dennistoun Burney" label="Dennistoun Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220673" start="1379" end="1386" title="Vickers" label="Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="1430" end="1446" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="1449" end="1455" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943679" start="1503" end="1515" title="Christopher Thomson, 1st Baron Thomson" label="Lord Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006354" start="1531" end="1554" title="Imperial Airship Scheme" label="Imperial Airship Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="1697" end="1709" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="1864" end="1868" title="RNAS" label="RNAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277154" start="1881" end="1887" title="RNAS Howden" label="Howden"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="1891" end="1900" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="1941" end="1945" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q243558" start="2788" end="2797" title="duralumin" label="duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624024" start="3594" end="3597" title="R38 class airship" label="R38"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3689" end="3697" title="airship#Envelope" label="envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q719717" start="3890" end="3903" title="Barnes Wallis" label="Barnes Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q243558" start="4055" end="4064" title="Duralumin" label="Duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533994" start="4486" end="4503" title="geodesic airframe" label="geodesic airframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752662" start="4537" end="4546" title="Vickers Wellesley" label="Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="4548" end="4558" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754283" start="4560" end="4567" title="Vickers Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q602731" start="4572" end="4579" title="Vickers Windsor" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q252451" start="4594" end="4603" title="elevator (aircraft)" label="elevators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849999" start="4609" end="4633" title="Balanced rudder" label="aerodynamically balanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="5595" end="5600" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010119" start="5631" end="5644" title="aircraft dope" label="aircraft dope"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="6114" end="6122" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876669" start="6245" end="6262" title="Beardmore Tornado" label="Beardmore Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="6310" end="6322" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q903799" start="6494" end="6512" title="Rolls-Royce Condor" label="Rolls-Royce Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q194376" start="6565" end="6576" title="flash point" label="flash point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831650" start="6739" end="6746" title="tractor configuration" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700567" start="6801" end="6817" title="pusher configuration" label="pusher propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275217" start="7796" end="7815" title="Royal Airship Works" label="Royal Airship Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q659945" start="7819" end="7843" title="Cardington, Bedfordshire" label="Cardington, Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="8635" end="8648" title="standing waves" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q557175" start="11054" end="11066" title="mooring mast" label="mooring mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432648" start="11074" end="11099" title="Montréal/St-Hubert Airport" label="St-Hubert, Quebec Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197597" start="11151" end="11169" title="great circle route" label="great circle route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518019" start="11187" end="11199" title="ground speed" label="ground speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206727" start="11356" end="11365" title="La Bolduc" label="La Bolduc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="11498" end="11504" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="11506" end="11513" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q34221" start="11519" end="11532" title="Niagara Falls" label="Niagara Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q356639" start="11637" end="11655" title="Nevil Shute" label="Nevil Shute Norway"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11681" end="11721" title="Slide Rule: Autobiography of an Engineer" label="Slide Rule: Autobiography of an Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q721226" start="12993" end="13025" title="LZ 127 Graf Zeppelin" label="LZ 127 &amp;quot;Graf Zeppelin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274350" start="13330" end="13334" title="R102" label="R102"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266374" wikidata="Q5014298" url="?curid=1266374" title="Governor Moore (gunboat)">
<text>LSNS Governor Moore was a schooner-rigged steamer in the Confederate States Navy.

&quot;Governor Moore&quot; had been Southern S. S. Company&#x27;s Charles Morgan, named for the firm&#x27;s founder and built at New York in 1854 as a schooner-rigged, low pressure, walking beam-engined, seagoing steamer. She was seized at New Orleans, Louisiana by Brigadier General Mansfield Lovell, CSA, in mid-January 1862 &quot;for the public service.&quot; As a gunboat, renamed for Louisiana&#x27;s Governor Thomas Overton Moore, her stem was reinforced for ramming by two strips of flat railroad iron at the waterline, strapped and bolted in place, with pine lumber and cotton-bale barricades to protect her boilers, but the &quot;Governor Moore&quot; was never commissioned as a ship in the Confederate States Navy.

The larger of two similar cotton-clads owned and operated by the State of Louisiana, &quot;Governor Moore&quot; was commanded for some time by Lieutenant Beverly Kennon, CSN, then serving as Commander in the Louisiana Provisional Navy without pay. She distinguished herself in the battle of 24 April 1862, when Admiral David Farragut, USN, passed Fort Jackson and Fort St. Philip before dawn en route to capture New Orleans. After a furious exchange of raking fire, &quot;Governor Moore&quot; twice rammed USS &quot;Varuna&quot;, and a third thrust from another cottonclad forced &quot;Varuna&quot; aground. Next attacking USS &quot;Cayuga&quot;, &quot;Governor Moore&quot; exposed herself to fire from most of the Union flotilla. With practically her whole upper hamper shot away and 61 men dead or dying, she went out of command, drifting helplessly to shore, where her captain, pilot, and a seaman set her afire. &quot;Governor Moore&quot; blew up while they and three other survivors were being captured by USS &quot;Oneida&quot;&#x27;s boats to be imprisoned on board USS &quot;Colorado&quot;; two-thirds of the two dozen or more crew members escaped into the marshes, the rest being captured by other ships&#x27; launches; no one drowned.

&quot;The pennant and remains of the ensign were never hauled down,&quot; wrote Kennon from &quot;Colorado&quot;. &quot;The flames that lit our decks stood faithful sentinels over their halyards until they, like the ship, were entirely consumed. I burned the bodies of the slain. Our colors were shot away three times. I hoisted them myself twice; finally every stripe was taken out of the flag, leaving a small constellation of four little stars only, which showed to our enemy how bravely we had defended them.&quot; The ship sank with the Louisiana&#x27;s colors flying.(It is unclear if the flag referred to was the Confederate Stars and Bars or Louisiana State banner of January 1861; the &quot;Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships&quot; claims the latter.)

==See also==
*Bibliography of early United States naval history

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5014298" start="0" end="4" title="Governor Moore (gunboat)" label="LSNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="26" end="34" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="42" end="49" title="steamship" label="steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124986" start="57" end="80" title="Confederate States Navy" label="Confederate States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="212" end="220" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="323" end="334" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="336" end="345" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="349" end="366" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286537" start="367" end="383" title="Mansfield Lovell" label="Mansfield Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="385" end="388" title="Confederate States Army" label="CSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="451" end="458" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="489" end="497" title="Governor" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q431703" start="498" end="518" title="Thomas Overton Moore" label="Thomas Overton Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175764" start="835" end="847" title="cotton-clads" label="cotton-clads"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="952" end="962" title="Lieutenant" label="Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124986" start="979" end="982" title="Confederate States Navy" label="CSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="1000" end="1009" title="Commander" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="1120" end="1127" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q315607" start="1128" end="1142" title="David Farragut" label="David Farragut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1144" end="1147" title="United States Navy" label="USN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471393" start="1156" end="1168" title="Fort Jackson (Louisiana)" label="Fort Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472085" start="1173" end="1188" title="Fort St. Philip" label="Fort St. Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875031" start="1315" end="1337" title="USS Varuna (1861)" label="USS &amp;quot;Varuna&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868164" start="1432" end="1454" title="USS Cayuga (1861)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cayuga&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872433" start="1820" end="1842" title="USS Oneida (1861)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oneida&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273174" start="1882" end="1906" title="USS Colorado (1856)" label="USS &amp;quot;Colorado&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116086" start="2110" end="2121" title="Striking the colors" label="hauled down"/>
<link wikidata="Q913583" start="2675" end="2701" title="Confederate Stars and Bars" label="Confederate Stars and Bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19374" start="2705" end="2743" title="Flag of Louisiana" label="Louisiana State banner of January 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210312" start="2755" end="2798" title="Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships" label="Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903414" start="2840" end="2889" title="Bibliography of early United States naval history" label="Bibliography of early United States naval history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266377" wikidata="Q1338334" url="?curid=1266377" title="Phillip Parker King">
<text>Phillip Parker King (13 December 1791 – 26 February 1856) was an early explorer of the Australian and Patagonian coasts.

==Early life and education==

King was born on Norfolk Island, to Philip Gidley King and Anna Josepha King &quot;née&quot; Coombe, and named after his father&#x27;s mentor, Admiral Arthur Phillip (1738–1814), (first governor of New South Wales and founder of the British penal colony which later became the city of Sydney in Australia), which explains the difference in spelling of his and his father&#x27;s first names. King was sent to England for education in 1796, and he joined the Royal Naval Academy, at Portsmouth, in county Hampshire, England in 1802. King entered the Royal Navy in 1807, where he was commissioned lieutenant in 1814.

==Expeditions in Australia==

King was assigned to survey the parts of the Australian coast not already examined by Royal Navy officer, Matthew Flinders, (who had already made three earlier exploratory voyages between 1791 and 1810, including the first circumnavigation of Australia) and made four voyages between December 1817 and April 1822. Amongst the 19-man crew were Allan Cunningham, a botanist, John Septimus Roe, later the first Surveyor-General of Western Australia, and the Aboriginal man, Bungaree. The first three trips were in the 76-tonne cutter , but the vessel was grounded in 1829. The Admiralty had instructed King to discover whether there was any river &quot;likely to lead to an interior navigation into this great continent&quot;. The Colonial Office had given instructions to collect information about topography, fauna, timber, minerals, climate, and the Indigenous peoples and the prospects of developing trade with them.

===First voyage===
From February to June 1818, the coast was surveyed as far as Van Diemen Gulf (between the Northern Territory and Timor) and there were many meetings with Aboriginal Australians and proas sailed by Makassans. In June the &quot;Mermaid&quot; visited Timor before returning to Sydney using the same route, arriving on 29 July.

===Second voyage===
In December 1818 and January 1819, King surveyed Macquarie Harbour in Van Diemen&#x27;s Land (now Tasmania), sailing north in May 1819 for Torres Strait. King took John Oxley as far as the Hastings River on the Mid North Coast of New South Wales, and continued further up the coast to survey the coastline between Cape Wessel (Northern Territory) and Admiralty Gulf (Western Australia). King returned to Sydney on 12 January 1820.

===Third voyage===
On King&#x27;s third voyage, &quot;Mermaid&quot; ran aground on the Queensland coast, but the crew did not realise how badly it had been damaged until they had rounded the tip of the Cape York Peninsula, sailed through the Torres Strait and across the northern coast as far as the Kimberley in Western Australia. When the ship was taking on water faster than it could be pumped out by the crew, King selected a spot north-east of present-day Broome, now known as Careening Bay, on Coronation Island, after he was forced to execute a manoeuvre known as careening, or deliberately grounding a ship so that it could be repaired. The crew did not meet any of the local Wunambal people while they were stranded there for 18 days doing the repairs, but they observed that the area was occupied, with Parker commenting in his journal on the dwellings that they observed. He described not only bark shelters on the beach, but more larger and more substantial buildings on top of the hill. He also observed the remnants of sago palm nuts, which were commonly eaten along the coast.

King was concerned at this point of the crew&#x27;s vulnerability to the armed Makassan proas, as the Makassans harvested trepang (sea cucumbers) and traded along the northern Australian coast at that time, so he ordered the cannons to be mounted along the beach. They managed to repair the ship without incident and sailed away in early October 1820, but not before the ship&#x27;s carpenter had been instructed to inscribe &quot;Mermaid 1820&quot; on an ancient boab tree, which still stands today.

===Fourth voyage===
King&#x27;s fourth voyage was undertaken in the 154-tonne sloop HMS &quot;Bathurst&quot;. The ship headed north, through Torres Strait and to the north-west coast of the continent, including the Dampier Archipelago. Further survey of the west coast was made after a visit to Mauritius.

==Expeditions to South America==
King had been promoted to commander in July 1821, and in April 1823 returned to England. He subsequently commanded the survey vessel HMS &quot;Adventure&quot;, and in company with HMS &quot;Beagle&quot;, spent five years surveying the complex convoluted coasts around the Strait of Magellan (1826–1830) at the southern tip of South America. At the same time, King put together a unique collection of Patagonian objects from local tribes living in Tierra del Fuego, which was later donated to the British Museum in London. In addition to written records, King also lent his hand to drawing and watercolour painting for illustrations, some of which were later used to illustrate his accounts. The result was presented at a meeting of the Royal Geographical Society in 1831. His eldest son, also named Philip Gidley King,
accompanied his father and continued as a midshipman on HMS &quot;Beagle&quot; (1832–1836) on the continuing survey of Patagonia under Robert FitzRoy, in the company of noted scientist Charles Darwin (1809–1882). King owned a property at Dunheved in the western suburbs of Sydney where he entertained Charles Darwin on Darwin&#x27;s last night in Sydney in January 1836.

==Later life==

King was appointed to the first New South Wales Legislative Council in 1829, however he was absent from the colony and did not take his seat, and was replaced by John Campbell. When King returned to the colony in 1832 he pressed for his reappointment to the council, however he was not re-appointed until February 1839. In April the same year King was appointed resident commissioner of the Australian Agricultural Company, a position he held for ten years. King offered to resign from the council on accepting this appointment, but his resignation was not accepted until October. King was again appointed to the Legislative Council in 1850, and was elected as the member for the Counties of Gloucester and Macquarie in 1851.

In 1855 King was promoted to Rear admiral on the retired list. King was a Fellow of the Royal Society.

King died on 26 February 1856 at North Sydney.

==Family==
King married Harriet Lethbridge in 1817 prior to sailing to New South Wales. Harriet died at Ashfield, Sydney, on 19 December 1874. Together they had eight children including :
*Philip Gidley (1817–1904) stock manager of the Australian Agricultural Co &amp; later a member of the Legislative Council.
* John (1820–1895)
* (William) Essington (1821–1910)
*Rev. Robert Lethbridge King (1823–1897) was principal of Moore Theological College in 1868–78.
* (Charles) Macarthur (1824–1903) 
* Frederick (1825–1895),
* Arthur Septimus (1827–1899)
==Legacy==
King and his crew made valuable contributions had to the exploration and mapping of Australia, particularly the northern and western coasts. Because he and his crew were prepared to risk the danger of going in close to the shoreline, they were able to complete the valuable work of charting the entire coastline of Australia.

===Recognition===
King was honoured on the £2 postage stamp of Australia in 1964, and the $4 of 1966.(The Australian pound was replaced by the decimal Australian dollar in 1966.)

The Australian native orchid &quot;Dendrobium kingianum&quot; was named after him.

King Sound in the Kimberley region was named after him.

John Oxley named the waterway Kings River on 4 October 1818 after King. The name was changed from Kings Creek to King Creek at the request of residents and council on 19 January 2007.

Six species of reptiles are named in his honour: &quot;Amphisbaena kingii&quot;, &quot;Chlamydosaurus kingii, Egernia kingii, Elgaria kingii, Hydrophis kingii&quot;, and &quot;Liolaemus kingii&quot;. &quot;Chlamydosaurus kingii&quot;, the frill-neck lizard, was first collected by the botanist Cunningham at Careening Cove on the third journey in 1820 (see above).

==Works==
*Extracts from a letter addressed by Capt. Philip Parker King, R.N., F.R.S. and L.S., to N.A. Vigors, Esq., on the animals of the Straits of Magellan. &quot;Zoological Journal London&quot; 3:422-32. 1828.
*Notes on birds collected by Capt. King in Chile.&quot;Proceedings of the Committee of Science and Correspondence of the Zoological Society of London&quot;, 1831: 29–30.1831
*King, P.P. and Broderip, W.J. Description of Cirrhipedia, Conchifera and Mollusca, in a collection formed by the officers of H.M.S. Adventure and Beagle employed between the years 1826 and 1830 in surveying the southern coasts of South America, including the Straits of Magalhaens and the coast of Tierra del Fuego. &quot;The Zoological Journal&quot;, 5: 332–349.1832

==See also==
* King expedition of 1817
* European and American voyages of scientific exploration

==Notes==
==References==
* Thompson, R. T., 1998 Insect collections made by Captain P.P. King in South America 1826–1830, with a list of some of the beetles &quot;Archives of Natural History&quot; 25: 331–343

==External links==
* 
* King&#x27;s journals online
* NSW state papers holdings for Phillip Parker King
* NRA records for King
* 
* Godley, E. J., &quot;Biographical Notes: Phillip Parker King (1791–1856) 
* Phillip Parker King: The great hydrographer of the Magellanic sea. (Spanish). By Mateo Martinic
* Inauguration of Phillip Parker King&#x27;s memorial in San Juan de la Posesión Bay (Chile)
* Monument to Captain Philip Parker King R.N.: San Juan de la Posesión Bay, Magellan Strait, (Chile)
* The Allan Cunningham Project Allan Cunningham was the botanist on HMS Mermaid and HMS Bathurst with Phillip Parker King
* The Tomb of Phillip Parker King an article from The Allan Cunningham Project
* &quot;Chart of the intertropical and west coasts of Australia: as surveyed in the years 1820 to 1822 by Phillip P. King, R. N.&quot; J. Walker sculpt. Published London: John Murray; 1825.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1338334" start="0" end="19" title="Phillip Parker King" label="Phillip Parker King"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="87" end="96" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="102" end="111" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="169" end="183" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q725880" start="188" end="206" title="Philip Gidley King" label="Philip Gidley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767124" start="211" end="228" title="Anna Josepha King" label="Anna Josepha King"/>
<link wikidata="Q311548" start="303" end="317" title="Arthur Phillip" label="Arthur Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="350" end="365" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="437" end="443" title="Sydney, Australia" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="447" end="456" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="560" end="567" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445998" start="609" end="628" title="Royal Naval Academy" label="Royal Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="633" end="643" title="Portsmouth, England" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="655" end="664" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="666" end="673" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="700" end="710" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="746" end="756" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q219895" start="903" end="919" title="Matthew Flinders" label="Matthew Flinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1040" end="1049" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545888" start="1140" end="1156" title="Allan Cunningham (botanist)" label="Allan Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701718" start="1170" end="1187" title="John Septimus Roe" label="John Septimus Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647130" start="1205" end="1242" title="Surveyor-General of Western Australia" label="Surveyor-General of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="1252" end="1266" title="Aboriginal Australian" label="Aboriginal man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009426" start="1268" end="1276" title="Bungaree" label="Bungaree"/>
<link wikidata="Q683363" start="1321" end="1327" title="Cutter (ship)" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="1371" end="1380" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="1525" end="1540" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="1593" end="1603" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="1605" end="1610" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="1647" end="1665" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q55442244" start="1796" end="1811" title="Van Diemen Gulf" label="Van Diemen Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="1825" end="1843" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q83067" start="1848" end="1853" title="Timor" label="Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="1889" end="1911" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535890" start="1916" end="1920" title="proa" label="proa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634" start="1932" end="1940" title="Makassan" label="Makassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882990" start="2129" end="2146" title="Macquarie Harbour" label="Macquarie Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="2150" end="2172" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q179188" start="2219" end="2232" title="Torres Strait" label="Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q540949" start="2244" end="2254" title="John Oxley" label="John Oxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588812" start="2269" end="2283" title="Hastings River" label="Hastings River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083808" start="2291" end="2306" title="Mid North Coast" label="Mid North Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2310" end="2325" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334418" start="2394" end="2405" title="Rimbija Island" label="Cape Wessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="2407" end="2425" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683765" start="2431" end="2445" title="Admiralty Gulf" label="Admiralty Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="2447" end="2464" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="2599" end="2609" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q233770" start="2714" end="2733" title="Cape York Peninsula" label="Cape York Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q672805" start="2808" end="2821" title="the Kimberley" label="the Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="2825" end="2842" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q606294" start="2973" end="2979" title="Broome, Western Australia" label="Broome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986669" start="2994" end="3007" title="Careening Bay, Western Australia" label="Careening Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986669" start="3012" end="3029" title="Coronation Island, Western Australia" label="Coronation Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497972" start="3083" end="3092" title="careening" label="careening"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798003" start="3196" end="3204" title="Wunambal" label="Wunambal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894245" start="3545" end="3554" title="sago palm" label="sago palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424325" start="3717" end="3734" title="trepanging" label="harvested trepang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738834" start="3755" end="3797" title="Makassan contact with Australia" label="traded along the northern Australian coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="3830" end="3836" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159165" start="4069" end="4073" title="boab" label="boab"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="4185" end="4190" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q520323" start="4322" end="4341" title="Dampier Archipelago" label="Dampier Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="4402" end="4411" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="4473" end="4482" title="commander" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329478" start="4580" end="4605" title="HMS Aid (1809)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Adventure&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35926" start="4627" end="4649" title="HMS Beagle" label="HMS &amp;quot;Beagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="4719" end="4737" title="Strait of Magellan" label="Strait of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="4773" end="4786" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="4847" end="4856" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="4894" end="4910" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="4943" end="4957" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4961" end="4967" title="London, England" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="5183" end="5209" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q35926" start="5322" end="5344" title="HMS Beagle" label="HMS &amp;quot;Beagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q213756" start="5401" end="5415" title="Robert FitzRoy" label="Robert FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="5451" end="5465" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437503" start="5504" end="5512" title="St Marys, New South Wales" label="Dunheved"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="5686" end="5721" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="New South Wales Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260535" start="5816" end="5829" title="John Thomas Campbell" label="John Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823789" start="6045" end="6076" title="Australian Agricultural Company" label="Australian Agricultural Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164060" start="6334" end="6370" title="Electoral district of Counties of Gloucester and Macquarie" label="Counties of Gloucester and Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="6410" end="6422" title="Rear admiral" label="Rear admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="6469" end="6482" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q21537140" start="6722" end="6735" title="Philip King (Australian politician)" label="Philip Gidley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203421" start="6847" end="6851" title="John King (Australian politician)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908243" start="6956" end="6981" title="Moore Theological College" label="Moore Theological College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="7468" end="7481" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q783373" start="7528" end="7544" title="Australian pound" label="Australian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="7573" end="7590" title="Australian dollar" label="Australian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="7624" end="7630" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387434" start="7637" end="7657" title="Dendrobium kingianum" label="Dendrobium kingianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140493" start="7686" end="7696" title="King Sound" label="King Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="7932" end="7939" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="7943" end="7950" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844328" start="7983" end="8001" title="Amphisbaena kingii" label="Amphisbaena kingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q501566" start="8015" end="8036" title="Chlamydosaurus kingii" label="Chlamydosaurus kingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008779" start="8038" end="8052" title="Egernia kingii" label="Egernia kingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050842" start="8054" end="8068" title="Elgaria kingii" label="Elgaria kingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q152504" start="8070" end="8086" title="Hydrophis" label="Hydrophis kingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828757" start="8104" end="8120" title="Liolaemus" label="Liolaemus kingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q501566" start="8167" end="8184" title="frill-neck lizard" label="frill-neck lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568742" start="8699" end="8713" title="William Broderip" label="Broderip, W.J."/>
<link wikidata="Q220457" start="8729" end="8740" title="Cirrhipedia" label="Cirrhipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q675203" start="8742" end="8752" title="Conchifera" label="Conchifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="8757" end="8765" title="Mollusca" label="Mollusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411553" start="9068" end="9091" title="King expedition of 1817" label="King expedition of 1817"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563335" start="9094" end="9149" title="European and American voyages of scientific exploration" label="European and American voyages of scientific exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786471" start="9650" end="9664" title="Mateo Martinic" label="Mateo Martinic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266378" wikidata="Q2303778" url="?curid=1266378" title="Koichi Fukuda">
<text>Koichi Fukuda (born July 1, 1975) is a Japanese musician, best known as the lead guitarist, programmer, keyboardist, and co-founder of the American industrial metal band Static-X; he has been a member of the band three times, initially from 1994 to 2000, again from 2005 to 2010 and since 2018. He was also the former lead guitarist of the bands Drugstore Fanatics and Bellusira.

== Biography ==
He was present on Static-X&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Wisconsin Death Trip&quot;, but left the band prior to the recording of their second album, &quot;Machine&quot;, citing personal problems due to excessive touring. However, he did still contribute keyboards to the record. He rejoined Static-X after the firing of their then-current guitarist, Tripp Eisen, at the end of the recording process of the 2005 album &quot;Start a War&quot;, and was present to record their fifth album, &quot;Cannibal&quot;.

Between his stints in Static-X, he formed another, less aggressive band called Revolve. Drawing comparisons to Tool and Pink Floyd, they were successful locally and played several concerts in and around the Los Angeles area. They released several demos as free downloads on their website, and released one EP containing several reworked versions of previously released demos, as well as a few new tracks. Fukuda has a son born in 2008.

On Fukuda&#x27;s rejoining into the band, frontman Wayne Static said:

In 2010, Fukuda joined Drugstore Fanatics.

Fukuda contributed to the KMFDM album &quot;WTF?!&quot;, playing guitar on the song &quot;Come On – Go Off&quot;.

Fukuda also contributed to Wednesday 13&#x27;s 2011 remix EP &quot;Re-Animated&quot;. The tracks from the EP were re-released as part of Disc 4 for Wednesday&#x27;s &quot;Dead Meat: 10 Years of Blood, Feathers &amp; Lipstick&quot; box set under the Disc title: &quot;Re-Animated Resurrected&quot;. The disc also featured extra remixes by Koichi.

In 2015, Fukuda was in the Australian rock band Bellusira, working out of Los Angeles.

In October 2018, it was announced that Fukuda – along with the other two surviving original members, bassist Tony Campos and drummer Ken Jay – would be involved in a reunion of Static-X, who were planning to release a new album and tour in 2019 in honor of the memory of their former bandmate Wayne Static. The first of those albums, which had since been announced as being split into two parts, titled &quot;Project Regeneration Vol. 1&quot;, was released in July 2020.

== Equipment ==

*ESP Guitars and Ibanez Guitars (particularly favoring the RGR models, with reverse headstock)
*Fernandes Monterey Deluxe and Revolver Elite Ltd.
*EMG 60AX, 81X, 89X, SAX, EXG, and SPC pickups and tone controls
*Seymour Duncan Distortion and Custom bridge pickups, with a Cool Rails in the neck position.
*Hughes &amp; Kettner Switchblade heads.
*Digitech GSP-1101 effects unit.
*Electro-Voice digital wireless system. (the same one Wayne Static used) 

== References ==
== External links ==

*Official Static-X website
*Interview with Ultimate Guitar along with Wayne Static</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2303778" start="0" end="13" title="Koichi Fukuda" label="Koichi Fukuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q208494" start="148" end="164" title="industrial metal" label="industrial metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q491892" start="170" end="178" title="Static-X" label="Static-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q577314" start="450" end="470" title="Wisconsin Death Trip (album)" label="Wisconsin Death Trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760034" start="548" end="555" title="Machine (Static-X album)" label="Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q370977" start="743" end="754" title="Tripp Eisen" label="Tripp Eisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756614" start="816" end="827" title="Start a War" label="Start a War"/>
<link wikidata="Q649496" start="886" end="894" title="Cannibal (Static-X album)" label="Cannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="1014" end="1018" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="1023" end="1033" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q439366" start="1391" end="1403" title="Wayne Static" label="Wayne Static"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351424" start="1481" end="1486" title="KMFDM" label="KMFDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956146" start="1499" end="1504" title="WTF?!" label="WTF?!"/>
<link wikidata="Q538634" start="1597" end="1609" title="Wednesday 13" label="Wednesday 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930851" start="1637" end="1648" title="Re-Animated (EP)" label="Re-Animated"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1741" end="1794" title="Dead Meat: 10 Years of Blood, Feathers &amp;amp; Lipstick" label="Dead Meat: 10 Years of Blood, Feathers &amp;amp; Lipstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q713854" start="2114" end="2125" title="Tony Campos" label="Tony Campos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701232" start="2138" end="2145" title="Ken Jay" label="Ken Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750224" start="2414" end="2441" title="Project Regeneration Vol. 1" label="Project Regeneration Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q844871" start="2495" end="2506" title="ESP Guitars" label="ESP Guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q320458" start="2511" end="2525" title="Ibanez Guitars" label="Ibanez Guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q509507" start="2590" end="2599" title="Fernandes Guitars" label="Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q525227" start="2641" end="2644" title="EMG Inc." label="EMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998755" start="2706" end="2720" title="Seymour Duncan" label="Seymour Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q464310" start="2800" end="2820" title="Hughes &amp;amp; Kettner" label="Hughes &amp;amp; Kettner"/>
<link wikidata="Q584991" start="2841" end="2849" title="Boss Corporation" label="Digitech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037978" start="2874" end="2887" title="Electro-Voice" label="Electro-Voice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266382" wikidata="Q134149" url="?curid=1266382" title="Hausen (crater)">
<text>Hausen is a large lunar impact crater that lies along the south-southwestern limb of the Moon. It was named after German astronomer Christian A. Hausen by the IAU in 1961. 

The visibility of this crater is significantly affected by libration effects, although even under the very best of conditions it is viewed nearly from on edge. It lies along the western edge of the immense walled plain Bailly. To the northeast is the crater Pingré on the near side, and to the north is the Arrhenius just on the far side of the lunar limb.

The rim of this crater is generally circular, with an outward bulge to the south-southeast. The inner wall is d at the northern and southern ends, and is more irregular along the eastern and western flanks. The rim along the east and southeast flanks displays slumping, producing a sharp edge. It is not significantly eroded or overlaid by craters, with only a single small craterlet along the southwest rim.

The interior floor is generally level, with a few sites of rough terrain. There is a complex formation of central peaks offset somewhat to the east of the midpoint. This formation extends further in the north–south direction and consists of several ridges separated by valleys. There is a lower range of hills just to the southeast of this range and a small cluster of hills to the south.

Hausen is the largest crater of Eratosthenian age.

Hausen lies to the south of the Mendel-Rydberg Basin, a 630 km wide impact basin of Nectarian age.

== Satellite craters ==

The following craters have been renamed by the IAU:

* Hausen A — &quot;See&quot; Chappe.
* Hausen B — &quot;See&quot; Pilâtre.

== External links ==
*Hausen Crater Central Peaks, Oblique view from LRO

== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134149" start="0" end="6" title="Hausen (crater)" label="Hausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="18" end="23" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="24" end="37" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="89" end="93" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q91657" start="132" end="151" title="Christian August Hausen" label="Christian A. Hausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="159" end="162" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q218673" start="233" end="242" title="libration" label="libration"/>
<link wikidata="Q773075" start="393" end="399" title="Bailly (crater)" label="Bailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q133555" start="432" end="438" title="Pingré (crater)" label="Pingré"/>
<link wikidata="Q699618" start="481" end="490" title="Arrhenius (lunar crater)" label="Arrhenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="503" end="511" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q726866" start="1364" end="1377" title="Eratosthenian" label="Eratosthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23836204" start="1416" end="1436" title="Mendel-Rydberg Basin" label="Mendel-Rydberg Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030016" start="1468" end="1477" title="Nectarian" label="Nectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="1556" end="1559" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q133613" start="1591" end="1597" title="Chappe (crater)" label="Chappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133959" start="1628" end="1635" title="Pilâtre (crater)" label="Pilâtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q331778" start="1707" end="1710" title="Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="LRO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266383" wikidata="Q6418063" url="?curid=1266383" title="Kitchener range">
<text>The Kitchener Range (c. 1802) is a closed-top range patented by George Bodley, a Devon iron-founder. It had a cast-iron hotplate over the fire with removable boiling rings. The second image is more common than the final one, having an oven only to one side. The term Kitchener appears to be applicable to either the single or double oven design.

A further claim, that the Kitchener range was designed by William Flavel in 1829, and lives on in the modern interpretation by Rangemaster, who are still based at Flavels original foundry in Royal Leamington Spa, England.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6418063" start="4" end="19" title="Kitchener range" label="Kitchener Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="81" end="86" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="87" end="91" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418063" start="267" end="276" title="Kitchener range" label="Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="405" end="419" title="William Flavel" label="William Flavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="538" end="558" title="Royal Leamington Spa" label="Royal Leamington Spa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266384" wikidata="Q106733" url="?curid=1266384" title="Jerome Karle">
<text>Jerome Karle (born Jerome Karfunkle; June 18, 1918 – June 6, 2013) was an American physical chemist. Jointly with Herbert A. Hauptman, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1985, for the direct analysis of crystal structures using X-ray scattering techniques.

==Early life and education==
Karle was born in New York City, on June 18, 1918, the son of Sadie Helen (Kun) and Louis Karfunkle. He was born into a Jewish family with a strong interest in the arts. He had played piano as a youth and had participated in a number of competitions, but he was far more interested in science. He attended Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn, and would later join Arthur Kornberg (awarded the Nobel in Medicine in 1959) and Paul Berg (a winner in Chemistry in 1980), as graduates of the school to win Nobel Prizes. As a youth, Karle enjoyed handball, ice skating, touch football and swimming in the nearby Atlantic Ocean.

He started college at the age of 15 and received his bachelor&#x27;s degree from the City College of New York in 1937, where he took additional courses in biology, chemistry and math in addition to the required curriculum there. He earned a master&#x27;s degree from Harvard University in 1938, having majored in biology.

As part of a plan to accumulate enough money to pay for further graduate studies, Karle took a position in Albany, New York with the New York State Department of Health, where he developed a method to measure dissolved fluoride levels, a technique that would become a standard for water fluoridation.

He enrolled at the University of Michigan in 1940 and met his future wife, Isabella Lugoski, who was sitting at an adjoining desk during his first course in physical chemistry. The two married in 1942. They were both supervised in their PhD studies by physical chemist Lawrence Brockway. Though Karle completed his studies in 1943, he was awarded his PhD the following year.

Jerome Karle was a former president of both the American Crystallographic Association (ACA) (1972) and the IUCr (1981-1984), as well as a co-recipient of the 1985 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on direct methods. Among the many additional honors he received for his work, he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1976, the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1986, and the American Philosophical Society in 1990.

==Research and Nobel Prize==
Starting in 1943, after completing graduate studies, Karle worked on the Manhattan Project at the University of Chicago with his wife Dr. Isabella Karle, one of the youngest scientists and few women on the project. In 1944, they returned to the University of Michigan, where Karle worked on a project for the United States Naval Research Laboratory. In 1946, they moved to Washington, D.C. to work for the Naval Research Laboratory.

Karle and Herbert A. Hauptman were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1985 for their work in using X-ray scattering techniques to determine the structure of crystals, a technique that is used to study the biological, chemical, metallurgical and physical characteristics. They were able to employ the Sayre equation in centrosymmetric structure, developing the so-called direct methods. Through isolating the position of the atoms in a crystal, the molecular structure of the material being studied can be determined, allowing processes to be designed to duplicate the molecules being studied. This technique has played a major role in the development of new pharmaceutical products and other synthesized materials.
Karle and his wife retired from the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory on July 31, 2009, after a combined 127 years of service to the United States Government, with Karle joining the NRL in 1944 and his wife two years later. At the time of his departure from government service, Karle held the chair of science as chief scientist of the Laboratory for the Structure of Matter. Retirement ceremonies for the Karles were attended by United States Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus, who presented the couple with the Department of the Navy Distinguished Civilian Service Award, the Navy&#x27;s highest form of recognition to civilian employees.

==Personal==
Karle was married to Isabella Helen Lugoski (1921-2017) with whom he had three daughters, all of whom work in scientific fields:
*Louise Karle (born 1946) is a theoretical chemist
*Jean Karle (born 1950) is an organic chemist
*Madeleine Karle (born 1955) is a museum specialist with expertise in the field of geology.

==Death==

Karle died of liver cancer on June 6, 2013, at the Leewood Healthcare Center in Annandale, Virginia. Karle is interred at the Columbia Gardens Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia.

== See also ==
* List of Jewish Nobel laureates

==References==
==External links==

*2005 Video Interview with Jerome Karle by the Atomic Heritage Foundation Voices of the Manhattan Project
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q106733" start="0" end="12" title="Jerome Karle" label="Jerome Karle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106733" start="19" end="35" title="Jerome Karle" label="Jerome Karfunkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="83" end="99" title="physical chemist" label="physical chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q107422" start="114" end="133" title="Herbert A. Hauptman" label="Herbert A. Hauptman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="154" end="165" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="169" end="178" title="Chemistry" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="215" end="232" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12073245" start="240" end="267" title="X-ray scattering techniques" label="X-ray scattering techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="317" end="330" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="419" end="425" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669021" start="605" end="632" title="Abraham Lincoln High School (Brooklyn)" label="Abraham Lincoln High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="636" end="644" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q295678" start="667" end="682" title="Arthur Kornberg" label="Arthur Kornberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q102379" start="727" end="736" title="Paul Berg" label="Paul Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866478" start="844" end="852" title="American handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="854" end="865" title="ice skating" label="ice skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q970584" start="867" end="881" title="Touch football (American)" label="touch football"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="909" end="923" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="979" end="1001" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="1011" end="1035" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="1167" end="1187" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1193" end="1211" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="1356" end="1372" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014077" start="1382" end="1417" title="New York State Department of Health" label="New York State Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="1468" end="1476" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125466" start="1530" end="1548" title="water fluoridation" label="water fluoridation"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="1570" end="1592" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q512459" start="1626" end="1642" title="Isabella Karle" label="Isabella Lugoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935564" start="1820" end="1837" title="Lawrence Brockway" label="Lawrence Brockway"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1902" end="1905" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994886" start="1975" end="2012" title="American Crystallographic Association" label="American Crystallographic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q904405" start="2034" end="2038" title="IUCr" label="IUCr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280367" start="2131" end="2145" title="Direct methods (crystallography)" label="direct methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="2228" end="2256" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="2296" end="2327" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="2345" end="2375" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="2488" end="2505" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2513" end="2534" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q512459" start="2553" end="2567" title="Isabella Karle" label="Isabella Karle"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="2660" end="2682" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="2724" end="2763" title="United States Naval Research Laboratory" label="United States Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2788" end="2804" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="2896" end="2920" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429303" start="3154" end="3168" title="Sayre equation" label="Sayre equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280367" start="3224" end="3238" title="direct methods (crystallography)" label="direct methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="3996" end="4031" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="United States Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531247" start="4032" end="4041" title="Ray Mabus" label="Ray Mabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q512459" start="4240" end="4262" title="Isabella Karle" label="Isabella Helen Lugoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="4563" end="4575" title="liver cancer" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375477" start="4629" end="4648" title="Annandale, Virginia" label="Annandale, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149692" start="4675" end="4700" title="Columbia Gardens Cemetery" label="Columbia Gardens Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="4704" end="4723" title="Arlington, Virginia" label="Arlington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915649" start="4743" end="4773" title="List of Jewish Nobel laureates" label="List of Jewish Nobel laureates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266386" wikidata="Q7159228" url="?curid=1266386" title="Pediatric ophthalmology">
<text>Pediatric ophthalmology is a sub-specialty of ophthalmology concerned with eye diseases, visual development, and vision care in children.

==Training==
In the United States, pediatric ophthalmologists are physicians who have completed medical school, a 1-year internship, 3-year residency in ophthalmology, and a 1-year fellowship in pediatric ophthalmology and strabismus. Pediatric ophthalmology fellowships in the United States are accredited by the American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus.

==Clinical expertise==
Pediatric ophthalmologists focus on the development of the visual system and the various diseases that disrupt visual development in children. Pediatric ophthalmologists also have expertise in managing the various ocular diseases that affect children. Pediatric ophthalmologists are qualified to perform complex eye surgery as well as to manage children&#x27;s eye problems using glasses and medications. Many ophthalmologists and other physicians refer pediatric patients to a pediatric ophthalmologist for examination and management of ocular problems due to children&#x27;s unique needs. In addition to children with obvious vision problems, children with head turns, head tilts, squinting of the eyes, or preferred head postures (torticollis) are typically referred to a pediatric ophthalmologist for evaluation. Pediatric ophthalmologists typically also manage adults with eye movement disorders (such as nystagmus or strabismus) due to their familiarity with strabismus conditions.

==Eye problems in children==

Children experience a variety of eye problems, many quite distinct from adult eye diseases. Pediatric ophthalmologists are specially trained to manage the following disorders:
*Infections (Conjunctivitis).
*Strabismus is a misalignment of the eyes that affects 2-4% of the population; it is often associated with amblyopia. The inward turning gaze commonly referred to as &quot;crossed-eyes&quot; is an example of strabismus. The term strabismus applies to other types of misalignments, including an upward, downward, or outward turning eye.
*Amblyopia (aka lazy eye) occurs when the vision of one eye is significantly better than the other eye, and the brain begins to rely on the better eye and ignore the weaker one. Amblyopia affects 4% of the population and is clinically diagnosed when the refractive error of one eye is more than 1.5 diopters different from the other eye (anisometropia) or one of the eye is misaligned for a long period of time (Strabismus). The management of amblyopia involves correcting of significant refractive errors and using techniques that encourage the brain to pay attention to the weaker eye such as patching the stronger eye (occlusion therapy).
*Blocked tear ducts.
*Ptosis
*Retinopathy of prematurity
*Nystagmus
*Visual inattention
*Pediatric cataracts
*Pediatric glaucoma
*Abnormal vision development
*Genetic disorders often cause eye problems for affected children. Since approximately 30% of genetic syndromes affect the eyes, examination by a pediatric ophthalmologist can help with the diagnosis of genetic conditions. Many pediatric ophthalmologists participate with multi-disciplinary medical teams that treat children with genetic syndromes.
*Congenital malformations affecting vision or the tear drainage duct system can be evaluated and possibly surgically corrected by a pediatric ophthalmologist.
*Orbital tumours
*Refractive errors such as myopia (near-sightedness), hyperopia (far-sightedness) and astigmatism can often be corrected with prescriptions for glasses or contacts.
*Accommodative insufficiency
*Convergence insufficiency and asthenopia
*Evaluation of visual issues in education, including dyslexia and attention deficit disorder.

Pediatric ophthalmologists often work in conjunction with orthoptists in the treatment of strabismus.

==History==
Frank D. Costenbader was an American physician frequently credited as the world&#x27;s first pediatric ophthalmologist. Costenbader and Marshall M. Parks (his mentee who would later be known to many as &quot;the father of pediatric ophthalmology&quot;) began the first ophthalmology fellowship trained program of any subspecialty at the Children&#x27;s Hospital in Washington, D.C., now known as the Children&#x27;s National Medical Center. Parks trained many pediatric ophthalmologists during his career and was instrumental in the establishment of the American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus, a national organization dedicated to improving the quality and management of pediatric ocular disease. Over time, over 30 programs were developed for the training of pediatric ophthalmologists throughout the United States. The American Academy of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus works with the American Academy of Pediatrics on issues related to pediatric eye disease and vision screening guidelines.

Other notable pediatric ophthalmologists have included: Jack Crawford, John T. Flynn, David S. Friendly, Eugene R. Folk, David Guyton, Robison D. Harley, Eugene Helveston, Arthur Jampolsky, Barrie Jay, Phillip Knapp, Burton J. Kushner, Henry Metz, Marilyn T. Miller, John Pratt-Johnson, Arthur Rosenbaum, William E. Scott, Gunter K. von Noorden, and Mette Warburg.

==See also==

*Eye exam
*Infant vision
*Ophthalmoscope
*Orthoptics
*Refractive surgery#Children
*School vision screening
*Strabismus surgery
*Visual acuity
== References ==
==External links==
*American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7159228" start="0" end="23" title="Pediatric ophthalmology" label="Pediatric ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="46" end="59" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041498" start="75" end="86" title="eye disease" label="eye disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="205" end="215" title="physicians" label="physicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="235" end="249" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500754" start="260" end="270" title="internship" label="internship"/>
<link wikidata="Q256698" start="279" end="288" title="Residency (medicine)" label="residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912722" start="320" end="330" title="fellowship (medicine)" label="fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="362" end="372" title="strabismus" label="strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743031" start="453" end="516" title="American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus" label="American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q760348" start="854" end="865" title="eye surgery" label="eye surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q37501" start="922" end="929" title="glasses" label="glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q615363" start="1276" end="1287" title="torticollis" label="torticollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="1452" end="1461" title="nystagmus" label="nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="1465" end="1475" title="strabismus" label="strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="1750" end="1764" title="Conjunctivitis" label="Conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="1768" end="1778" title="Strabismus" label="Strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207855" start="2104" end="2113" title="Amblyopia" label="Amblyopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q470427" start="2357" end="2373" title="refractive error" label="refractive error"/>
<link wikidata="Q247978" start="2441" end="2454" title="anisometropia" label="anisometropia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="2515" end="2525" title="Strabismus" label="Strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q526920" start="2754" end="2763" title="tear duct" label="tear duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q622427" start="2767" end="2773" title="Ptosis (eyelid)" label="Ptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423087" start="2775" end="2801" title="Retinopathy of prematurity" label="Retinopathy of prematurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="2803" end="2812" title="Nystagmus" label="Nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="2844" end="2853" title="cataracts" label="cataracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785168" start="2855" end="2873" title="Pediatric glaucoma" label="Pediatric glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="2904" end="2921" title="Genetic disorders" label="Genetic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="3253" end="3277" title="Congenital malformations" label="Congenital malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="3420" end="3427" title="tumours" label="tumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="3455" end="3461" title="myopia" label="myopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177254" start="3482" end="3491" title="hyperopia" label="hyperopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177895" start="3514" end="3525" title="astigmatism (eye)" label="astigmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672700" start="3594" end="3621" title="Accommodative insufficiency" label="Accommodative insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166383" start="3623" end="3648" title="Convergence insufficiency" label="Convergence insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q749159" start="3653" end="3663" title="asthenopia" label="asthenopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="3717" end="3725" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="3730" end="3756" title="attention deficit disorder" label="attention deficit disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241279" start="3817" end="3827" title="orthoptist" label="orthoptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486114" start="3874" end="3894" title="Frank D. Costenbader" label="Frank D. Costenbader"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="3911" end="3920" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016552" start="4010" end="4027" title="Marshall M. Parks" label="Marshall M. Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098193" start="4274" end="4313" title="Children&amp;#x27;s National Medical Center" label="Children&amp;#x27;s National Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743031" start="4428" end="4491" title="American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus" label="American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463305" start="4794" end="4824" title="American Academy of Pediatrics" label="American Academy of Pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182589" start="4973" end="4986" title="John T. Flynn" label="John T. Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4988" end="5005" title="David S. Friendly" label="David S. Friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407665" start="5007" end="5021" title="Eugene R. Folk" label="Eugene R. Folk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5023" end="5035" title="David Guyton" label="David Guyton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5037" end="5054" title="Robison D. Harley" label="Robison D. Harley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5056" end="5072" title="Eugene Helveston" label="Eugene Helveston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5074" end="5090" title="Arthur Jampolsky" label="Arthur Jampolsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5092" end="5102" title="Barrie Jay" label="Barrie Jay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5104" end="5117" title="Phillip Knapp" label="Phillip Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000871" start="5119" end="5136" title="Burton J. Kushner" label="Burton J. Kushner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203536" start="5138" end="5148" title="Henry Metz" label="Henry Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763638" start="5150" end="5167" title="Marilyn T. Miller" label="Marilyn T. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734702" start="5169" end="5187" title="John Pratt-Johnson" label="John Pratt-Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5189" end="5205" title="Arthur Rosenbaum" label="Arthur Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008412" start="5207" end="5223" title="William E. Scott" label="William E. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5225" end="5246" title="Gunter K. von Noorden" label="Gunter K. von Noorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19731788" start="5252" end="5265" title="Mette Warburg" label="Mette Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q796207" start="5283" end="5291" title="Eye exam" label="Eye exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028893" start="5293" end="5306" title="Infant vision" label="Infant vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q837188" start="5308" end="5322" title="Ophthalmoscope" label="Ophthalmoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241279" start="5324" end="5334" title="Orthoptics" label="Orthoptics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5336" end="5363" title="Refractive surgery#Children" label="Refractive surgery#Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q796207" start="5365" end="5388" title="School vision screening" label="School vision screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q760341" start="5390" end="5408" title="Strabismus surgery" label="Strabismus surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q555066" start="5410" end="5423" title="Visual acuity" label="Visual acuity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266395" wikidata="Q5442366" url="?curid=1266395" title="Felix Z. Longoria Jr.">
<text>Felix Z. Longoria (April 16, 1920 – June 16, 1945) was an American soldier from Texas, who served in the United States Army as a private. He died during World War II and was buried at Arlington National Cemetery after veterans supported his cause in a dispute over his funerary arrangements.

Longoria was killed during the war, in the Philippines in 1945, but his body was not returned to his family until 1949. Upon receiving the body, his family attempted to arrange to bury him at the local cemetery, which was segregated and limited to whites. The only funeral home in town denied wake services since Felix was Mexican-American. The American GI Forum, a local activist group, fought against the injustice, and he was eventually buried in Arlington National Cemetery near Washington D.C.

==Personal==

Born and raised in Three Rivers, Texas, Felix Longoria moved to Corpus Christi with his wife in search of work. He was working there as a truck driver and he and his wife had a four-year-old daughter. Feeling the call to service, in November 1944, Longoria enlisted in the US Army.

In late April 1945, he shipped out from Fort Ord, California, to the 27th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Infantry Division, then located in Luzon in the Philippines. He arrived on Luzon Island around June 1, 1945. The platoon was ambushed by a hidden Japanese machine gunner within two weeks of landing, and Longoria was among those killed. His remains were not recovered and identified until 1949. Once they were identified, the Army arranged to have them returned to the United States and to his family.

==Social climate==
In Texas during the 1940s, as in other parts of the country, Mexican Americans were socially considered non-white but they were counted as white on the census.
Segregation of Mexican American children in schools and employment discrimination against Mexican American workers was pervasive in the Southwestern United States.
The town of Three Rivers was no exception. The section nearest the river and west of the railroad was setup for Mexican Americans to live in segregation (see referenced map: the streets west of the rail lines have names in Spanish).

Generally during World War II, Mexican-American servicemen were integrated into regular military units, but some served in segregated Mexican-American units, such as Company C, 141st Infantry Regiment, 36th Infantry Division of the Texas Army National Guard.

==Funeral and burial arrangements==
The soldier&#x27;s widow tried to make arrangements with the director of the funeral home in Three Rivers to hold a wake for Longoria at the funeral home. Tom Kennedy, the funeral home director, would not allow this. He said that because the late soldier was a &quot;Mexican,&quot; &quot;the whites would not like it.&quot; He repeated this sentiment in phone conversations with Hector P. Garcia and reporter, George Groh, of the &quot;Corpus Christi Caller.&quot; Kennedy was willing to set up a wake at the Longoria home, in the segregated area across the railroad tracks from the white section of town, as was the customary treatment of Mexican Americans by the Three Rivers community. Longoria was to be re-interred in the Longoria Cemetery (purchased by his father in 1925), which abutted the West side of the town&#x27;s all-white cemetery. This portion of the cemetery, separated by a fence at that time, was reserved by the Three Rivers community for the Mexican Americans.

After an investigation into the Longoria Affair, U.S. Senator Lyndon B. Johnson offered to have Private Longoria&#x27;s remains interred at Arlington National Cemetery. He wanted to end the controversy related to where the wake would be held prior to burial. When the &quot;New York Times&quot; reported on the local difficulties faced by Longoria&#x27;s family in Three Rivers, the case attracted national attention and it became known as the Felix Longoria Affair. Walter Winchell on his radio program stated &quot;The big state of Texas looks mighty small tonight&quot;.

Outraged Tejanos who sought to end such discrimination, organized under the newly formed American GI Forum and its leader, Hector P. Garcia. With the incident being reported by national papers, Freshman Senator Lyndon B. Johnson intervened in the case. He gained approval for Longoria&#x27;s remains to be reinterred in Arlington National Cemetery in a full military ceremony, along with the remains of eighteen other soldiers whose remains had been repatriated from foreign soil where they had served and died. Full military honors were accorded each burial.

==Texas House of Representatives committee investigation==
Under mounting national pressure, the State of Texas took action. The Texas House of Representatives appointed a five-person committee to investigate the allegations of racism. The Committee met in the Three Rivers Chamber of Commerce, next to the barber shop that served only whites. The committee conducted open hearings to take testimony, statements, and hear arguments on the issue. In the end, two reports were filed. The majority report found that no racism had occurred. Frank Oltorf, dissenting member, wrote a minority report concluding that the funeral home&#x27;s actions were discriminatory based on race. The reports and supporting documentation were filed with the Texas House of Representatives. When one of the members removed his name from the majority report, both reports were pulled from the record. The summaries of both reports, without any supporting documentation, are all that survive.

==Decorations==
* Purple Heart
* Good Conduct Medal
* Combat Infantryman Badge

==Chicano movement==
What has now become known as the &quot;Longoria Affair&quot; was a pivotal moment in the early stages of the post-World War II Chicano Movement in the United States. The newly formed GI Forum (est. March 1948) was advocating on behalf of segregated Hispanic veterans receiving unequal treatment by the military in Corpus Christi. Mrs. Longoria and her sister contacted Hector P. Garcia, founder of the American GI Forum, who began lobbying for improvements. The national and international press picked up the story and the movement even impacted U.S.–Mexican relations.

The Felix Longoria affair became an early example of a unifying event in the Chicano Movement. The intervention of García and the American GI Forum in the matter led to an increased interest around the country in opening local chapters of the organization.

Among Mexican Americans and Hispanics across the country, the incident became a rallying point and a recruiting tool for the GI Forum that soon had chapters across the US.

==Texas Historical Marker==
In 2004, Santiago Hernandez of Corpus Christi, who was an employee of the federal prison near Three Rivers, began a push for local recognition of Private Felix Longoria in Three Rivers. He proposed to name the city&#x27;s post office in honor of Longoria. This revived former tensions and longstanding resentments, both among survivors and a new generation, related to the events of 1948–1949 and discrimination against Hispanics. In this atmosphere the proposal was rejected.

Hernandez gained permission from the Tejano owner of the now closed and dilapidated funeral home to place a Texas Historical Marker on the property. The Texas Historical Commission granted permission, over the objections of the local historical commission and the mostly white supporters of Mr. Kennedy to the marker and to the information on it. The marker was installed in the Spring of 2010, and many in the community attended the dedication. In 2014, new owners of the funeral home demolished it and converted the lot into a parking area. The historical marker was damaged in the process; after it was hit by a car soon after, it was removed. The new owners of the property asked that the marker not be returned after it was repaired, so it was rededicated and installed in the town square at the entrance to city hall.

The events of 1944 and the placement of the historical marker were covered in a documentary film: the film, &quot;The Longoria Affair&quot;. The exact words Mr. Kennedy reportedly used and his reasons for denying the use of the funeral home are disputed by some locals in Three Rivers, and the family and friends of Mr. Kennedy.

==References==
==Further reading==

* Carroll, Patrick &quot;Felix Longoria&#x27;s Wake: Bereavement, Racism, and the Rise of Mexican American Activism&quot;, University of Texas Press ()
* Carl Allsup, The American G.I. Forum: Origins and Evolution, University of Texas Center for Mexican American Studies Monograph 6, Austin, (1982)
* Hudson, Richard. &quot;Felix Longoria Legend: The Untold Story&quot;. &quot;Ten Spurs:the best of the best&quot; [University of North Texas Literary Nonfiction of the Mayborn Conference Vol. 4 (2010): 42–53].

==External links==
* Flyer
* &quot;The Longoria Affair&quot; site for Independent Lens on PBS
* The University of Texas Medical Branch, Dr. Hector P. Garcia, alumni documents.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5442366" start="0" end="17" title="Felix Z. Longoria Jr." label="Felix Z. Longoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="105" end="123" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="153" end="165" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="184" end="211" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="616" end="632" title="Mexican-American" label="Mexican-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743873" start="638" end="655" title="American GI Forum" label="American GI Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="743" end="770" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q976326" start="826" end="845" title="Three Rivers, Texas" label="Three Rivers, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="871" end="885" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q943136" start="1130" end="1150" title="Fort Ord, California" label="Fort Ord, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632617" start="1159" end="1181" title="27th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="27th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="1229" end="1234" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1242" end="1253" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1618" end="1623" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="1775" end="1786" title="Racial segregation" label="Segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="1911" end="1937" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549664" start="2350" end="2373" title="141st Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="141st Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612933" start="2375" end="2397" title="36th Infantry Division (United States)" label="36th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626853" start="2848" end="2864" title="Hector P. Garcia" label="Hector P. Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3514" end="3531" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="3592" end="3619" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097952" start="3919" end="3934" title="Walter Winchell" label="Walter Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4221" end="4229" title="Freshman#United States" label="Freshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="5577" end="5589" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983464" start="5592" end="5610" title="Good Conduct Medal (United States)" label="Good Conduct Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192947" start="5613" end="5637" title="Combat Infantryman Badge" label="Combat Infantryman Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963346" start="5787" end="5803" title="Chicano Movement" label="Chicano Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743873" start="5843" end="5851" title="American GI Forum" label="GI Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743873" start="6062" end="6079" title="American GI Forum" label="American GI Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15036230" start="8940" end="8956" title="Independent Lens" label="Independent Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="8960" end="8963" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266396" wikidata="Q600319" url="?curid=1266396" title="Black-footed albatross">
<text>The black-footed albatross (Phoebastria nigripes) is a large seabird of the albatross family Diomedeidae from the North Pacific. All but 2.5% of the population is found among the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. It is one of three species of albatross that range in the northern hemisphere, nesting on isolated tropical islands. Unlike many albatrosses, it is dark plumaged.

==Taxonomy==
Black-footed albatrosses are a type of albatross that belong to family Diomedeidae of the order Procellariiformes, along with shearwaters, fulmars, storm petrels, and diving petrels. They share certain identifying features. First, they have nasal passages that attach to the upper bill called naricorns. Although the nostrils on the albatross are on the sides of the bill. The bills of Procellariiformes are also unique in that they are split into between seven and nine horny plates. Finally, they produce a stomach oil made up of wax esters and triglycerides that is stored in the proventriculus. This is used both against predators and as an energy rich food source for chicks and for the adults during their long flights. They also have a salt gland that is situated above the nasal passage that helps desalinate their bodies, to compensate for the high amount of ocean water that they imbibe. It excretes a high saline solution from their nose.

The specific epithet of &quot;nigripes&quot; is derived from two Latin words, &quot;niger&quot; meaning &quot;black&quot;, and &quot;pes&quot; meaning &quot;foot&quot;.

==Description==
The black-footed albatross is a small member of the albatross family (while still large compared to most other seabirds) that has almost all black plumage. Some adults show white undertail coverts, and all adults have white markings around the base of the beak and below the eye. As the birds age they acquire more white at the base of the beak. Its beak and feet are also all dark. They have only the one plumage. They measure , have a wingspan of , and weigh . Males, at an average weight of are larger than females, at an average of .

==Distribution and habitat==
The black-footed albatross, along with the Laysan albatross and the rare short-tailed albatross, are the three species of albatross that range in the northern hemisphere, as opposed to the rest of the family which range from the Equator south. There are at least 12 known breeding locations, but 97.5% of the total population is found colonially on the isolated Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, from Kure Atoll to Kaula Island, (such as Laysan, Midway, and the French Frigate Shoals). Small populations can be found on the Japanese islands of Tori Shima, Bonin, and Senkaku, and off the Mexican coast, primarily on Isla Guadalupe. They are extirpated from the Iwo Jima, Agrihan, Taongi Atoll, Marcus Island, Wake Island, and Johnston Island. Their range at sea varies during the seasons (straying farther from the breeding islands when the chicks are older or they don&#x27;t have chicks) but they make use of great areas of the North Pacific, feeding from Alaska to California and Japan; however they do prefer the northeastern Pacific Ocean. They overlap greatly in breeding and feeding range with the other two species of northern albatross, although the other two will range further north into the Bering Sea than the Black-footed will. They have, on occasion, been sighted in the southern hemisphere.

==Behavior==
Their vocalizations range from shrieks and squeals while fighting over food to bill-clapping, whistles, groans, and quacks while courting.

===Breeding===

The black-footed albatross, like the rest of its family, forms long term pair-bonds that last for life. After fledging the birds return to the colony after three years, and spend two years building nests, dancing and being with prospective mates, a behaviour that probably evolved to ensure maximum trust between the birds (raising an albatross chick is a massive energetic investment, and a long courting period establishes for both birds that the other is committed). They will start reproducing after about seven years, mating every two years.

Nests are simple depressions scraped in the sand, into which one dull white with reddish brown spots egg is laid. The egg is incubated for just over two months (65 days). Both birds incubate the egg, the male incubating more as the female leaves soon after hatching to recoup reserves used for egg-laying. The average time spent on incubating shifts is 18 days. However, mates can wait up to 38 days to be relieved, and if something happens to the mate the other has been recorded incubating for 49 days without food or water.

The chick is brooded for 20 days by its parents, after which both parents leave the nest and return to feed the chick. The chick is fed regurgitated food by sticking its bill inside that of its parent. Fledging occurs after 140 days.

===Feeding===
The black-footed albatross feeds in pelagic waters, taking the eggs of flying fish, live fish, fish offal, squid and to a lesser extent crustaceans. It will also consume floating debris, including plastics.

==Conservation==

The black-footed albatross is considered near threatened by the IUCN, because it is taken incidentally by longline fishing. An estimated 4,000 are taken every year (based on the number that were taken in 1990); other estimates put the number at 8,000, although more recent estimates are at around 6,150 per year, with the majority of deaths caused by Taiwanese and Japanese fishing fleets. It is also vulnerable to oil pollution in the water, and to the ingestion of floating plastics, which reduces the space in the stomach available for food to be brought to its chicks. Volcanic eruptions on Torishima also continue to pose a threat.

The black-footed albatross has an occurrence range of and a breeding range of , with a population of 129,000 adult birds. Of these birds, 24,000 pairs breed on Midway Atoll and 21,000 pairs breed on Laysan Island. Torishima has 1,218 pairs, the Bonin Islands have 23 pairs and there are about 400 pairs on offshore Mexican islands (337 of those are on Guadalupe Island). (All these numbers are based on estimates made from 2005 to 2007).

All of its nesting sites in the U.S. are protected, along with a buffer zone around these islands. Within this buffer zone, longline fishing is outlawed. Almost 80% of the breeding population is counted or sampled each year, and most fisheries take measures to prevent seabird bycatch.

==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Whittow, G. Causey. 1993. Black-footed Albatross (&quot;Diomedea nigripes&quot;). &quot;In&quot; The Birds of North America, No. 65 (A. Poole and F. Gill, Eds.). Philadelphia: The Academy of Natural Sciences; Washington, D.C.: The American Ornithologists’ Union.

== External links ==
* Species factsheet - BirdLife International
* Photos and fact file - ARKive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q600319" start="4" end="26" title="Black-footed albatross" label="black-footed albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="61" end="68" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="93" end="104" title="Diomedeidae" label="Diomedeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="114" end="127" title="North Pacific" label="North Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q183110" start="179" end="208" title="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands" label="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="268" end="287" title="northern hemisphere" label="northern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="309" end="324" title="tropical island" label="tropical island"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="458" end="469" title="Diomedeidae" label="Diomedeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21685" start="483" end="500" title="Procellariiformes" label="Procellariiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729486" start="513" end="523" title="shearwater" label="shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q311224" start="526" end="532" title="fulmar" label="fulmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29032629" start="535" end="547" title="storm petrel" label="storm petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q539433" start="554" end="567" title="diving petrel" label="diving petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q858590" start="680" end="689" title="naricorns" label="naricorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848473" start="896" end="907" title="stomach oil" label="stomach oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010324" start="919" end="928" title="wax ester" label="wax ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="934" end="947" title="triglycerides" label="triglycerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q522113" start="970" end="984" title="proventriculus" label="proventriculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q908437" start="1342" end="1358" title="specific name (zoology)" label="specific epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1403" end="1408" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="1586" end="1592" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="1671" end="1678" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="1780" end="1784" title="beak" label="beak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364" start="1799" end="1802" title="eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q934841" start="2135" end="2151" title="Laysan albatross" label="Laysan albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q853412" start="2165" end="2187" title="short-tailed albatross" label="short-tailed albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="2203" end="2210" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="2321" end="2328" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368963" start="2427" end="2437" title="seabird colony" label="colonially"/>
<link wikidata="Q183110" start="2454" end="2483" title="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands" label="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686179" start="2490" end="2500" title="Kure Atoll" label="Kure Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450889" start="2504" end="2516" title="Kaula Island" label="Kaula Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34720" start="2527" end="2533" title="Laysan" label="Laysan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="2535" end="2541" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q936636" start="2551" end="2572" title="French Frigate Shoals" label="French Frigate Shoals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2613" end="2618" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q475743" start="2633" end="2643" title="Torishima (Izu Islands)" label="Tori Shima"/>
<link wikidata="Q243634" start="2645" end="2650" title="Bonin Islands" label="Bonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29460" start="2656" end="2663" title="Senkaku Islands" label="Senkaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2677" end="2684" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q853909" start="2705" end="2719" title="Guadalupe Island" label="Isla Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="2730" end="2740" title="Local extinction" label="extirpated"/>
<link wikidata="Q201633" start="2750" end="2758" title="Iwo Jima" label="Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q396730" start="2760" end="2767" title="Agrihan" label="Agrihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q700138" start="2769" end="2781" title="Taongi Atoll" label="Taongi Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047492" start="2783" end="2796" title="Marcus Island" label="Marcus Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="2798" end="2809" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131008" start="2815" end="2830" title="Johnston Island" label="Johnston Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="2847" end="2850" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q120647565" start="2913" end="2920" title="islands" label="islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="3025" end="3032" title="Pacific" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="3047" end="3053" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3057" end="3067" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="3292" end="3302" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914884" start="3676" end="3684" title="fledge" label="fledging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="3764" end="3769" title="bird nest" label="nests"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="3930" end="3939" title="energy" label="energetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="4158" end="4162" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="4215" end="4218" title="egg (biology)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914884" start="4844" end="4852" title="Fledge" label="Fledging"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="4927" end="4934" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183686" start="4962" end="4973" title="flying fish" label="flying fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="4980" end="4984" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="4991" end="4996" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="4998" end="5003" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="5027" end="5037" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="5070" end="5076" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="5088" end="5096" title="plastics" label="plastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q719675" start="5158" end="5173" title="Near-threatened species" label="near threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="5181" end="5185" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q930179" start="5223" end="5239" title="longline fishing" label="longline fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="5634" end="5641" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q475743" start="5712" end="5721" title="Torishima (Izu Islands)" label="Torishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="5915" end="5927" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q34720" start="5954" end="5967" title="Laysan Island" label="Laysan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q243634" start="6000" end="6013" title="Bonin Islands" label="Bonin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q853909" start="6107" end="6123" title="Guadalupe Island" label="Guadalupe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q930179" start="6318" end="6334" title="longline fishing" label="longline fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="6463" end="6470" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q814689" start="6471" end="6478" title="bycatch" label="bycatch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266400" wikidata="Q6894819" url="?curid=1266400" title="Moisis Michail Bourlas">
<text>Moisis Michail Bourlas (; May 9, 1918 – March 17, 2011) was a Greek Jewish member of the World War II resistance.

==Biography==
He was born Moisis Bourlas on May 9, 1918 in Cairo. His parents were both Greek Jews; his father from the city of Volos and his mother from the island of Khios. Moisis was the fourth child of a large family. His parents were forced to return to Greece due to financial problems. The Bourlas family first established in Naousa and then in Thessaloniki. Since his childhood Moisis assisted his father who was employed in a bakery.

After finishing high school, he became an apprentice turner (lathe operator). In 1935, Bourlas became a member of OKNE, the Organization of Communist Youths of Greece. When World War II erupted, Bourlas was serving in the Engineers&#x27; Arms of the Greek Military in the Greek part of Thrace. As an army bridge constructor, he was transferred to the Albanian front to combat the Italian invasion of 1940-1941, where he fought in the front line. In February 1943, right after the Nazi occupation forces had imposed their &quot;racial measures&quot; that eventually led to the Holocaust, Bourlas joined the resistance forces of &quot;ELAS&quot; (Greek National Liberation Army) under the alias &quot;Byron&quot;, and fought in the 30th Regiment on the mountain of Paiko near Kilkis.

In the summer of 1945, after the &quot;Varkiza agreement&quot; that preluded the Greek Civil War, Bourlas was arrested for his political convictions and exiled in the Greek islands of Icaria, Makronisos and Ai Stratis. Thanks to a Greek-Israeli agreement in 1951, Bourlas was released from his exile and immigrated to Israel. He worked there as a turner, while he was actively involved in the Communist Party of Israel and the workers&#x27; movement. He stayed in Israel until 1967, when the anti-communism of the Israeli society developed after the Six-Day War forced him and his Russian Jewish wife to flee the country. After a short stay in Bulgaria, Bourlas and his wife went to the Soviet Union, where they established in a town near the Ural Mountains. During his stay in the Soviet Union, Bourlas adopted the middle name &quot;Michail&quot;.

Bourlas continued to work as a turner until 1982, when he became a pensioner and started his efforts to return to Greece. He established in the city of Sukhumi in the Georgian SSR, where he became a Greek language teacher to the young Greek students of the area. He returned to Greece in August 1990, without any resources or financial aid, where he started a new struggle to survive and regain his Greek citizenship that he had lost when he emigrated to Israel. Bourlas eventually succeeded to regain his citizenship in 1999. In 2000, he published his autobiography &quot;Greek, Jew and Left&quot; (Greek: Έλληνας, Εβραίος και Αριστερός) under the name of Moisis Michail Bourlas.

During the last years of his life, Moisis Michail Bourlas lived in the &quot;Saoul Modiano&quot; Home for the Elderly in Thessaloniki. He continued to be actively involved in the Greek left and the city&#x27;s affairs. In 2002 and again in 2006, he ran as a candidate for the city council of Thessaloniki, in the ticket of &quot;Thessaloniki for Citizens and Ecology&quot; led by Tasos Kourakis. He died on March 17, 2011. His remains are buried in the Jewish cemetery of Stavroupoli, Thessaloniki.

==See also==
*History of Modern Greece

==References==
*Bourlas, Moisis Michail (autobiography). &quot;Έλληνας, Εβραίος και Αριστερός&quot; (Greek, Jewish and Left). &quot;Nisides&quot;. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6894819" start="0" end="22" title="Moisis Michail Bourlas" label="Moisis Michail Bourlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="68" end="71" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="89" end="101" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="174" end="179" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200036" start="243" end="248" title="Volos" label="Volos"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="283" end="288" title="Khios" label="Khios"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="374" end="380" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875668" start="448" end="454" title="Naousa, Imathia" label="Naousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="467" end="479" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="620" end="625" title="Lathe (tool)" label="lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557784" start="673" end="677" title="OKNE" label="OKNE"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="845" end="851" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="910" end="917" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1039" end="1043" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1135" end="1144" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="1204" end="1234" title="Ethnikos Laikos Apeleftherotikos Stratos" label="Greek National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394352" start="1322" end="1327" title="Mount Paiko" label="Paiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015968" start="1333" end="1339" title="Kilkis" label="Kilkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q321933" start="1381" end="1398" title="Treaty of Varkiza" label="Varkiza agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="1423" end="1438" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q209576" start="1526" end="1532" title="Icaria" label="Icaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q618600" start="1534" end="1544" title="Makronisos" label="Makronisos"/>
<link wikidata="Q393937" start="1549" end="1559" title="Ai Stratis" label="Ai Stratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1660" end="1666" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383903" start="1735" end="1760" title="Maki (historical political party)" label="Communist Party of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="1834" end="1848" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="1892" end="1903" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="1986" end="1994" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2029" end="2041" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="2085" end="2099" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q40811" start="2344" end="2351" title="Sukhumi" label="Sukhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="2359" end="2371" title="Georgian SSR" label="Georgian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2391" end="2405" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="2597" end="2608" title="citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16170532" start="3254" end="3268" title="Tasos Kourakis" label="Tasos Kourakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637062" start="3346" end="3357" title="Stavroupoli" label="Stavroupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204808" start="3388" end="3412" title="History of Modern Greece" label="History of Modern Greece"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266403" wikidata="Q979772" url="?curid=1266403" title="Bracero Program">
<text>The Bracero Program (from the Spanish term &quot;bracero&quot; , meaning &quot;manual laborer&quot; or &quot;one who works using his arms&quot;) was a U.S. Government-sponsored program that imported Mexican farm and railroad workers into the United States between the years 1942 and 1964.

The program, which was designed to fill agriculture shortages during World War II, offered employment contracts to 5 million braceros in 24 U.S. states. It was the largest guest worker program in U.S. history. 

The program was the result of a series of laws and diplomatic agreements, initiated on August 4, 1942, when the United States signed the Mexican Farm Labor Agreement with Mexico. For these farmworkers, the agreement guaranteed decent living conditions (sanitation, adequate shelter, and food) and a minimum wage of 30 cents an hour, as well as protections from forced military service, and guaranteed that a part of wages was to be put into a private savings account in Mexico. The program also allowed the importation of contract laborers from Guam as a temporary measure during the early phases of World War II.

The agreement was extended with the Migrant Labor Agreement of 1951 (), enacted as an amendment to the Agricultural Act of 1949 by the United States Congress, which set the official parameters for the Bracero Program until its termination in 1964.

In studies published in 2018 and 2023, it was found that the Bracero Program did not have an adverse effect on the wages or employment for American-born farm workers, and that termination of the program had adverse impact on American-born farmers and resulted in increased farm mechanization. 

Since abolition of the Bracero Program, temporary agricultural workers have been admitted with H-2 and H-2A visas.

== Introduction ==
The Bracero Program operated as a joint program under the State Department, the Department of Labor, and the Immigration and Naturalization Services (INS) in the Department of Justice. Under this pact, the laborers were promised decent living conditions in labor camps, such as adequate shelter, food and sanitation, as well as a minimum wage pay of 30 cents an hour. The agreement also stated that braceros would not be subject to discrimination such as exclusion from &quot;white&quot; areas. 

This program, which commenced in Stockton, California in August 1942, was intended to fill the labor shortage in agriculture because of World War II. In Texas, the program was banned by Mexico for several years during the mid-1940s due to the discrimination and maltreatment of Mexicans, which included lynchings along the border. Texas Governor Coke Stevenson pleaded on several occasions to the Mexican government that the ban be lifted to no avail. The program lasted 22 years and offered employment contracts to 5 million braceros in 24 U.S. states—becoming the largest foreign worker program in U.S. history.

From 1942 to 1947, only a relatively small number of braceros were admitted, accounting for less than 10 percent of U.S. hired workers. Yet both U.S. and Mexican employers became heavily dependent on braceros for willing workers; bribery was a common way to get a contract during this time. Consequently, several years of the short-term agreement led to an increase in undocumented immigration and a growing preference for operating outside of the parameters set by the program.

Moreover, Truman&#x27;s Commission on Migratory Labor in 1951 disclosed that the presence of Mexican workers depressed the income of American farmers, even as the U.S. Department of State urged a new bracero program to counter the popularity of communism in Mexico. Furthermore, it was seen as a way for Mexico to be involved in the Allied armed forces. The first braceros were admitted on September 27, 1942, for the sugar-beet harvest season. From 1948 to 1964, the U.S. allowed in on average 200,000 braceros per year.

== Railroad workers ==
Bracero railroad workers were often distinguished from their agricultural counterparts. Railroad workers closely resembled agriculture contract workers between Mexico and the U.S. Being a bracero on the railroad meant lots of demanding manual labor, including tasks such as expanding rail yards, laying track at port facilities, and replacing worn rails. Railroad work contracts helped the war effort by replacing conscripted farmworkers, staying in effect until 1945 and employing about 100,000 men.&quot;

=== Southern Pacific Railroad ===
In 1942 when the Bracero Program came to be, it was not only agriculture work that was contracted, but also railroad work. Just like braceros working in the fields, Mexican contract workers were recruited to work on the railroads. The Southern Pacific railroad was having a hard time keeping full-time rail crews on hand. The dilemma of short handed crews prompted the railway company to ask the government permission to have workers come in from Mexico. The railroad version of the Bracero Program carried many similarities to agricultural braceros. It was written that, &quot;The bracero railroad contract would preserve all the guarantees and provisions extended to agricultural workers.&quot; Only eight short months after agricultural braceros were once again welcomed to work, so were braceros on the railroads. The &quot;Immigration and Naturalization authorized, and the U.S. attorney general approved under the 9th Proviso to Section 3 of the Immigration Act of February 5, 1917, the temporary admission of unskilled Mexican non-agricultural workers for railroad track and maintenance-of-way employment. The authorization stipulated that railroad braceros could only enter the United States for the duration of the war.&quot; Over the course of the next few months, braceros began coming in by the thousands to work on railroads. Multiple railroad companies began requesting Mexican workers to fill labor shortages. Bracero railroaders were also in understanding of an agreement between the U.S. and Mexico to pay a living wage, and provide adequate food, housing, and transportation. Working in the U.S. was not easy for bracero railroaders. Oftentimes, just like agricultural braceros, the railroaders were subject to rigged wages, harsh or inadequate living spaces, food scarcity, and racial discrimination . Exploitation of the braceros went on well into the 1960s.

==1951 negotiations to termination==
American growers longed for a system that would admit Mexican workers and guarantee them an opportunity to grow and harvest their crops, and place them on the American market. Thus, during negotiations in 1948 over a new bracero program, Mexico sought to have the United States impose sanctions on American employers of undocumented workers.

President Truman signed Public Law 78 (which did not include employer sanctions) in July 1951. Soon after it was signed, United States negotiators met with Mexican officials to prepare a new bilateral agreement. This agreement made it so that the U.S. government were the guarantors of the contract, not U.S. employers. The braceros could not be used as replacement workers for U.S. workers on strike; however, the braceros were not allowed to go on strike or renegotiate wages. The agreement set forth that all negotiations would be between the two governments.

A year later, the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 was passed by the 82nd United States Congress whereas President Truman vetoed the U.S. House immigration and nationality legislation on June 25, 1952. The H.R. 5678 bill conceded a federal felony for knowingly concealing, harboring, or shielding a foreign national or illegal immigrant. However the Texas Proviso stated that employing unauthorized workers would not constitute as &quot;harboring or concealing&quot; them. This also led to the establishment of the H-2A visa program, which enabled laborers to enter the U.S. for temporary work. There were a number of hearings about the United States–Mexico migration, which overheard complaints about Public Law 78 and how it did not adequately provide them with a reliable supply of workers. Simultaneously, unions complained that the braceros&#x27; presence was harmful to U.S. workers.

The outcome of this meeting was that the United States ultimately got to decide how the workers would enter the country by way of reception centers set up in various Mexican states and at the United States border. At these reception centers, potential braceros had to pass a series of examinations. The first step in this process required that the workers pass a local level selection before moving onto a regional migratory station where the laborers had to pass a number of physical examinations.

Lastly, at the U.S. reception centers, workers were inspected by health departments, stripped &amp; sprayed with DDT a dangerous pesticide.

They were then sent to contractors that were looking for workers. Operations were primarily run by the United States Public Health Service (USPHS) along with other military personnel. Braceros frequently dealt with harassment from these officials and could be kept for extended periods of time in the examination rooms. These rooms held as many as 40 men at a time, and migrants would have to wait 6 or more hours to be examined. According to first hand accounts, personnel would often process 800 to 1600 braceros at a time and, on occasion, upwards of 3100. The invasive health procedures and overcrowded processing centers would continue to persist throughout the program&#x27;s 22-year tenure.

To address the overwhelming amount of undocumented migrants in the United States, the Immigration and Naturalization Service launched Operation Wetback in June 1954, as a way to repatriate illegal laborers back to Mexico. The illegal workers who came over to the states at the initial start of the program were not the only ones affected by this operation, there were also massive groups of workers who felt the need to extend their stay in the U.S. well after their labor contracts were terminated.

In the first year, over a million Mexicans were sent back to Mexico; 3.8 million were repatriated when the operation was finished. The criticisms of unions and churches made their way to the U.S. Department of Labor, as they lamented that the braceros were negatively affecting the U.S. farmworkers in the 1950s. In 1955, the AFL and CIO spokesman testified before a Congressional committee against the program, citing lack of enforcement of pay standards by the Labor Department. The Department of Labor eventually acted upon these criticisms and began closing numerous bracero camps in 1957–1958, they also imposed new minimum wage standards and in 1959 they demanded that American workers recruited through the Employment Service be entitled to the same wages and benefits as the braceros.

The Department of Labor continued to try to get more pro-worker regulations passed, however the only one that was written into law was the one guaranteeing U.S. workers the same benefits as the braceros, which was signed in 1961 by President Kennedy as an extension of Public Law 78. After signing, Kennedy said, &quot;I am aware ... of the serious impact in Mexico if many thousands of workers employed in this country were summarily deprived of this much-needed employment.&quot; Thereupon, bracero employment plummeted; going from 437,000 workers in 1959 to 186,000 in 1963.

During a 1963 debate over extension, the House of Representatives rejected an extension of the program. However, the Senate approved an extension that required U.S. workers to receive the same non-wage benefits as braceros. The House responded with a final one-year extension of the program without the non-wage benefits, and the Bracero Program saw its demise in 1964.

==Emergency Farm Labor Program and federal public laws==



The workers who participated in the bracero program have generated significant local and international struggles challenging the U.S. government and Mexican government to identify and return 10 percent mandatory deductions taken from their pay, from 1942 to 1948, for savings accounts that they were legally guaranteed to receive upon their return to Mexico at the conclusion of their contracts. Many field working braceros never received their savings, but most railroad working braceros did.

Lawsuits presented in federal courts in California, in the late 1990s and early 2000s (decade), highlighted the substandard conditions and documented the ultimate destiny of the savings accounts deductions, but the suit was thrown out because the Mexican banks in question never operated in the United States. Today, it is stipulated that ex-braceros can receive up to $3,500.00 as compensation for the 10% only by supplying check stubs or contracts proving they were part of the program during 1942 to 1948. It is estimated that, with interest accumulated, $500 million is owed to ex-braceros, who continue to fight to receive the money owed to them.

==Organized labor==
===Notable strikes===
* January–February (exact dates aren&#x27;t noted) 1943: In Burlington, Washington, braceros strike because farmers were paying higher wages to whites than to the braceros doing similar work
* 1943: In Medford, Oregon, one of the first notable strikes was by a group of braceros that staged a work stoppage to protest their pay based on per box versus per hour. The growers agreed to pay them 75 cents an hour versus the 8 or 10 cents per box.
* May 1944: Braceros in Preston, Idaho, struck over wages
* July and September 1944: Braceros near Rupert and Wilder, Idaho, strike over wages
* October 1944: Braceros in Sugar City and Lincoln, Idaho refused to harvest beets after earning higher wages picking potatoes
* May–June 1945: Bracero asparagus cutters in Walla Walla, Washington, struck for twelve days complaining they grossed only between $4.16 and $8.33 in that time period
* June 1945: Braceros from Caldwell-Boise sugar beet farms struck when hourly wages were 20 cents less than the established rate set by the County Extension Service. They won a wage increase.
* June 1945: In Twin Falls, Idaho, 285 braceros went on strike against the Amalgamated Sugar Company for two days which resulted in them effectively receiving a 50 cent raise which put them 20 cents over the prevailing wage of the contracted labor
* June 1945: Three weeks later braceros at Emmett struck for higher wages
* July 1945: In Idaho Falls, 170 braceros organized a sit-down strike that lasted nine days after fifty cherry pickers refused to work at the prevailing rate.
* October 1945: In Klamath Falls, Oregon, braceros and transient workers from California refuse to pick potatoes due to insufficient wages
* A majority of Oregon&#x27;s Mexican labor camps were affected by labor unrest and stoppages in 1945
* November 1946: In Wenatchee, Washington, 100 braceros refused to be transported to Idaho to harvest beets and demanded a train back to Mexico.

The number of strikes in the Pacific Northwest is much longer than this list. Two strikes, in particular, should be highlighted for their character and scope: the Japanese-Mexican strike of 1943 in Dayton, Washington and the June 1946 strike of 1000 plus braceros that refused to harvest lettuce and peas in Idaho.

=== 1943 strike ===

The 1943 strike in Dayton, Washington, is unique in the unity it showed between Mexican braceros and Japanese-American workers. The wartime labor shortage not only led to tens of thousands of Mexican braceros being used on Northwest farms, it also saw the U.S. government allow some ten thousand Japanese Americans, who were placed against their will in internment camps during World War II, to leave the camps in order to work on farms in the Northwest. The strike at Blue Mountain Cannery erupted in late July. After &quot;a white female came forward stating that she had been assaulted and described her assailant as &#x27;looking Mexican&#x27; ... the prosecutor&#x27;s and sheriff&#x27;s office imposed a mandatory &#x27;restriction order&#x27; on both the Mexican and Japanese camps.&quot; No investigation took place nor were any Japanese or Mexican workers asked their opinions on what happened.

The Walla Walla Union-Bulletin reported the restriction order read:

The workers&#x27; response came in the form of a strike against this perceived injustice. Some 170 Mexicans and 230 Japanese struck. After multiple meetings including some combination of government officials, Cannery officials, the county sheriff, the Mayor of Dayton and representatives of the workers, the restriction order was voided. Those in power actually showed little concern over the alleged assault. Their real concern was ensuring the workers got back into the fields. Authorities threatened to send soldiers to force them back to work. Two days later the strike ended. Many of the Japanese and Mexican workers had threatened to return to their original homes, but most stayed there to help harvest the pea crop.

=== Reasons for discontent ===
First, like braceros in other parts of the U.S., those in the Northwest came to the U.S. looking for employment with the goal of improving their lives. Yet, the power dynamic all braceros encountered offered little space or control by them over their living environment or working conditions. As Gamboa points out, farmers controlled the pay (and kept it very low), hours of work and even transportation to and from work. Transportation and living expenses from the place of origin to destination, and return, as well as expenses incurred in the fulfillment of any requirements of a migratory nature, should have been met by the employer. Most employment agreements contained language to the effect of, &quot;Mexican workers will be furnished without cost to them with hygienic lodgings and the medical and sanitary services enjoyed without cost to them will be identical with those furnished to the other agricultural workers in regions where they may lend their services.&quot; These were the words of agreements that all bracero employers had to come to but employers often showed that they couldn&#x27;t stick with what they agreed on. Braceros had no say on any committees, agencies or boards that existed ostensibly to help establish fair working conditions for them. The lack of quality food angered braceros all over the U.S. According to the War Food Administrator, &quot;Securing able cooks who were Mexicans or who had had experience in Mexican cooking was a problem that was never completely solved.&quot;

John Willard Carrigan, who was an authority on this subject after visiting multiple camps in California and Colorado in 1943 and 1944, commented, &quot;Food preparation has not been adapted to the workers&#x27; habits sufficiently to eliminate vigorous criticisms. The men seem to agree on the following points: 1.) the quantity of food is sufficient, 2.) evening meals are plentiful, 3.) breakfast often is served earlier than warranted, 4.) bag lunches are universally disliked ... In some camps, efforts have been made to vary the diet more in accord with Mexican taste. The cold sandwich lunch with a piece of fruit, however, persists almost everywhere as the principal cause of discontent.&quot;

Not only was the pay extremely low, but braceros often weren&#x27;t paid on a timely basis. A letter from Howard A. Preston describes payroll issues that many braceros faced, &quot;The difficulty lay chiefly in the customary method of computing earnings on a piecework basis after a job was completed. This meant that full payment was delayed for long after the end of regular pay periods. It was also charged that time actually worked was not entered on the daily time slips and that payment was sometimes less than 30 cents per hour. April 9, 1943, the Mexican Labor Agreement is sanctioned by Congress through Public Law 45 which led to the agreement of a guaranteed a minimum wage of 30 cents per hour and &quot;humane treatment&quot; for workers involved in the program.

==== Wage discrepancies ====
Despite what the law extended to braceros and what growers agreed upon in their contracts, braceros often faced rigged wages, withheld pay, and inconsistent disbursement of wages. Bracero railroaders were usually paid by the hour, whereas agricultural braceros sometime were paid by the piece of produce which was packaged. Either way, these two contracted working groups were shorted more times than not. Bracero contracts indicated that they were to earn nothing less than minimum wage. In an article titled, &quot;Proof of a Life Lived: The Plight of the Braceros and What It Says About How We Treat Records&quot; written by Jennifer Orsorio, she describes this portion of wage agreement, &quot;Under the contract, the braceros were to be paid a minimum wage (no less than that paid to comparable American workers), with guaranteed housing, and sent to work on farms and in railroad depots throughout the country - although most braceros worked in the western United States.&quot; Unfortunately, this was not always simple and one of the most complicated aspects of the bracero program was the worker&#x27;s wage garnishment. The U.S. and Mexico made an agreement to garnish bracero wages, save them for the contracted worker (agriculture or railroad), and put them into bank accounts in Mexico for when the bracero returned to their home. Like many, braceros who returned home did not receive those wages. Many never had access to a bank account at all. It is estimated that the money the U.S. &quot;transferred&quot; was about $32 million. Often braceros would have to take legal action in attempts to recover their garnished wages. According to bank records money transferred often came up missing or never went into a Mexican banking system. In addition to the money transfers being missing or inaccessible by many braceros, the everyday battles of wage payments existed up and down the railroads, as well as in all the country&#x27;s farms.

In a newspaper article titled &quot;U.S. Investigates Bracero Program&quot;, published by The New York Times on January 21, 1963, claims the U.S. Department of Labor was checking false-record keeping. In this short article the writer explains, &quot;It was understood that five or six prominent growers have been under scrutiny by both regional and national officials of the department.&quot; This article came out of Los Angeles particular to agriculture braceros. However, just like many other subjections of the bracero, this article can easily be applied to railroaders.

=== Reasons for strikes in the Northwest ===

One key difference between the Northwest and braceros in the Southwest or other parts of the United States involved the lack of Mexican government labor inspectors. According to Galarza, &quot;In 1943, ten Mexican labor inspectors were assigned to ensure contract compliance throughout the United States; most were assigned to the Southwest and two were responsible for the northwestern area.&quot; The lack of inspectors made the policing of pay and working conditions in the Northwest extremely difficult. The farmers set up powerful collective bodies like the Associated Farmers Incorporated of Washington with a united goal of keeping pay down and any union agitators or communists out of the fields. The Associated Farmers used various types of law enforcement officials to keep &quot;order&quot; including privatized law enforcement officers, the state highway patrol, and even the National Guard.

Another difference is the proximity, or not, to the Mexican border. In the Southwest, employers could easily threaten braceros with deportation knowing the ease with which new braceros could replace them. However, in the Northwest due to the much farther distance and cost associated with travel made threats of deportation harder to follow through with. Braceros in the Northwest could not easily skip out on their contracts due to the lack of a prominent Mexican-American community which would allow for them to blend in and not have to return to Mexico as so many of their counterparts in the Southwest chose to do and also the lack of proximity to the border.

Knowing this difficulty, the Mexican consulate in Salt Lake City, and later the one in Portland, Oregon, encouraged workers to protest their conditions and advocated on their behalf much more than the Mexican consulates did for braceros in the Southwest. Combine all these reasons together and it created a climate where braceros in the Northwest felt they had no other choice, but to strike in order for their voices to be heard.

Braceros met the challenges of discrimination and exploitation by finding various ways in which they could resist and attempt to improve their living conditions and wages in the Pacific Northwest work camps. Over two dozen strikes were held in the first two years of the program. One common method used to increase their wages was by &quot;loading sacks&quot; which consisted of braceros loading their harvest bags with rock in order to make their harvest heavier and therefore be paid more for the sack. Also, braceros learned that timing was everything. Strikes were more successful when combined with work stoppages, cold weather, and a pressing harvest period. The notable strikes throughout the Northwest proved that employers would rather negotiate with braceros than to deport them, employers had little time to waste as their crops needed to be harvested and the difficulty and expense associated with the bracero program forced them to negotiate with braceros for fair wages and better living conditions.

Braceros were also discriminated and segregated in the labor camps. Some growers went to the extent of building three labor camps, one for whites, one for blacks, and the one for Mexicans. The living conditions were horrible, unsanitary, and poor. For example, in 1943 in Grants Pass, Oregon, 500 braceros suffered food poisoning, one of the most severe cases reported in the Northwest. This detrition of the quality and quantity of food persisted into 1945 until the Mexican government intervened. Lack of food, poor living conditions, discrimination, and exploitation led braceros to become active in strikes and to successfully negotiate their terms.

== Role of women and impact on families ==
The role of women in the bracero movement was often that of the homemaker, the dutiful wife who patiently waited for their men; cultural aspects also demonstrate women as a deciding factor for if men answered to the bracero program and took part in it. Women and families left behind were also often seen as threats by the US government because of the possible motives for the full migration of the entire family.

=== Romantic relationships ===
Bracero men&#x27;s prospective in-laws were often wary of men who had a history of abandoning wives and girlfriends in Mexico and not coming back from the U.S. or not reaching out when they were back in the country. The women&#x27;s families were not persuaded then by confessions and promises of love and good wages to help start a family and care for it. As a result, bracero men who wished to marry had to repress their longings and desires as did women to demonstrate to the women&#x27;s family that they were able to show strength in emotional aspects, and therefore worthy of their future wife.

Due to gender roles and expectations, bracero wives and girlfriends left behind had the obligation to keep writing love letters, to stay in touch, and to stay in love while bracero men in the U.S. did not always respond or acknowledge them. Married women and young girls in relationships were not supposed to voice their concerns or fears about the strength of their relationship with bracero men, and women were frowned upon if they were to speak on their sexual and emotional longings for their men as it was deemed socially, religiously, and culturally inappropriate.

=== Women as deciding factors for men in bracero program integration ===
The Bracero Program was an attractive opportunity for men who wished to either begin a family with a head start with American wages, or to men who were already settled and who wished to expand their earnings or their businesses in Mexico. As such, women were often those to whom both Mexican and US governments had to pitch the program to. Local Mexican government was well aware that whether male business owners went into the program came down to the character of their wives; whether they would be willing to take on the family business on their own in place of their husbands or not. Workshops were often conducted in villages all over Mexico open to women for them to learn about the program and to encourage their husbands to integrate into it as they were familiarized with the possible benefits of the program 

=== US government censorship of family contact ===
As men stayed in the U.S., wives, girlfriends, and children were left behind often for decades. Bracero men searched for ways to send for their families and saved their earnings for when their families were able to join them. In the U.S., they made connections and learned the culture, the system, and worked to found a home for a family. The only way to communicate their plans for their families&#x27; futures was through mail in letters sent to their women. These letters went through the US postal system and originally they were inspected before being posted for anything written by the men indicating any complaints about unfair working conditions. However, once it became known that men were actively sending for their families to permanently reside in the US, they were often intercepted, and many men were left with no responses from their women. Permanent settlement of bracero families was feared by the US, as the program was originally designed as a temporary work force which would be sent back to Mexico eventually.

== Aftermath ==

After the 1964 termination of the Bracero Program, the A-TEAM, or Athletes in Temporary Employment as Agricultural Manpower, program of 1965 was meant to simultaneously deal with the resulting shortage of farmworkers and a shortage of summer jobs for teenagers. More than 18,000 17-year-old high school students were recruited to work on farms in Texas and California. Only 3,300 ever worked in the fields, and many of them quickly quit or staged strikes because of the poor working conditions, including oppressive heat and decrepit housing. The program was cancelled after the first summer.

== Significance and effects ==
The Catholic Church in Mexico was opposed to the Bracero Program, objecting to the separation of husbands and wives and the resulting disruption of family life; to the supposed exposure of migrants to vices such as prostitution, alcohol, and gambling in the United States; and to migrants&#x27; exposure to Protestant missionary activity while in the United States. Starting in 1953, Catholic priests were assigned to some &quot;bracero&quot; communities, and the Catholic Church engaged in other efforts specifically targeted at &quot;braceros&quot;.

Labor unions that tried to organize agricultural workers after World War II targeted the Bracero Program as a key impediment to improving the wages of domestic farm workers. These unions included the National Farm Laborers Union (NFLU), later called the National Agricultural Workers Union (NAWU), headed by Ernesto Galarza, and the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee (AWOC), AFL-CIO. During his tenure with the Community Service Organization, César Chávez received a grant from the AWOC to organize in Oxnard, California, which culminated in a protest of domestic U.S. agricultural workers of the U.S. Department of Labor&#x27;s administration of the program. In January 1961, in an effort to publicize the effects of &quot;bracero&quot; labor on labor standards, the AWOC led a strike of lettuce workers at 18 farms in the Imperial Valley, an agricultural region on the California-Mexico border and a major destination for &quot;braceros&quot;.

Prior to the end of the Bracero Program in 1964, The Chualar Bus Crash in Salinas, California made headlines illustrating just how harsh braceros situations were in California. In the accident 31 braceros lost their lives in a collision with a train and a bracero transportation truck. This particular accident led activist groups from agriculture and the cities to come together and strongly oppose the Bracero Program. According to Manuel Garcia y Griego, a political scientist and author of &quot;The Importation of Mexican Contract Laborers to the United States 1942–1964&quot;, the Contract-Labor Program &quot;left an important legacy for the economies, migration patterns, and politics of the United States and Mexico&quot;. Griego&#x27;s article discusses the bargaining position of both countries, arguing that the Mexican government lost all real bargaining-power after 1950. In addition to the surge of activism in American migrant labor the Chicano Movement was now in the forefront creating a united image on behalf of the fight against the Bracero Program.   

The end of the Bracero Program in 1964 was followed by the rise to prominence of the United Farm Workers (UFW) and the subsequent transformation of American migrant labor under the leadership of César Chávez, Gilbert Padilla, and Dolores Huerta. Newly formed labor unions (sponsored by Chávez and Huerta), namely the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee, were responsible for series of public demonstrations including the Delano grape strike. These efforts demanded change for labor rights, wages and the general mistreatment of workers that had gained national attention with the Bracero Program. Change ensued with the UFW championing a 40% wage increase for grape farm laborers nationwide. While the federal minimum wage remained at $1.25 per hour, laborers operating under the &quot;grape contract&quot; made $1.50. In order to avoid increased wages, farmers who formerly employed braceros would later turn to the mechanization of labor-intensive tasks.

Recent scholarship illustrates that the program generated controversy in Mexico from the outset. Mexican employers and local officials feared labor shortages, especially in the states of west-central Mexico that traditionally sent the majority of migrants north (Jalisco, Guanajuato, Michoacan, Zacatecas). The Catholic Church warned that emigration would break families apart and expose braceros to Protestant missionaries and to labor camps where drinking, gambling, and prostitution flourished. Others deplored the negative image that the braceros&#x27; departure produced for the Mexican nation. The political opposition even used the exodus of braceros as evidence of the failure of government policies, especially the agrarian reform program implemented by the post-revolutionary government in the 1930s. Because of labor shortage concerns, the administration of president Ávila Camacho declared in 1942 that laborers from Jalisco, Guanajuato and Michoacan were ineligible to qualify as braceros. By 1944, some Jalisco and Michoacan laborers had found ways to evade the restrictions placed on them. They applied for state (not federal) government-issued provisional passports with which they entered the United States. In response, the Mexican federal government instructed state governments to ban the issuance of provisional passports to anyone who they deemed to fit the profile of a potential Bracero Program applicant. State governments were further instructed to distribute pamphlets warning that wages incurred by working in the U.S. illegally were not subject to protections contained in bracero contracts. Despite state government protests about the effects this would have on agricultural production, the federal Bracero ban on laborers from the three provinces was lifted by the Mexican government in 1946. 

Some historians like Michael Snodgrass and Deborah Cohen demonstrate why the program proved popular among so many migrants, for whom seasonal work in the US offered great opportunities, despite the poor conditions they often faced in the fields and housing camps. They saved money, purchased new tools or used trucks, and returned home with new outlooks and with a greater sense of dignity. Social scientists doing field work in rural Mexico at the time observed these positive economic and cultural effects of bracero migration. The bracero program looked different from the perspective of the participants rather than from the perspective of its many critics in the U.S. and Mexico.

A 1980 Congressional Research Service report found that the Bracero Program was &quot;instrumental&quot; in significantly reducing illegal immigration by the mid-1950s. The end of the program saw a rise in Mexican legal immigration between 1963 and 1972, as many Mexican men who had already lived in the United States chose to return, bringing along their families. The dissolution of the Bracero program also saw a rise in undocumented immigration, despite the efforts of Operation Wetback, and American growers hired increasing numbers of undocumented migrants.

The aftermath of the Bracero Program&#x27;s effect on labor conditions for agricultural workers continues to be debated. On one hand, the end of the program allowed workers to unionize and facilitated victories made by labor organizations and other individuals. A key victory for these former &quot;braceros&quot; was the abolition of the short-handed hoe, &quot;el cortito,&quot; spurred by the efforts of American lawyer Maurice Jordan. Jordan was successfully able to win a case against California growers, claiming that the tool did not increase crop yield and caused several health issues for workers.

However, the unionization efforts of the United Farm Workers, as popular as they were, were increasingly challenged by farm owners in the 1970s. Employers would pit unions against one another as they increasingly hired workers from the Teamster union, for example, that challenged the earlier work done by the UFW to achieve favorable contracts. Furthermore, union participation has decreased among many farmworkers, reaching a 90% decline from 1975 to 2000, consequently lowering the bargaining power of these organizations.

Some consider the H-2A visa program to be a repeat of the abuses of the Bracero Program where workers report dangerous conditions. For example, a blueberry farm worker in Washington died in August 2017 for reported 12-hour shifts under hot conditions to meet production quotas.

A 2018 study published in the &quot;American Economic Review&quot; found that the Bracero program did not have any adverse impact on the labor market outcomes of American-born farm workers. The study found that ending the Bracero program did not raise wages or employment for American-born farm workers. A 2023 study in the &quot;American Economic Journal&quot; found that the termination of the program had adverse economic effects on American farmers and prompted greater farm mechanization.

== In popular culture ==

* Woody Guthrie&#x27;s poem &quot;Deportee (Plane Wreck at Los Gatos)&quot;, set to music by Martin Hoffman, commemorates the deaths of 28 &quot;braceros&quot; being repatriated to Mexico in January 1948. The song has been recorded by dozens of folk artists.
* Protest singer Phil Ochs&#x27;s song &quot;Bracero&quot; focuses on the exploitation of the Mexican workers in the program.
* A minor character in the 1948 Mexican film &quot;Nosotros los Pobres&quot; wants to become a &quot;bracero.&quot;
* The 1949 film &quot;Border Incident&quot; explores two federal agents&#x27; efforts to end an illegal &quot;bracero-&quot;smuggling operation.
* Famed satirist Tom Lehrer wrote the song &quot;George Murphy&quot; about Senator George Murphy in response to an infamous racist gaffe referring to Mexican labor, which included the lines &quot;Should Americans pick crops? George says &quot;No&quot; / &#x27;Cause no-one but a Mexican would stoop so low / And after all, even in Egypt, the pharaohs / Had to import Hebrew braceros&quot;.
* The 2010 documentary &quot;Harvest of Loneliness&quot; describes the history of the bracero program. It includes interviews with several former braceros and family members, and with labor historian Henry Anderson.
* &quot;A Convenient Truth&quot; (2014) urges viewers not to let their governments repeat &quot;the follies&quot; of the Braceros program, during the end credits.
* In 1953, Pedro Infante recorded &quot;Canto del Bracero&quot; under Peerlees label.

== Exhibitions and collections ==

In October 2009, the Smithsonian National Museum of American History opened a bilingual exhibition titled, &quot;Bittersweet Harvest: The Bracero Program, 1942–1964.&quot; Through photographs and audio excerpts from oral histories, this exhibition examined the experiences of bracero workers and their families while providing insight into the history of Mexican Americans and historical context to today&#x27;s debates on guest worker programs. The exhibition included a collection of photographs taken by photojournalist Leonard Nadel in 1956, as well as documents, objects, and an audio station featuring oral histories collected by the Bracero Oral History Project. The exhibition closed on January 3, 2010. The exhibition was converted to a traveling exhibition in February 2010 and traveled to Arizona, California, Idaho, Michigan, Nevada, and Texas under the auspices of Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service.

== See also ==
* Bracero Selection Process
* 1917 Bath Riots
* Maquiladora
* Operation Wetback
* Chualar Bus Incident
* Mexican Repatriation
* Bracero Monument
* Rio Vista Bracero Reception Center

== Footnotes ==

== Bibliography ==
* Deborah Cohen, &quot;Braceros: Migrant Citizens and Transnational Subjects in the Postwar United States and Mexico&quot; Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2011.
* 
* Don Mitchell, &quot;They Saved the Crops: Labor, Landscape, and the Struggle Over Industrial Farming in Bracero-Era California.&quot; Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 2012.
* Ana Elizabeth Rosas, &quot;Abrazando el Espíritu: Bracero Families Confront the US-Mexico Border.&quot; Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2014.
* Michael Snodgrass, &quot;The Bracero Program, 1942–1964,&quot; in &quot;Beyond the Border: The History of Mexican-U.S. Migration&quot;, Mark Overmyer-Velásquez, ed., New York: Oxford University Press, 2011, pp. 79–102.
* Michael Snodgrass, &quot;Patronage and Progress: The bracero program from the Perspective of Mexico,&quot; in &quot;Workers Across the Americas: The Transnational Turn in Labor History&quot;, Leon Fink, ed., New York: Oxford University Press, 2011, pp. 245–266.

== External links ==
* The Bracero Project
* Los Braceros: Strong Arms to Aid the USA – Public Television Program
* Braceros in Oregon Photograph Collection
* Bittersweet Harvest: The Bracero Program 1942–1964 An online exhibition from the National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution
* University of Texas El Paso Oral History Archive 
* 
* &quot;Braceros in Oregon Photograph Collection.&quot; Oregon State University, Special Collections and Archives Research Center.
*Bracero Archive - a project of the Roy Rosenzwieg Center for History and New Media, George Mason University, the Smithsonian National Museum of American History, Brown University, and The Institute of Oral History at the University of Texas at El Paso.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979772" start="4" end="19" title="Bracero Program" label="Bracero Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="30" end="37" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12713481" start="79" end="93" title="manual laborer" label="manual laborer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="151" end="166" title="U.S. Government" label="U.S. Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="199" end="206" title="Mexicans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q131512" start="207" end="211" title="Farmer" label="farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="216" end="231" title="railroad worker" label="railroad worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="242" end="255" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615130" start="462" end="482" title="guest worker program" label="guest worker program"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="673" end="679" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060555" start="691" end="701" title="farmworker" label="farmworker"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="755" end="765" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="789" end="793" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1102" end="1114" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693861" start="1220" end="1244" title="Agricultural Act of 1949" label="Agricultural Act of 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1252" end="1274" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627820" start="1764" end="1773" title="H-2A visa" label="H-2A visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="2326" end="2346" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="2596" end="2605" title="Lynching" label="lynchings"/>
<link wikidata="Q542045" start="2639" end="2653" title="Coke Stevenson" label="Coke Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="4711" end="4736" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660068" start="7318" end="7357" title="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952" label="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644671" start="7376" end="7403" title="82nd United States Congress" label="82nd United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824575" start="7412" end="7428" title="Presidency of Harry S. Truman" label="President Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="7440" end="7450" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="7523" end="7527" title="Bill (law)" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128054" start="7539" end="7553" title="Classes of offenses under United States federal law" label="federal felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468420" start="7606" end="7622" title="foreign national" label="foreign national"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="7626" end="7643" title="Illegal immigration" label="illegal immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627820" start="7822" end="7831" title="H-2A visa" label="H-2A visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830764" start="7958" end="7974" title="Mexican migration" label="Mexico migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="8811" end="8814" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q476322" start="8942" end="8977" title="United States Public Health Service" label="United States Public Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131119" start="9672" end="9689" title="Operation Wetback" label="Operation Wetback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060555" start="10326" end="10336" title="farmworker" label="farmworker"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="12338" end="12345" title="Lawsuit" label="Lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="12378" end="12388" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739372" start="14182" end="14207" title="Amalgamated Sugar Company" label="Amalgamated Sugar Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q925426" start="15331" end="15349" title="Dayton, Washington" label="Dayton, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="15413" end="15430" title="Japanese-American" label="Japanese-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="15666" end="15682" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938917" start="16221" end="16247" title="Walla Walla Union-Bulletin" label="Walla Walla Union-Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30035" end="30092" title="Athletes in Temporary Employment as Agricultural Manpower" label="Athletes in Temporary Employment as Agricultural Manpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626021" start="30204" end="30214" title="summer job" label="summer job"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="30416" end="30423" title="Strike action" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q979079" start="30598" end="30623" title="Catholic Church in Mexico" label="Catholic Church in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="30901" end="30911" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394176" start="31455" end="31470" title="Ernesto Galarza" label="Ernesto Galarza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154874" start="31566" end="31596" title="Community Service Organization" label="Community Service Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q355425" start="31598" end="31610" title="César Chávez" label="César Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q209338" start="31657" end="31675" title="Oxnard, California" label="Oxnard, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="31752" end="31776" title="U.S. Department of Labor" label="U.S. Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871046" start="31979" end="31994" title="Imperial Valley" label="Imperial Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153950" start="32155" end="32172" title="Chualar bus crash" label="Chualar Bus Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="32562" end="32581" title="political scientist" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887749" start="33262" end="33281" title="United Farm Workers" label="United Farm Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q355425" start="33372" end="33384" title="César Chávez" label="César Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190455" start="33386" end="33401" title="Gilbert Padilla" label="Gilbert Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q468843" start="33407" end="33421" title="Dolores Huerta" label="Dolores Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887749" start="33494" end="33535" title="Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee" label="Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253161" start="33604" end="33623" title="Delano grape strike" label="Delano grape strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="35020" end="35033" title="Manuel Ávila Camacho" label="Ávila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="36660" end="36690" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="39155" end="39168" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260707" start="39187" end="39222" title="Deportee (Plane Wreck at Los Gatos)" label="Deportee (Plane Wreck at Los Gatos)"/>
<link wikidata="Q379802" start="39429" end="39438" title="Phil Ochs" label="Phil Ochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061845" start="39589" end="39608" title="Nosotros los Pobres" label="Nosotros los Pobres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144382" start="39676" end="39691" title="Border Incident" label="Border Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q369724" start="39816" end="39826" title="Tom Lehrer" label="Tom Lehrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="39874" end="39881" title="United States Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q527052" start="39882" end="39895" title="George Murphy" label="George Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39914" end="39935" title="George Murphy#Career" label="infamous racist gaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q467954" start="40579" end="40592" title="Pedro Infante" label="Pedro Infante"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="40711" end="40722" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="40723" end="40758" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486835" start="41034" end="41062" title="history of Mexican Americans" label="history of Mexican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615130" start="41113" end="41134" title="guest worker programs" label="guest worker programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="41490" end="41497" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="41499" end="41509" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="41511" end="41516" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="41518" end="41526" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="41528" end="41534" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="41540" end="41545" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="41568" end="41591" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715371" start="41640" end="41665" title="Bracero Selection Process" label="Bracero Selection Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q27688862" start="41668" end="41683" title="1917 Bath Riots" label="1917 Bath Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360592" start="41686" end="41697" title="Maquiladora" label="Maquiladora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131119" start="41700" end="41717" title="Operation Wetback" label="Operation Wetback"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153950" start="41720" end="41740" title="1963 Chualar bus crash" label="Chualar Bus Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245808" start="41743" end="41763" title="Mexican Repatriation" label="Mexican Repatriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q114451310" start="41766" end="41782" title="Bracero Monument" label="Bracero Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q130471963" start="41785" end="41819" title="Rio Vista Bracero Reception Center" label="Rio Vista Bracero Reception Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373315" start="43392" end="43439" title="Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media" label="Roy Rosenzwieg Center for History and New Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="43441" end="43464" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="43470" end="43517" title="National Museum of American History" label="Smithsonian National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="43519" end="43535" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="43578" end="43608" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266404" wikidata="Q900292" url="?curid=1266404" title="Hypalon">
<text>Hypalon is a chlorosulfonated polyethylene (CSPE) synthetic rubber (CSM) noted for its resistance to chemicals, temperature extremes, and ultraviolet light. It was a product of DuPont Performance Elastomers, a subsidiary of DuPont. Hypalon as it is now known in the marine industry today is a remarketed version of the old Hypalon using an additional layer of neoprene (cr) so the new chemical formulation is csm/cr.

==Chemical structure==
Polyethylene is treated with a mixture of chlorine and sulfur dioxide under UV-radiation. The product contains 20-40% chlorine. The polymer also contains a few percent chlorosulfonyl (ClSO2-) groups. These reactive groups allow for vulcanization, which strongly affects the physical durability of the products. An estimated 110,000 tons/y were produced in 1991.

==Discontinuance==
DuPont Performance Elastomers announced on May 7, 2009, that it intended to close its manufacturing plant in Beaumont, Texas, by June 30, 2009. This was DPE&#x27;s sole plant for CSM materials. The company was therefore exiting the business for Hypalon and its related product, Acsium. The plant closure was delayed until April 20, 2010, in response to customer requests.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q900292" start="0" end="7" title="Hypalon" label="Hypalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q143429" start="30" end="42" title="polyethylene" label="polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="50" end="66" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="138" end="155" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="224" end="230" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q143937" start="360" end="368" title="neoprene" label="neoprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="496" end="510" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188631" start="673" end="686" title="vulcanization" label="vulcanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="932" end="947" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266405" wikidata="Q2398159" url="?curid=1266405" title="Holidays in the Sun (song)">
<text>&quot;Holidays in the Sun&quot; is a song by the English punk rock band the Sex Pistols. It was released on 14 October 1977 as the band&#x27;s fourth single, as well as the advance single from their only album &quot;Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&#x27;s the Sex Pistols&quot;. A #8 chart hit in the UK, the single proved to be the last with singer John Lydon for 30 years. Steve Jones and Paul Cook recorded one more single, &quot;No One Is Innocent&quot; with Ronnie Biggs, as the band imploded, and Sid Vicious recorded solo covers of &quot;My Way&quot; and &quot;Somethin&#x27; Else&quot; under the Pistols name. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the song #43 of the 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time.

==Song==

The song was inspired by a trip to the Channel Island of Jersey: &quot;We tried our holiday in the sun in the isle of Jersey and that didn&#x27;t work. They threw us out.&quot; That trip was followed by a couple of weeks spent in Berlin. Although they described the city as &quot;raining and depressing&quot;, they were relieved to get away from London. John Lydon said, &quot;Being in London at the time made us feel like we were trapped in a prison camp environment. There was hatred and constant threat of violence. The best thing we could do was to go set up in a prison camp somewhere else. Berlin and its decadence was a good idea. The song came about from that. I loved Berlin. I loved the wall and the insanity of the place. The communists looked in on the circus atmosphere of West Berlin, which never went to sleep, and that would be their impression of the West.&quot;

&quot;Holidays in the Sun&quot; was later featured as the opening track on the group&#x27;s debut album &quot;Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&#x27;s the Sex Pistols&quot;. The single&#x27;s B-side was &quot;Satellite&quot;, a song about the band&#x27;s early performances in &quot;satellite towns&quot; (&quot;You know I don&#x27;t like where you come from / It&#x27;s just a satellite of London...&quot;). The Sex Pistols had enjoyed playing away from London because it was an opportunity to play away from their manager Malcolm McLaren and his group of associates.

==Promotional posters==
Two promotional posters were issued to promote the single. The most common of the pair was simply an oversized reproduction of the single&#x27;s front cover.

The second version featured a monochrome image of a beach scene. This version of the poster was reproduced heavily for commercial sale during the mid-1980s.

==Charts==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2398159" start="6" end="25" title="Holidays in the Sun (song)" label="Holidays in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="76" end="87" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q457275" start="216" end="268" title="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols" label="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="347" end="357" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="372" end="383" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q363260" start="388" end="397" title="Paul Cook" label="Paul Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756249" start="430" end="448" title="No One Is Innocent (song)" label="No One Is Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q560955" start="460" end="472" title="Ronnie Biggs" label="Ronnie Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="500" end="511" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q925657" start="542" end="548" title="My Way" label="My Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560018" start="565" end="584" title="Somethin&amp;#x27; Else (Eddie Cochran song)" label="Somethin&amp;#x27; Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="621" end="634" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="775" end="781" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="948" end="954" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="1072" end="1082" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="1504" end="1515" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q457275" start="1709" end="1761" title="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols" label="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q691960" start="1878" end="1892" title="satellite town" label="satellite town"/>
<link wikidata="Q325377" start="2119" end="2134" title="Malcolm McLaren" label="Malcolm McLaren"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266407" wikidata="Q984097" url="?curid=1266407" title="Pettit (lunar crater)">
<text>Pettit is a lunar impact crater that lies near the western limb of the Moon. It was named after American astronomer Edison Pettit. In this location the crater is viewed nearly from the side by observers on Earth, and visibility can be significantly affected by libration effects.

The crater lies among the rugged features of the Montes Rook, the inner ring of mountains that surround the Mare Orientale impact basin. It is nearly a twin of the crater Nicholson which lies less than one crater diameter to the northeast. Another similar formation is Wright almost due south.

The rim of this crater has something of the appearance of a rounded hexagon, with slightly flattened rims to the east and west. The rim is sharp-edged, and the inner wall material has slumped down to lie in a pile around the base. The interior floor is a rugged jumble, with a small central peak and hills to the north and west. Beyond the rim lies rugged terrain to the north and west, while the ground becomes less jumbled to the southeast beyond the edge of the mountain foothills.

This formation should not be mistaken for the similarly named crater Petit, a small feature on the eastern half of the Moon&#x27;s near side.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Pettit.

The following craters have been renamed by the IAU.
* Pettit T — &quot;See&quot; Shuleykin (crater).

==See also==
*Pettit (Martian crater)

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q984097" start="0" end="6" title="Pettit (lunar crater)" label="Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="12" end="17" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="18" end="31" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="71" end="75" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284854" start="116" end="129" title="Edison Pettit" label="Edison Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="206" end="211" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q218673" start="261" end="270" title="libration" label="libration"/>
<link wikidata="Q501012" start="330" end="341" title="Montes Rook" label="Montes Rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q488143" start="389" end="403" title="Mare Orientale" label="Mare Orientale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985053" start="452" end="461" title="Nicholson (lunar crater)" label="Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752552" start="550" end="556" title="Wright (lunar crater)" label="Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q866702" start="1131" end="1136" title="Petit (crater)" label="Petit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="1417" end="1420" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504922" start="1451" end="1469" title="Shuleykin (crater)" label="Shuleykin (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614541" start="1486" end="1509" title="Pettit (Martian crater)" label="Pettit (Martian crater)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266410" wikidata="Q297537" url="?curid=1266410" title="2004 AFF Championship">
<text>The 2004 [[AFF Championship]] (officially known as the 2004 Tiger Cup for sponsorship reasons) was the 5th edition of the AFF Championship, the football championship of nations affiliated to the ASEAN Football Federation (AFF), and the last time under the name Tiger Cup. This was the first time a new format had been applied. The group stage was jointly hosted by Vietnam and Malaysia from 7 to 16 December 2004, and the top two teams from each group advanced to the Semi-finals and the Final, which was played in a two-leg home-and-away format from 28 December 2004 to 16 January 2005. This was also the final AFF Cup to feature a third-place match, as it was removed in the 2007 edition.

Thailand were the two-time defending champions, but were eliminated in Group stage. Singapore won the tournament by a 5–2 victory in the two-legged final against Indonesia to secure their second title.

== Summary ==
In the group matches, Indonesia, coached by former Thailand coach Peter Withe, emerged as the Group A winners with ten points, 17 goals scored and none conceded. They were the hot favourites to win the 2004 AFF Championship after bundling out the hosts Vietnam with an unexpected 3–0 victory. Less than a day after the match had ended, the Vietnam Football Federation requested the resignation from its national coach Edson Tavares, despite his requests to stay on until the last match. Singapore, led by Radojko Avramović pipped out the hosts by just a single point and remained unbeaten to become the only team in the championship to not lose a single match.

Following the tournament motto &quot;Anything can happen&quot;, Myanmar, under coach Ivan Kolev emerged as the surprise, holding defending champions Thailand to a draw and beating Malaysia on their own turf.

== Teams ==
All teams from member associations of the ASEAN Football Federation (AFF) participated with the exception of Brunei. However, they would be replaced by East Timor when sponsors Tiger Beer stated in May 2004 that the world&#x27;s newest country at the time would be joining the competition. This kept the tournament at 10 teams.

== Squads ==

==Venues==
== Tournament ==

=== Group stage ===
==== Group A ====
* All times are Indochina Time (ICT) – UTC+7
* All matches played in Vietnam





==== Group B ====
* All times are Malaysia Standard Time (MST) – UTC+8
* All matches played in Malaysia

----


----



=== Knockout stage ===
==== Semi-finals ====



&quot;Singapore win 8–5 on aggregate&quot;

&quot;Indonesia win 5–3 on aggregate&quot;

==== Third place play-off ====
==== Final ====


&quot;Singapore win 5–2 on aggregate&quot;

== Awards ==

==Goal scorers==
;7 goals
* Ilham Jaya Kesuma

;6 goals

* Muhamad Khalid Jamlus
* Soe Myat Min
* Agu Casmir
;5 goals
* Kurniawan Dwi Yulianto

;4 goals

* Elie Aiboy
* Liew Kit Kong
* Noh Alam Shah
* Indra Sahdan Daud
* Sarayoot Chaikamdee
* Thạch Bảo Khanh
* Lê Công Vinh
;3 goals
* Boaz Solossa
* Chalana Luang-Amath
* Emelio Caligdong

;2 goals

* Mohd Amri Yahyah
* San Day Thien
* Daniel Bennett
* Khairul Amri
* Therdsak Chaiman
* Suriya Domtaisong
* Đặng Văn Thành
;1 goal

* Hing Darith
* Hang Sokunthea
* Charis Yulianto
* Mahyadi Panggabean
* Muhammad Mauli Lessy
* Ortizan Solossa
* Visay Phaphouvanin
* Mohd Fadzli Saari
* Mohamad Nor Ismail
* Muhamad Kaironnisam Sahabudin Hussain
* Muhammad Shukor Adan
* Aung Kyaw Moe
* Min Thu
* Zaw Lynn Tun
* Myo Hlaing Win
* Chad Gould
* Baihakki Khaizan
* Itimi Dickson
* Hasrin Jailani
* Sharil Ishak
* Weerayut Jitkuntod
* Yuttajak Kornjan
* Ittipol Poolsap
* Sarif Sainui
* Banluesak Yodyingyong
* Januário do Rego
* Simon Diamantino
* Nguyễn Huy Hoàng
* Nguyễn Minh Phương
;Own goal
* Sun Sampratna (For Vietnam)
* Sengphet Thongphachan (For Singapore)
* Siththalay Kanyavong (For Indonesia)

==Team statistics==

==Notes==
==References==
;General

* Stokkermans, Karel. &quot;ASEAN (&quot;Tiger&quot;) Cup 2004 (Vietnam)&quot;. RSSSF.
;Specific
== External links ==
* Tiger Cup 2004 at AseanFootball.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q297537" start="4" end="29" title="2004 AFF Championship" label="2004 [[AFF Championship]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q297537" start="55" end="69" title="2004 AFF Championship" label="2004 Tiger Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q862567" start="122" end="138" title="AFF Championship" label="AFF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="144" end="152" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q297590" start="195" end="220" title="ASEAN Football Federation" label="ASEAN Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q297537" start="261" end="270" title="2004 AFF Championship" label="Tiger Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q266904" start="677" end="689" title="2007 AFF Championship" label="2007 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q239549" start="692" end="700" title="Thailand national football team" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q239528" start="776" end="785" title="Singapore national football team" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q657451" start="854" end="863" title="Indonesia national football team" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q657451" start="931" end="940" title="Indonesia national football team" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239549" start="960" end="968" title="Thailand national football team" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q467383" start="975" end="986" title="Peter Withe" label="Peter Withe"/>
<link wikidata="Q270689" start="1162" end="1169" title="Vietnam national football team" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340332" start="1327" end="1340" title="Edson Tavares" label="Edson Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q239528" start="1396" end="1405" title="Singapore national football team" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616683" start="1414" end="1431" title="Radojko Avramović" label="Radojko Avramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q271753" start="1635" end="1642" title="Myanmar national football team" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116086" start="1656" end="1666" title="Ivan Venkov Kolev" label="Ivan Kolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q239549" start="1720" end="1728" title="Thailand national football team" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q318922" start="1751" end="1759" title="Malaysia national football team" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q297590" start="1834" end="1859" title="ASEAN Football Federation" label="ASEAN Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q239555" start="1901" end="1907" title="Brunei national football team" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q270973" start="1944" end="1954" title="East Timor national football team" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862698" start="1969" end="1979" title="Tiger Beer" label="Tiger Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940" start="2241" end="2246" title="UTC+7" label="UTC+7"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="2271" end="2278" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272978" start="2318" end="2340" title="Malaysia Standard Time" label="Malaysia Standard Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985" start="2349" end="2354" title="UTC+8" label="UTC+8"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="2379" end="2387" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513935" start="2675" end="2692" title="Ilham Jaya Kesuma" label="Ilham Jaya Kesuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932275" start="2706" end="2727" title="Muhamad Khalid Jamlus" label="Muhamad Khalid Jamlus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553462" start="2730" end="2742" title="Soe Myat Min" label="Soe Myat Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694415" start="2745" end="2755" title="Agu Casmir" label="Agu Casmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q983494" start="2767" end="2789" title="Kurniawan Dwi Yulianto" label="Kurniawan Dwi Yulianto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505511" start="2803" end="2813" title="Elie Aiboy" label="Elie Aiboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10436856" start="2816" end="2829" title="Liew Kit Kong" label="Liew Kit Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700074" start="2832" end="2845" title="Noh Alam Shah" label="Noh Alam Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147349" start="2848" end="2865" title="Indra Sahdan Daud" label="Indra Sahdan Daud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039567" start="2868" end="2887" title="Sarayoot Chaikamdee" label="Sarayoot Chaikamdee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708869" start="2890" end="2905" title="Thạch Bảo Khanh" label="Thạch Bảo Khanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q460346" start="2908" end="2920" title="Lê Công Vinh" label="Lê Công Vinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931574" start="2932" end="2944" title="Boaz Solossa" label="Boaz Solossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61128819" start="2947" end="2966" title="Chalana Luang-Amath" label="Chalana Luang-Amath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370364" start="2969" end="2985" title="Emelio Caligdong" label="Emelio Caligdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119626" start="2999" end="3015" title="Mohd Amri Yahyah" label="Mohd Amri Yahyah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3018" end="3031" title="San Day Thien" label="San Day Thien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053244" start="3034" end="3048" title="Daniel Bennett (footballer)" label="Daniel Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q10314253" start="3051" end="3063" title="Khairul Amri" label="Khairul Amri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396018" start="3066" end="3082" title="Therdsak Chaiman" label="Therdsak Chaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640470" start="3085" end="3102" title="Suriya Domtaisong" label="Suriya Domtaisong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205805" start="3105" end="3119" title="Đặng Văn Thành" label="Đặng Văn Thành"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3131" end="3142" title="Hing Darith" label="Hing Darith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3145" end="3159" title="Hang Sokunthea" label="Hang Sokunthea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116081" start="3162" end="3177" title="Charis Yulianto" label="Charis Yulianto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116083" start="3180" end="3198" title="Mahyadi Panggabean" label="Mahyadi Panggabean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3201" end="3221" title="Muhammad Mauli Lessy" label="Muhammad Mauli Lessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105039" start="3224" end="3239" title="Ortizan Solossa" label="Ortizan Solossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q603787" start="3242" end="3260" title="Visay Phaphouvanin" label="Visay Phaphouvanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119834" start="3263" end="3280" title="Mohd Fadzli Saari" label="Mohd Fadzli Saari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890901" start="3283" end="3301" title="Mohamad Nor Ismail" label="Mohamad Nor Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509454" start="3304" end="3341" title="Muhamad Kaironnisam Sahabudin Hussain" label="Muhamad Kaironnisam Sahabudin Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509327" start="3344" end="3364" title="Muhammad Shukor Adan" label="Muhammad Shukor Adan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821897" start="3367" end="3380" title="Aung Kyaw Moe" label="Aung Kyaw Moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862604" start="3383" end="3390" title="Min Thu (footballer)" label="Min Thu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3393" end="3405" title="Zaw Lynn Tun" label="Zaw Lynn Tun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869090" start="3408" end="3422" title="Myo Hlaing Win" label="Myo Hlaing Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058557" start="3425" end="3435" title="Chad Gould" label="Chad Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545057" start="3438" end="3454" title="Baihakki Khaizan" label="Baihakki Khaizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094726" start="3457" end="3470" title="Itimi Dickson" label="Itimi Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q124465756" start="3473" end="3487" title="Hasrin Jailani" label="Hasrin Jailani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959019" start="3490" end="3502" title="Sharil Ishak" label="Sharil Ishak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631670" start="3505" end="3523" title="Weerayut Jitkuntod" label="Weerayut Jitkuntod"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3526" end="3542" title="Yuttajak Kornjan" label="Yuttajak Kornjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095060" start="3545" end="3560" title="Ittipol Poolsap" label="Ittipol Poolsap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506677" start="3563" end="3575" title="Sarif Sainui" label="Sarif Sainui"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3578" end="3599" title="Banluesak Yodyingyong" label="Banluesak Yodyingyong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3602" end="3618" title="Januário do Rego" label="Januário do Rego"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3621" end="3637" title="Simon Diamantino" label="Simon Diamantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q926022" start="3640" end="3656" title="Nguyễn Huy Hoàng" label="Nguyễn Huy Hoàng"/>
<link wikidata="Q926057" start="3659" end="3677" title="Nguyễn Minh Phương" label="Nguyễn Minh Phương"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3690" end="3703" title="Sun Sampratna" label="Sun Sampratna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3720" end="3741" title="Sengphet Thongphachan" label="Sengphet Thongphachan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3760" end="3780" title="Siththalay Kanyavong" label="Siththalay Kanyavong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266413" wikidata="Q6158090" url="?curid=1266413" title="Japanese American Citizens League">
<text>The is an Asian American civil rights charity, headquartered in San Francisco, with regional chapters across the United States.

The Japanese American Citizens League (JACL) describes itself as the oldest and largest Asian American civil rights organization in the United States, focusing on civil and human rights of all Americans, particularly the Asian Pacific American community. The organization was formed in 1929 out of existing Nisei organizations in California and Washington.

In its early years, the JACL lobbied for legislation that expanded the citizenship rights of Japanese Americans, and local chapters organized meetings to encourage Nisei to become more politically active. During and leading up to World War II, the JACL was criticized for its decision not to use its political influence to fight the incarceration of Japanese Americans, aiding U.S. intelligence agencies in identifying &quot;disloyal&quot; Issei, and taking a hardline stance against draft resisters in camp. These issues remain a source of division within the Japanese American community and the organization itself.

After the war, the JACL returned its primary focus to civil rights legislation, lobbying Congress and bringing lawsuits to overturn or amend laws regarding interracial marriage, segregation, and race-based restrictions on immigration and naturalization. In the 1970s, after some initial disagreement among leaders, the organization became involved in the movement for redress for the wartime incarceration. The influence of JACL lobbyists was a key factor in the passage of the Civil Liberties Act of 1988, which formally acknowledged the unconstitutionality of and provided reparations for the incarceration. A younger generation of JACL leadership has made an effort to acknowledge the consequences of its wartime actions, officially apologizing for its condemnation of Nisei draft resisters in 2002.

Today, the national organization consists of 100-plus chapters, mostly located in major cities and metropolitan areas across the US. These chapters are separated geographically into seven district councils, each of which is headed by a district governor. The organization is guided by a board of elected officials, consisting of the officers and district governors.

==History==
===Early years (1929–1941)===
In 1929, several already-established Nisei organizations merged to form the Japanese American Citizens League (JACL), most prominent among them Fresno&#x27;s (headed by Nisei UC educated dentist Dr. Thomas T. Yatabe, 1897–1977), the , and the San Francisco-based (headed by Nisei UC educated lawyer Saburo Kido, 1902–1977). Aiming towards professionals and small business owners among the Nisei, the JACL sought to promote free enterprise, self-reliance, and loyalty to the United States. The organization thus excluded a hyphen from its name.

Due in part to the active support of James Sakamoto and other Seattle activists, the nascent JACL chose to hold its first national conference in Seattle in 1930. It soon after began work to expand the citizenship rights of Japanese and other Asian Americans, who were considered unassimilable to American society and therefore ineligible for naturalization under the Immigration Act of 1924. Their first target was the Cable Act of 1922, which revoked the citizenship of women who married men ineligible for citizenship, namely Asian immigrants. After a successful lobbying campaign, Congress amended the act in 1931. Next, the JACL began a campaign to allow Issei and other Asian American veterans of the First World War to become U.S. citizens. In 1935, the Nye-Lea Act secured citizenship rights for these men.

===World War II incarceration (1941–1945)===

In 1941, within hours of the Imperial Japanese Navy&#x27;s attack on Pearl Harbor, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) began arresting Japanese American community leaders (mostly Issei Japanese language school teachers, priests, martial arts instructors, and business owners). Members of the JACL testified at government hearings to promote a picture of Nisei as loyal and patriotic Americans, an effort to counteract rumors of fifth column activity that had spread in the wake of Pearl Harbor. At the same time, the JACL aided FBI and Naval Intelligence officials to identify potentially disloyal Issei, a move many Japanese Americans argued tried to buy political safety for a small segment of the community at the expense of its more vulnerable members.

When President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, JACL leadership did not question the constitutionality of the exclusion of Japanese Americans from the West Coast. Instead, arguing it would better serve the community to follow government orders without protest, the organization advised the approximately 120,000 affected to go peacefully and distanced itself from those who actively opposed the order. In an interview after the war, civil rights attorney Wayne M. Collins criticized these actions of the JACL. &quot;The JACL pretended to be the spokesman for all Japanese Americans, but they wouldn&#x27;t stand up for their people ... They led their people like a bunch of goddam doves to the concentration camps.&quot;

Throughout the war, the JACL made efforts to ensure some measure of protection and comfort for Japanese Americans resettling outside government concentration camps, providing loans and establishing offices in Chicago to assist families resettling in the Midwest. The organization argued for the right of Japanese Americans to serve in the U.S. military. In Hawaii, where at that time the JACL did not exist, many community leaders actively supported for men of Japanese descent to serve in the military resulting in the formation of the 100th Infantry Battalion , and the 442nd Regiment Combat Team, when 10,000 signed up with eventually 2,686 being chosen to join the 1,500 from the mainland.

===Redress (1945–1988)===

Following the war, the JACL began a long series of legislative efforts to establish rights for Japanese Americans. The JACL embarked on a campaign to repeal California&#x27;s Alien Land Law, which had prohibited all Japanese aliens (i.e. immigrants) from purchasing and owning land in the state. In 1948, the JACL succeeded in gaining passage of the Evacuation Claims Act, the first of a series of efforts to rectify the losses and injustices of the World War II incarceration. In 1949, the JACL initiated efforts in the U.S. Congress to gain the right of Japanese immigrants to become naturalized citizens of the U.S.

In 1970, the JACL endorsed a resolution, introduced by member Edison Uno, to urge Congress to compensate each camp survivor for each day they had spent in confinement. Later, in 1979, the JACL&#x27;s National Committee for Redress proposed the creation of a federal commission to investigate the incarceration. The following year, the JACL, with help from Senators Daniel Inouye and Spark Matsunaga, pushed a bill through Congress to create the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians (CWRIC). In 1983, the CWRIC published its findings and recommended an official Government apology and redress payments to survivors. This was granted with the passage of the Civil Liberties Act of 1988 and signed by President Ronald Reagan.

===Post-redress (1988–present)===
In 1994, at its national convention, the JACL passed a resolution affirming its commitment to and support of the basic human right of marriage, including the right to marry for same-sex couples. In 2012, the JACL was the first national civil rights membership organization to publicly and actively adopt this position, and praised President Barack Obama for his support for same-sex marriage.

Since 2022, the JACL has championed the cause of reparations for slavery. In addition to endorsing local proposals for reparations, JACL has demanded the Biden administration begin the process of studying federal reparations for African Americans. JACL representatives testified in favor of the creation of the Philadelphia Reparations Task Force.

==Programs==

===Bridging Communities Program===
The Bridging Communities Program brings youth from the Japanese and Asian American community together with Muslim and Arab American youth. High school students attend workshops on identity, community, organizing, culture, and empowerment. The program involves visits to the Tule Lake Relocation Center, Manzanar, and Minidoka National Historic Site concentration camps, which first confined Japanese Americans during World War II. The Bridging Communities program is funded by a grant from the National Park Service.

Organizational partners include the Council on American-Islamic Relations, the Tule Lake Pilgrimage Committee, the National Japanese American Historical Society, Nikkei for Civil Rights and Redress, Kizuna, and Friends of Minidoka.

===JACL/OCA Leadership Summit===
This three-day annual leadership training summit is a joint program organized by the JACL which includes participants from OCA National (formerly the Organization of Chinese Americans). Workshop topics range from coalition building techniques to the strategy of successful lobbying.

===Youth Leadership Summit===
The JACL&#x27;s Youth Leadership Summit was first established in 2010 and has been held annually in Chicago, Portland, and Washington DC.

===Scholarships===
The JACL launched a National Scholarship and Awards Program in 1946. It offer scholarships to students at the entering freshman, undergraduate, graduate, law, financial need and creative &amp; performing arts. All scholarships are one-time awards.

===The League of Dreams===
JACL National and film producer Lane Nishikawa are working together to create a documentary of the 90 years of history since the foundation of the JACL. Nishikawa intends for the documentary to &quot;chronicle the history of the Japanese American Citizens League (JACL), the oldest and largest Asian American civil rights organization in the U.S.&quot; The project has received a grant of $165,000 from the Japanese American Confinement Sites (JACS) and a grant award of $25,000 through the assistance of the San Diego Chapter JACL.

===Anti-Hate Program===
JACL&#x27;s Anti-Hate Program was created in response to the increased rates of Asian American hate crimes and anti-Asian sentiments following COVID-19. The JACL states that they aim to &quot;eradicate the use of negative stereotypes and misperceptions about Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. To accomplish this, the JACL monitors and combats hate crimes and hate incidents including defamation and racial/ethnic profiling.&quot; The site lists resources in response to anti-Asian sentiment and hate crimes, state hate crime laws, and responses to hate.

==National Convention==

===History of National Convention===
The first JACL National Convention was held on August 29, 1930, in Seattle, Washington. The first post World War II National JACL Convention was held in Denver, Colorado. Adoption of a 14-point program of rebuilding which included Issei naturalization, reparations for discriminatory treatment during the war, re-examination of the constitutionality of the evacuation, stay of deportation on hardship cases involving Japanese nationals, a call for a national conference of minorities, elimination of racial discrimination in housing and employment, challenge of the alien land laws, creation of a research clearinghouse on the evacuation, and assistance of returning Nisei veterans.

===1970 National Convention===
The 1970 JACL convention was marred by the murder of Evelyn Okubo, an 18-year-old activist and attendee, by a black man. Nevertheless, the JACL continued its commitment to racial justice for all Americans, including African-Americans.

===2013 National Convention===
The 2013 JACL National Convention was held July 24–26, 2013, in Washington, DC. The theme for the 44th convention was &quot;Justice for All&quot;.

== Headquarters, districts and chapters ==
As of 2022, the JACL is headquartered in San Francisco&#x27;s Japantown neighborhood, directly neighboring the offices of the Japanese American Association of Northern California (Hokka Nichi Bei Kai /北加日米会), which describes itself as the oldest Japanese American Community organization (founded in 1895).

The JACL also maintains an office in Washington DC, and (as of 2022) has over 100 chapters in the US, organized into seven district counciles: Central California District Council, Eastern District Council, Intermountain District Council, Midwest District Council, Northern California-Western Nevada-Pacific District Council, Pacific Northern District Council, and Pacific Southwest District Council.

The JACL did not exist in Hawaii during the years prior to and after World War II; a chapter was finally established in 1980.

==Notable members==

*Frank Chuman
*Gordon Hirabayashi
*Mike Honda
*Chris Iijima
*Saburo Kido
*Mike Masaoka
*Doris Matsui
*Robert Matsui
*Spark Matsunaga
*Stan Matsunaka
*Norman Mineta
*Evelyn Okubo
*James Y. Sakamoto
*Charles Z. Smith
*Ina Sugihara
*George Takei
*Grayce Uyehara
*George Yuzawa

==See also==

* Pacific Citizen
* Japanese Americans
* Japanese American Committee for Democracy
* Japanese American National Library
* Japanese American National Museum
**Japanese American Museum of San Jose
* Japan–United States relations
** Anti-Japanese sentiment in the United States
** Consulate-General of Japan, San Francisco
** U.S.-Japan Council

==References==
==Further reading==
* Bill Hosokawa, &quot;JACL in Quest of Justice&quot; (Morrow, 1982).

==External links==

* Website for national organization
* Berkeley chapter
* New England chapter
* Portland, Oregon chapter
* Twin Cities chapter
* New York chapter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="10" end="24" title="Asian American" label="Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="25" end="37" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806708" start="350" end="372" title="Asian Pacific American" label="Asian Pacific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215155" start="436" end="441" title="Nisei" label="Nisei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="474" end="484" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="516" end="523" title="lobbied" label="lobbied"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="558" end="569" title="citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="717" end="729" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="820" end="855" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="incarceration of Japanese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q159090" start="927" end="932" title="Issei" label="Issei"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1160" end="1172" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1195" end="1203" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774398" start="1262" end="1282" title="Anti-miscegenation laws in the United States" label="interracial marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="1284" end="1295" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="1344" end="1358" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124499" start="1584" end="1611" title="Civil Liberties Act of 1988" label="Civil Liberties Act of 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837439" start="2618" end="2629" title="Saburo Kido" label="Saburo Kido"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840678" start="2901" end="2915" title="James Sakamoto" label="James Sakamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="3087" end="3095" title="Japanese Americans" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="3106" end="3121" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="3231" end="3254" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="Immigration Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015628" start="3283" end="3300" title="Cable Act of 1922" label="Cable Act of 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984275" start="3392" end="3408" title="Asian immigration to the United States" label="Asian immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3570" end="3585" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="3754" end="3776" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="3784" end="3806" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="3812" end="3843" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="4159" end="4171" title="fifth column" label="fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967781" start="4267" end="4285" title="Office of Naval Intelligence" label="Naval Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4504" end="4525" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159918" start="4533" end="4553" title="Executive Order 9066" label="Executive Order 9066"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="4658" end="4668" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976433" start="4962" end="4978" title="Wayne M. Collins" label="Wayne M. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="5568" end="5581" title="United States military" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546241" start="5766" end="5790" title="100th Infantry Battalion (United States)" label="100th Infantry Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q704142" start="5801" end="5827" title="442nd Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="442nd Regiment Combat Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020225" start="6126" end="6140" title="Alien Land Law" label="Alien Land Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q473741" start="6176" end="6182" title="Alien (law)" label="aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849677" start="6301" end="6322" title="Japanese-American Claims Act" label="Evacuation Claims Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="6537" end="6557" title="naturalization" label="naturalized citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338435" start="6633" end="6643" title="Edison Uno" label="Edison Uno"/>
<link wikidata="Q312845" start="6936" end="6949" title="Daniel Inouye" label="Daniel Inouye"/>
<link wikidata="Q977134" start="6954" end="6969" title="Spark Matsunaga" label="Spark Matsunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152745" start="7016" end="7076" title="Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians" label="Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124499" start="7251" end="7278" title="Civil Liberties Act of 1988" label="Civil Liberties Act of 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="7303" end="7316" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242821" start="7530" end="7546" title="same-sex couples" label="same-sex couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7694" end="7706" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="7727" end="7744" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313910" start="7796" end="7819" title="reparations for slavery" label="reparations for slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="7901" end="7921" title="Presidency of Joe Biden" label="Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="7976" end="7993" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q121296337" start="8058" end="8093" title="Philadelphia Reparations Task Force" label="Philadelphia Reparations Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944942" start="8419" end="8446" title="Tule Lake Relocation Center" label="Tule Lake Relocation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q985484" start="8448" end="8456" title="Manzanar" label="Manzanar"/>
<link wikidata="Q927150" start="8462" end="8493" title="Minidoka National Historic Site" label="Minidoka National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8562" end="8574" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="8639" end="8660" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101965" start="9079" end="9112" title="Organization of Chinese Americans" label="Organization of Chinese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="9202" end="9210" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="10924" end="10931" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10960" end="10972" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="11010" end="11016" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="11094" end="11108" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201409" start="11110" end="11121" title="Japanese American redress and court cases" label="reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890727" start="11615" end="11637" title="murder of Evelyn Okubo" label="murder of Evelyn Okubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159207" start="12071" end="12114" title="Japantown, San Francisco" label="San Francisco&amp;#x27;s Japantown neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q114039956" start="12887" end="12899" title="Frank Chuman" label="Frank Chuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585299" start="12901" end="12919" title="Gordon Hirabayashi" label="Gordon Hirabayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q399621" start="12921" end="12931" title="Mike Honda" label="Mike Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106965" start="12933" end="12945" title="Chris Iijima" label="Chris Iijima"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837439" start="12947" end="12958" title="Saburo Kido" label="Saburo Kido"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847831" start="12960" end="12972" title="Mike Masaoka" label="Mike Masaoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q399561" start="12974" end="12986" title="Doris Matsui" label="Doris Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q399055" start="12988" end="13001" title="Robert Matsui" label="Robert Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q977134" start="13003" end="13018" title="Spark Matsunaga" label="Spark Matsunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597785" start="13020" end="13034" title="Stan Matsunaka" label="Stan Matsunaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q553502" start="13036" end="13049" title="Norman Mineta" label="Norman Mineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890727" start="13051" end="13063" title="Murder of Evelyn Okubo" label="Evelyn Okubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840678" start="13065" end="13082" title="James Sakamoto" label="James Y. Sakamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067395" start="13084" end="13100" title="Charles Z. Smith" label="Charles Z. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q116755788" start="13102" end="13114" title="Ina Sugihara" label="Ina Sugihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q110154" start="13116" end="13128" title="George Takei" label="George Takei"/>
<link wikidata="Q24285730" start="13130" end="13144" title="Grayce Uyehara" label="Grayce Uyehara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546617" start="13146" end="13159" title="George Yuzawa" label="George Yuzawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122346" start="13177" end="13192" title="Pacific Citizen" label="Pacific Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="13195" end="13213" title="Japanese Americans" label="Japanese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050047" start="13216" end="13257" title="Japanese American Committee for Democracy" label="Japanese American Committee for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158087" start="13260" end="13294" title="Japanese American National Library" label="Japanese American National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590419" start="13297" end="13330" title="Japanese American National Museum" label="Japanese American National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158083" start="13333" end="13369" title="Japanese American Museum of San Jose" label="Japanese American Museum of San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227243" start="13372" end="13401" title="Japan–United States relations" label="Japan–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774206" start="13405" end="13449" title="Anti-Japanese sentiment in the United States" label="Anti-Japanese sentiment in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13453" end="13494" title="Consulate-General of Japan, San Francisco" label="Consulate-General of Japan, San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087853" start="13498" end="13516" title="U.S.-Japan Council" label="U.S.-Japan Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266420" wikidata="Q4932275" url="?curid=1266420" title="Bob Deuell">
<text>Robert Franklin Deuell, known as Bob Deuell (born 11 March 1950), is a physician from Greenville, Texas, and a former Republican member of the Texas Senate. He entered office in 2003 and represented the ten counties of Senate District 2 in the northeastern portion of the state. His term ended in 2015.

Deuell was narrowly unseated in the runoff election held on May 27, 2014; he polled 17,930 (49.6 percent) to intraparty challenger Bob Hall&#x27;s 18,230 (50.4 percent). Deuell had led a three-candidate field in the primary on March 4, with 23,847 votes (48.5 percent). Because he fell short of a majority, he was placed in the runoff with the number-two candidate, Bob Hall, who in the primary polled 19,085 votes (38.8 percent). The remaining 6,240 votes (12.7 percent) went to the third candidate, Mark Thompson.

==Background==

Deuell, was educated at George Mason University in Fairfax County, Virginia, and the Medical College of Virginia. He is a partner in Primary Care Associates in Greenville, Texas. He is a member of the American Medical Association and Texas Medical Association. He is certified by the American Board of Family Medicine.

== Legislative history ==
During the Seventy-ninth Texas Legislature (2005), Deuell passed legislation to help ensure firefighters and other first responders who contract diseases in the line of duty receive the benefits they deserve (Senate Bill 310), created a statewide stroke emergency plan with the Texas Stroke Act (Senate Bill 330), authorized a medical dispatch program for rural areas (Senate Bill 523) and set up a Medicaid buy-in program for the working disabled (Senate Bill 565). Deuell also worked to ensure passage of bills dealing with issues such as education, transportation, lawsuit reform and family issues.

In the Eightieth Texas Legislature Senator Deuell was tapped by Lt. Governor David Dewhurst to carry Jessica&#x27;s Law legislation, aimed at protecting society&#x27;s most vulnerable population from child predators. Governor Rick Perry signed this bill into law on July 17, 2007. Deuell also worked to advance issues as diverse as Medicaid reform and incentives programs to attract film and television production to Texas. For his work in this Session, Deuell was named as one of Texas Monthly&#x27;s Best Legislators.

In 2013, Deuell co-authored legislation that would require abortion providers to abide by the same regulations as ambulatory surgical centers. Critics characterized the bill as a TRAP law that would enact a &quot;virtual ban on abortion in Texas.&quot;

== Leadership while in Senate ==
Deuell was the chairman of the Senate Committee on Economic Development, serving on the Senate Finance and Natural Resources committees, and was vice-chair of both the Health and Human Services and State Affairs committees.

In addition, Deuell was selected by Lieutenant Governor David Dewhurst to serve on the Senate Select Committee on Water Policy. He was a vice-chair of the Rural Caucus. Senator Deuell is a former chair of the Senate Republican Caucus.

==Electoral history==

=== 2014 ===




=== 2010 ===


=== 2006 ===




=== 2002 ===



=== 2000 ===








==References==
==External links==
*Senate of Texas - Senator Bob Deuell official TX Senate website 
*bobdeuell.org official campaign website
*Project Vote Smart - Senator Robert E. &#x27;Bob&#x27; Deuell (TX) profile
*&quot;Follow the Money&quot; - Bob Deuell
**2006 2004 2002 2000 campaign contributions
*Texas Monthly&#x27;s 10 Best and Worst &quot;Belo Blog&quot;, June 2007
*Bois d&#x27;Arc Dixieland Band</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4932275" start="0" end="22" title="Bob Deuell" label="Robert Franklin Deuell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932275" start="33" end="43" title="Bob Deuell" label="Bob Deuell"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="71" end="80" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q976490" start="86" end="96" title="Greenville, Texas" label="Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="98" end="103" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="118" end="128" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="143" end="155" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707969" start="219" end="236" title="Texas Senate, District 2" label="Senate District 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="340" end="355" title="runoff election" label="runoff election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619029" start="435" end="443" title="Bob Hall (Texas politician)" label="Bob Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="520" end="527" title="Partisan primary" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="601" end="609" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="861" end="884" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="888" end="902" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="904" end="912" title="Virginia (U.S. state)" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906647" start="922" end="949" title="Medical College of Virginia" label="Medical College of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="1038" end="1066" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707849" start="1071" end="1096" title="Texas Medical Association" label="Texas Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743203" start="1121" end="1154" title="American Board of Family Medicine" label="American Board of Family Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457787" start="1194" end="1225" title="Seventy-ninth Texas Legislature" label="Seventy-ninth Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="1275" end="1287" title="firefighters" label="firefighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="1430" end="1436" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="1582" end="1590" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349148" start="1793" end="1820" title="Eightieth Texas Legislature" label="Eightieth Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420499" start="1863" end="1877" title="David Dewhurst" label="David Dewhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187056" start="1887" end="1905" title="Jessica&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Jessica&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="2003" end="2011" title="governor of Texas" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215057" start="2012" end="2022" title="Rick Perry" label="Rick Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="2118" end="2126" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707865" start="2267" end="2280" title="Texas Monthly" label="Texas Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671282" start="2486" end="2494" title="TRAP law" label="TRAP law"/>
<link wikidata="Q639115" start="2855" end="2874" title="Lieutenant Governor of Texas" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420499" start="2875" end="2889" title="David Dewhurst" label="David Dewhurst"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266426" wikidata="Q1516096" url="?curid=1266426" title="Tochal">
<text>Tochal ( ), is a mountain and ski resort located on the Alborz mountain range, adjacent to the metropolitan area of Tehran in northern Iran. It includes a ridge. Its highest peak, also called &quot;Tochal&quot;, is at an elevation of above sea level.

A gondola lift runs from Tehran to the Tochal ski resort and hotel, all as a part of Tochal Complex.

==Peaks==
A number of peaks are accessible from the Tochal main ridge or by their own climbing paths. Peaks (from west to east) include:

* Lavarak (): accessible by main Tochal ridge or Imamzade Davood climbing path.
* Bazarak (): accessible by main Tochal ridge or Imamzade Davood climbing path.
* Palang-chal (): accessible from Darakeh valley and Palangchal Shelter.
* Sar-Bazarak (): accessible from Palangchal peak and main Tochal ridge.
* Shah-Neshin (): accessible from Tochal main ridge, Hezarcham path and south (Abshar-Dogholoo) ridge.
* Tochal (): The highest peak of the range, accessible by any climbing path that ends on the Tochal main ridge. The usual path from Tehran is by the south ridge (normally from Shirpala shelter and Siahsang hut).
* Spilit (): through Band-yakh-chal and Shervin hut by rock climbing or Klakchal ridge.
* West Lezon (): accessible from Tochal main ridge, Kolakchal shelter or Shirpala shelter.
* East Lezon or Piaz-chal (): accessible from Tochal main ridge, Kolakchal shelter or Shirpala shelter.
* Kolak-chal (): from Kolakchal shelter (through Golab-dareh valley, Vezbad valley or Jamshidieh park)
* Siah-band (): from Dar-abad valley and Dar-abad hut.

==Gondola lift==



Tochal has a long gondola lift which begins from Velenjak valley at and ends in the last station at 3740m near the main ridge of Tochal. This gondola lift is used for accessing ski resorts and other recreational centers on the mountain.

==Location in central Alborz==
==Opening season==
Tochal International ski resort, located in Iran&#x27;s capital Tehran, was officially reopened on 22 January 2024.

== Pictures ==
==See also==
* List of ski areas and resorts in Iran
* Tochal Complex
* Velenjak

==References==
==External links==

* Tochal website
* Tochal Overview
* 6 days snow forecast and skiing weather for Tochal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1516096" start="0" end="6" title="Tochal" label="Tochal"/>
<link wikidata="Q484725" start="56" end="62" title="Alborz" label="Alborz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="116" end="122" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="135" end="139" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576693" start="254" end="266" title="gondola lift" label="gondola lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811977" start="337" end="351" title="Tochal Complex" label="Tochal Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929141" start="1077" end="1093" title="Shirpala shelter" label="Shirpala shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q649180" start="1624" end="1632" title="Velenjak" label="Velenjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="1884" end="1887" title="ski" label="ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254729" start="2010" end="2047" title="List of ski areas and resorts in Iran" label="List of ski areas and resorts in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811977" start="2050" end="2064" title="Tochal Complex" label="Tochal Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q649180" start="2067" end="2075" title="Velenjak" label="Velenjak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266429" wikidata="Q2250595" url="?curid=1266429" title="Schubert (lunar crater)">
<text>Schubert is a lunar impact crater that lies near the eastern limb of the Moon&#x27;s near side. It is located northwest of the Mare Smythii, and southwest of the prominent crater Neper. Nearly attached to the southern rim is the crater Back.

Schubert is a nearly circular crater formation that has not suffered significant erosion from subsequent impacts, and retains a well-defined rim. The interior surface is generally flat, with a few low hills near the center.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Schubert.

The following craters have been renamed by the IAU.
* Schubert B — &quot;See&quot; Back (crater).
* Schubert Y — &quot;See&quot; Nobili (crater).
* Schubert Z — &quot;See&quot; Jenkins (crater).

Schubert C is called &quot;Doyle&quot; on some older maps, but this name was not approved by the IAU.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2250595" start="0" end="8" title="Schubert (lunar crater)" label="Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="14" end="19" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="20" end="33" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="73" end="77" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q168032" start="127" end="139" title="Mare Smythii" label="Mare Smythii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977728" start="179" end="184" title="Neper (crater)" label="Neper"/>
<link wikidata="Q798307" start="236" end="240" title="Back (crater)" label="Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="682" end="685" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q798307" start="718" end="731" title="Back (crater)" label="Back (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337093" start="764" end="779" title="Nobili (crater)" label="Nobili (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522666" start="812" end="828" title="Jenkins (crater)" label="Jenkins (crater)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266433" wikidata="Q6016633" url="?curid=1266433" title="Independent Gay Forum">
<text>The Independent Gay Forum was an organization that sponsored a website featuring free access to articles and opinions penned by gay economical conservative, center-right Independent and libertarian gay authors. Its &quot;raison d&#x27;etre&quot; was dissatisfaction by some lesbians and gay men with the alleged center-left or liberal orthodoxy of the lesbian and gay rights movement in the United States. It was founded around 1998 and dissolved in 2010, believing its mission had been largely accomplished. Its blog, by Stephen H. Miller, continues at the website IGFCultureWatch, which also hosts the Forum&#x27;s article archives.

==Rise of the new &#x27;gay right&#x27; movement==

In 1993, Bruce Bawer published his book &quot;A Place at the Table&quot; that criticized homophobic social conservatives and U.S. Democratic Party-aligned and center-left lesbians and gay men in the United States. He argued that this political bias produced an unworkable and partisan bias which locked lesbian and gay voters into endorsement of one partisan choice, instead of bipartisan political initiatives that focused on both the Democrat and Republican Parties, as well as questioning the relevance and importance of some broad center-left goals and objectives to lesbian and gay communities in the United States.

Bawer called for full inclusion of gays in mainstream society and criticized what he considered an unrepresentative but highly visible gay subculture that equated homosexuality with promiscuity, hedonism, political correctness or stereotypes like being effeminate or &quot;different&quot; in general.

In 1995, Andrew Sullivan published the book &quot;Virtually Normal&quot;. Sullivan was a longtime critic of decadence in the gay community, but the book also did something that Bawer did not do. Sullivan criticized what he called the prohibitionist, liberationist, liberal, and conservative approaches to gay rights in favor of a more &quot;classical liberal&quot; or libertarian approach. 

In 1996, Bawer edited a collection of writings by mostly gay men and women titled &quot;Beyond Queer: Challenging Gay Left Orthodoxy&quot;. The authors--including Sullivan, Jonathan Rauch, Stephen H. Miller, Paul Varnell, and Norah Vincent--covered a wide range of topics and did not have one political message. Some authors were critical of how the gay rights movement was trying to achieve its goals, some were critical of certain goals such as hate crime laws, and others were critical of both the ends and the means. 

These books became labeled in leftist gay circles as the manifesto of a new &quot;Gay Right&quot; though many of the authors in these books would dispute being labeled conservative. Some had libertarian political sympathies. 

The Independent Gay Forum became a significant online site for U.S. lesbian and gay authors that endorsed limited-government conservative or libertarian alternatives to what they saw as the &#x27;impractical&#x27; center-left bias that &#x27;characterizes&#x27; lesbian and gay identity and politics. Additional writers include philosopher John Corvino, activist Richard Rosendall and columnist Jennifer Vanasco.

The website included hundreds of articles on a wide range of political and cultural topics -- marriage, sex, religion, economics, law, politics, activism, books, and gay identity. It also included &quot;IGF Culture Watch&quot;, a blog authored by Miller.

==Criticism of the IGF==
===Liberal criticism===
Critics of the Independent Gay Forum&#x27;s writings tend to be drawn between a division between liberals and conservatives and a second division between conservatives and libertarians. The Independent Gay Forum mission statement is to forge a new &quot;gay mainstream&quot; that is committed to more conservative-libertarian values; i.e., limited government, free market capitalism and personal responsibility.

Liberal critics felt that the Independent Gay Forum was too closely aligned with the Republican Party, to be called &quot;Independent&quot;, and that its writers demonstrated too little respect for cultural diversity, social justice and social responsibility. IGF writers would often endorse conservative Republican theories about the harm that gun control legislation would pose to lesbian and gay handgun owners, arguing that such controls infringe constitutional rights under the Second Amendment, welfare &#x27;reform&#x27;, Social Security privatization, abortion, and the neo-conservative theory about initiating military action in order to promote a freedom and democracy in certain nations such as Iran and Iraq.

In another was when Miller supported Republican Arnold Schwarzenegger&#x27;s successful bid to become governor of California, praising his socially liberal, fiscally conservative philosophy. Liberal critics pointed out that Miller was much less supportive of Vermont Governor Howard Dean&#x27;s bid for governor who ran on a similar neoliberal philosophy. 

In another case, gay liberals also argued that the articles about the late, former U.S. President Ronald Reagan were too partisan and tried to rewrite the Reagan Administration&#x27;s policies on AIDS and gay rights.

===Libertarian criticism===

Libertarians criticism of the IGF tends to be tied to a belief that the writers do not go far enough in advocating for reducing government regulations that limit citizens personal and economic life. Yet, a second source of criticism, among libertarians is that the IGF writers do not advocate election law reforms that would allow the Libertarian Party to freely compete for votes in elections. 

When Miller defended the work of gay Republicans by using an analogy of the benefits to the consumer that occur when there is more than one grocery store in a town. The message was that gay voters, like consumers, would get a better deal with more competition for their support. This angered many Libertarians as the &#x27;grocery store analogy&#x27; ignored the fact that government regulations as ballot access law make it hard for a third political party such as the Libertarian Party to compete for the support of gay citizens because they have to spend limited resources in order to obtain access on the general election ballot with a party affiliation. Thus some libertarians felt that Miller should have been a better advocate for greater voter choice.

==Topics==

Aside from Miller, other writers have contributed to the Independent Gay Forum and have written numerous articles about current events such as gay marriage, civil unions, the Marriage Protection Amendment, transgender rights, the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, hate crime or hate speech bans, 
the religious right, the military gay ban, Social Security, the War in Iraq, and the Second Amendment.

==References==

* Independent Gay Forum webpage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6016633" start="4" end="25" title="Independent Gay Forum" label="Independent Gay Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567308" start="170" end="181" title="Independent (voter)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q991543" start="697" end="708" title="Bruce Bawer" label="Bruce Bawer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="818" end="834" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q333034" start="1066" end="1076" title="bipartisan" label="bipartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640852" start="1445" end="1459" title="gay subculture" label="gay subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="1515" end="1536" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q507809" start="1621" end="1636" title="Andrew Sullivan" label="Andrew Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2092" end="2136" title="Beyond Queer: Challenging Gay Left Orthodoxy" label="Beyond Queer: Challenging Gay Left Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274216" start="2177" end="2191" title="Jonathan Rauch" label="Jonathan Rauch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2193" end="2210" title="Stephen H. Miller" label="Stephen H. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2212" end="2224" title="Paul Varnell" label="Paul Varnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563058" start="2230" end="2243" title="Norah Vincent" label="Norah Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="2354" end="2373" title="gay rights movement" label="gay rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="2718" end="2729" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="2968" end="2979" title="center-left" label="center-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178904" start="3149" end="3165" title="Jennifer Vanasco" label="Jennifer Vanasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q795071" start="3813" end="3831" title="limited government" label="limited government"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="3833" end="3844" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3971" end="3987" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338878" start="4084" end="4102" title="cultural diversity" label="cultural diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="4104" end="4118" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427818" start="4123" end="4144" title="social responsibility" label="social responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="4231" end="4242" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4285" end="4299" title="handgun owners" label="handgun owners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068570" start="4337" end="4358" title="constitutional rights" label="constitutional rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="4369" end="4385" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="4415" end="4430" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="4446" end="4454" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="4543" end="4550" title="Freedom (political)" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="4555" end="4564" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4592" end="4596" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="4601" end="4605" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="4656" end="4677" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4722" end="4732" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="4867" end="4874" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q337470" start="4884" end="4895" title="Howard Dean" label="Howard Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="4941" end="4951" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="5064" end="5077" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="5162" end="5166" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="5171" end="5181" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="5453" end="5465" title="libertarians" label="libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851891" start="6009" end="6022" title="ballot access" label="ballot access"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="6080" end="6097" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="6526" end="6538" title="gay marriage" label="gay marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="6540" end="6552" title="civil unions" label="civil unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110619" start="6558" end="6587" title="Federal Marriage Amendment" label="Marriage Protection Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517455" start="6589" end="6607" title="transgender rights" label="transgender rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374344" start="6613" end="6646" title="Employment Non-Discrimination Act" label="Employment Non-Discrimination Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="6648" end="6658" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="6662" end="6673" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266435" wikidata="Q720570" url="?curid=1266435" title="Cook (crater)">
<text>Cook is a lunar impact crater that lies in the western part of the Mare Fecunditatis, just to the southeast of the prominent crater Colombo. To the southwest is Monge.

The interior of this crater has been flooded with lava, leaving only a low rim projecting above the surface. This rim is not quite circular, and has a somewhat hexagonal appearance. The low wall is worn in a few places, particularly along the northeastern rim. There is a small crater called Cook A on the interior floor near the southeast rim.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Cook.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q720570" start="0" end="4" title="Cook (crater)" label="Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="10" end="15" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="16" end="29" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q26210" start="67" end="84" title="Mare Fecunditatis" label="Mare Fecunditatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110459" start="132" end="139" title="Colombo (crater)" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708909" start="161" end="166" title="Monge (crater)" label="Monge"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="219" end="223" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q83043" start="329" end="336" title="hexagon" label="hexagon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266437" wikidata="Q6396233" url="?curid=1266437" title="Kevin Eltife">
<text>Kevin Paul Eltife (born March 1, 1959) is an American businessman and former politician from Tyler, Texas. A Republican, served in the Texas Senate from 2004 through 2017. He was sworn in on August 15, 2004, after winning a special election to represent District 1. He declined to seek re-election in 2016 and was succeeded in office by fellow Republican Bryan Hughes.

==Early life and education==
Eltife was born in Tyler, Texas, and grew up there. He is a Lebanese American; all of his grandparents immigrated to the United States from Lebanon. His father died when he was under two years old.

==Business and political career==
Eltife is the owner and operator of Eltife Properties, a commercial real estate company.

He first entered politics in 1991, when he ran for a city council seat. He subsequently served as mayor of Tyler for two terms (six years).

He defeated Paul Sadler in the special election for Texas Senate; in 2012, Sadler was the unsuccessful Democratic nominee against Ted Cruz for one of the two Texas seats in the United States Senate. The position opened when state Senator and former Lieutenant Governor Bill Ratliff of Mount Pleasant resigned with less than a year remaining in his state Senate term.

Eltife was a strong proponent of raising sales taxes and reducing property taxes. He wishes to use additional sales tax revenue to reduce the debt of the Texas Department of Transportation.

He was considered one of the most liberal of the nineteen (as of 2013) Texas Senate Republicans, along with Robert L. Duncan of Lubbock, Kel Seliger of Amarillo, Bob Deuell of Greenville, and John Carona of Dallas, according to an analysis by Mark P. Jones of the political science department at Rice University in Houston. Jones also found that these Republicans saw passage of 90 percent of the bills for which they voted. Of these five senators, Deuell lost a runoff election on May 27, 2014, and Carona was narrowly defeated for re-nomination on March 4. Duncan, meanwhile, resigned from the Senate to become chancellor of the Texas Tech University System.

In 2015, Eltife announced that he would not seek reelection to the Senate in 2016. He was succeeded in office by Republican state Representative Bryan Hughes of Mineola, who defeated Republican state Representative David Simpson of Longview in the Republican primary and automatically won the seat because there was no Democratic opponent.

In January 2017, Governor Greg Abbott appointed Eltife, along with two others, as a regent of the University of Texas System.

==Electoral history==
===2006===


===2004===





==References==
==External links==
*Senate of Texas - Senator Kevin Eltife (official TX Senate website)
*Project Vote Smart - Senator Kevin P. Eltife (TX) profile
*&quot;Follow the Money&quot; - Kevin Eltife
**2006 campaign contributions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6396233" start="0" end="17" title="Kevin Eltife" label="Kevin Paul Eltife"/>
<link wikidata="Q499169" start="93" end="105" title="Tyler, Texas" label="Tyler, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="109" end="119" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="135" end="147" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="224" end="240" title="special election" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707957" start="254" end="264" title="Texas Senate, District 1" label="District 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980170" start="355" end="367" title="Bryan Hughes (politician)" label="Bryan Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q499169" start="418" end="430" title="Tyler, Texas" label="Tyler, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510842" start="459" end="476" title="Lebanese American" label="Lebanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="820" end="825" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153402" start="875" end="886" title="Paul Sadler" label="Paul Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="966" end="976" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="993" end="1001" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1040" end="1060" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q639115" start="1112" end="1131" title="Lieutenant Governor of Texas" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163770" start="1132" end="1144" title="Bill Ratliff" label="Bill Ratliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q125934" start="1148" end="1162" title="Mount Pleasant, Texas" label="Mount Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404327" start="1272" end="1283" title="Sales tax in the United States" label="sales taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="1297" end="1309" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q568743" start="1385" end="1419" title="Texas Department of Transportation" label="Texas Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1456" end="1463" title="Liberal (politics)" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346543" start="1530" end="1546" title="Robert L. Duncan" label="Robert L. Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385421" start="1559" end="1570" title="Kel Seliger" label="Kel Seliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q51691" start="1574" end="1582" title="Amarillo, Texas" label="Amarillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932275" start="1584" end="1594" title="Bob Deuell" label="Bob Deuell"/>
<link wikidata="Q976490" start="1598" end="1608" title="Greenville, Texas" label="Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225244" start="1614" end="1625" title="John Carona" label="John Carona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="1629" end="1635" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="1718" end="1733" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="1737" end="1744" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="1885" end="1900" title="runoff election" label="runoff election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407664" start="2053" end="2081" title="Texas Tech University System" label="Texas Tech University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980170" start="2229" end="2241" title="Bryan Hughes (Texas politician)" label="Bryan Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q982367" start="2245" end="2252" title="Mineola, Texas" label="Mineola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239815" start="2299" end="2312" title="David Simpson (Texas politician)" label="David Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q852645" start="2316" end="2324" title="Longview, Texas" label="Longview"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605224" start="2451" end="2462" title="Greg Abbott" label="Greg Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140391" start="2523" end="2549" title="University of Texas System" label="University of Texas System"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266443" wikidata="Q897403" url="?curid=1266443" title="Language school">
<text>A language school is a school where one studies a foreign language. Classes at a language school are usually geared towards, for example, communicative competence in a foreign language. Language learning in such schools typically supplements formal education or existing knowledge of a foreign language.

Students vary widely by age, educational background, work experience. They usually have the possibility of selecting a specific course according to their language proficiency. According to the &quot;Common European Framework of Reference for Languages&quot; (CEFR), there are six language levels that define student language proficiency based on their speaking, writing and reading skills.

==Language courses==

===English===

Globally, English language schools have seen the greatest demand over schools for other languages. Over one billion people are said to be learning English in a second language or foreign language context. In the United States alone, ESL learners make up over one-third of all adult, non-academic learners.

====Accreditations for English Language Schools====
In England, major accreditations include:

* British Council: Accredits schools meeting high standards in education, teacher qualifications, and facilities.
* English UK: Requires member schools to comply with strict quality standards.
* RELSA: Accredits schools based on rigorous criteria in teaching and facilities.
* Quality English: An international association ensuring top standards for independent schools.

In Malta, accreditation is provided by:

* FELTOM: Accredits schools that meet high-quality standards in teaching, qualifications, and facilities.

=== Arabic ===

Arabic has also grown in popularity in the last decade. Reasons include the continued growth of Islam worldwide (the Koran holy book is in Arabic), as well as cultural, economic and political reasons.

===Hindi===

The Hindi language along with the culture of the Indian subcontinent has started to become important due to recent foreign policies, global competitiveness, and emigration from the country. Hindi began to be introduced as a foreign language in some American schools in the 2000s. Instructors in the language were sought to teach from the kindergarten level right up to the university as part of the National Security Language Initiative.

==See also==
*Language education
*English language learning and teaching
*English as a Foreign or Second Language
*Français langue étrangère
*Arabic language school
*Second language acquisition

==References==
==External links==
* Council of Europe Language Policy Unit</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q897403" start="2" end="17" title="Language school" label="language school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914" start="23" end="29" title="school" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q150352" start="50" end="66" title="foreign language" label="foreign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193729" start="138" end="162" title="communicative competence" label="communicative competence"/>
<link wikidata="Q221385" start="564" end="568" title="CEFR" label="CEFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="743" end="759" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="893" end="908" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="945" end="958" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q45433" start="1137" end="1152" title="British Council" label="British Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1671" end="1677" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1767" end="1772" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="1788" end="1793" title="Koran" label="Koran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="1890" end="1895" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131237" start="2285" end="2322" title="National Security Language Initiative" label="National Security Language Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455196" start="2339" end="2357" title="Language education" label="Language education"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081060" start="2359" end="2397" title="English language learning and teaching" label="English language learning and teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q130192" start="2399" end="2438" title="English as a Foreign or Second Language" label="English as a Foreign or Second Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076284" start="2440" end="2465" title="Français langue étrangère" label="Français langue étrangère"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783431" start="2467" end="2489" title="Arabic language school" label="Arabic language school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455178" start="2491" end="2518" title="Second language acquisition" label="Second language acquisition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266444" wikidata="Q1337604" url="?curid=1266444" title="Yangelʹ">
<text>Yangel is a small lunar impact crater that is located in the irregular terrain to the north of the Mare Vaporum. Its diameter is 8 km. It was named after Soviet rocketry scientist Mikhail Kuzmich Yangel in 1973. This crater was formerly designated Manilius F.

It is a relatively solitary crater formation, and the nearest larger craters lie more than 100 kilometers distant. To the southeast of Yangel is the prominent crater Manilius. Conon is located to the northwest, near the flanks of the Montes Apenninus range.

Just to the north of Yangel is the small lunar mare named Lacus Felicitatis, or Lake of Happiness. To the northeast, forming a bay on the Mare Vaporum, is Sinus Fidei. A sinuous rille named Rima Conon runs along the middle of this feature, reaching the northern end.

This is a circular, bowl-shaped crater with a narrow outer rim. The interior floor has a relatively low albedo that matches the dark hue of the mare to the south.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* LTO-41C4 Yangel — L&amp;PI topographic map
*Yangel&#x27; at The Moon Wiki
*Rima Yangel&#x27; at The Moon Wiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1337604" start="0" end="6" title="Yangelʹ" label="Yangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="18" end="23" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="24" end="37" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q218379" start="99" end="111" title="Mare Vaporum" label="Mare Vaporum"/>
<link wikidata="Q463450" start="180" end="202" title="Mikhail Kuzmich Yangel" label="Mikhail Kuzmich Yangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100661" start="427" end="435" title="Manilius (crater)" label="Manilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q545153" start="437" end="442" title="Conon (crater)" label="Conon"/>
<link wikidata="Q499037" start="495" end="511" title="Montes Apenninus" label="Montes Apenninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="561" end="571" title="lunar mare" label="lunar mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q487133" start="578" end="595" title="Lacus Felicitatis" label="Lacus Felicitatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q487246" start="675" end="686" title="Sinus Fidei" label="Sinus Fidei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432092" start="698" end="703" title="rille" label="rille"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="892" end="898" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216526" start="1034" end="1049" title="topographic map" label="topographic map"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266447" wikidata="Q334316" url="?curid=1266447" title="Montaillou">
<text>Montaillou (; ) is a commune in the Ariège department in the south of France. Its original, medieval location was abandoned and the current village is a short distance away.

==History==
The village is best known for being the subject of Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie&#x27;s pioneering work of microhistory, &quot;Montaillou, village occitan&quot;. It analyzes the village in great detail over a thirty-year period from 1294 to 1324. Then a village of some 250 people, the daily routines of the people are in the records of Jacques Fournier, later Pope Benedict XII.

Montaillou was one of the last bastions of Albigensianism, the heresy also known as Catharism. Fournier, then the local bishop, launched an extensive inquisition involving dozens of lengthy interviews with the locals, all of which were faithfully recorded, as well as the arrest of the entire village in 1308. When Fournier became Pope he took the records of the investigation with him and they remain in the Vatican Library.

The medieval village has been abandoned and the modern village is located a short distance downhill. There are visible remains of houses and there are also old tracks and field markings. In medieval times, the old village was guarded by the Château de Montaillou, now a ruin. The village church, dedicated to Notre Dame de Carnesses, remains in use.
==Population==

==See also==
*Communes of the Ariège department

==References==

*Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, &quot;Montaillou: The Promised Land of Error.&quot; translated by Barbara Bray. New York: G. Braziller, c1978.
* Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, ed., &quot;Autour de Montaillou - un village occitan; histoire et religiosité d&#x27;une communauté villageoise au Moyen Âge. Actes du colloque de Montaillou (25-26-27 août 2000)&quot;. Castelnaud la Chapelle, 2001.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334316" start="0" end="10" title="Montaillou" label="Montaillou"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="21" end="28" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184" start="36" end="42" title="Ariège (department)" label="Ariège"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="43" end="53" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="70" end="76" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q314148" start="238" end="261" title="Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie" label="Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140541" start="288" end="300" title="microhistory" label="microhistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q667002" start="308" end="335" title="Montaillou (book)" label="Montaillou, village occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170389" start="518" end="534" title="Jacques Fournier" label="Jacques Fournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q170389" start="542" end="559" title="Pope Benedict XII" label="Pope Benedict XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="605" end="616" title="Albigensian" label="Albigensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="625" end="631" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="646" end="655" title="Catharism" label="Catharism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="712" end="723" title="inquisition" label="inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="971" end="986" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013141" start="1230" end="1251" title="Château de Montaillou" label="Château de Montaillou"/>
<link wikidata="Q241093" start="1369" end="1402" title="Communes of the Ariège department" label="Communes of the Ariège department"/>
<link wikidata="Q314148" start="1421" end="1444" title="Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie" label="Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858769" start="1512" end="1524" title="Barbara Bray" label="Barbara Bray"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266449" wikidata="Q2542924" url="?curid=1266449" title="Wolf (crater)">
<text>Wolf is a lunar impact crater that lies in the south-central part of the Mare Nubium, a lunar mare in the southern hemisphere of the Moon. It lies to the north-northwest of the walled plain Pitatus, and east-southeast of the prominent crater Bullialdus. It is named after the German astronomer Max Wolf.

The interior floor of this crater has been completely flooded by lava, leaving only an irregular, broken rim projecting slightly above the surface. The surviving rim is not quite circular, having outward bulges to the north and west. It rises to a maximum height of about 0.7 km. The smaller crater Wolf B has overlaid the southern rim, and the two have now merged into one formation. Low ridges connect to the exterior rim to the east and south.

== Satellite craters ==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Wolf.
== See also ==
* 827 Wolfiana
* 1217 Maximiliana
* Mons Wolff (Montes Apenninus)

== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Wolf at The Moon Wiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2542924" start="0" end="4" title="Wolf (crater)" label="Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="10" end="15" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="16" end="29" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q210716" start="73" end="84" title="Mare Nubium" label="Mare Nubium"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="88" end="98" title="lunar mare" label="lunar mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="133" end="137" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572138" start="190" end="197" title="Pitatus (crater)" label="Pitatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004491" start="242" end="252" title="Bullialdus (crater)" label="Bullialdus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76712" start="294" end="302" title="Max Wolf" label="Max Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="370" end="374" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q157308" start="934" end="946" title="827 Wolfiana" label="827 Wolfiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q137072" start="949" end="965" title="1217 Maximiliana" label="1217 Maximiliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q499037" start="968" end="978" title="Mons Wolff" label="Mons Wolff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266451" wikidata="Q2081617" url="?curid=1266451" title="Edgerrin James">
<text>Edgerrin Tyree James (; born August 1, 1978) is an American former professional football player who was a running back in the National Football League (NFL) for 11 seasons. He played college football at the University of Miami for the Miami Hurricanes. He was selected by the Indianapolis Colts fourth overall in the 1999 NFL draft. James also played for the Arizona Cardinals and Seattle Seahawks.

He was named AP NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year in 1999 and earned four Pro Bowl selections and three All-Pro selections. James is the Colts&#x27; all-time leader in career rushing yards, attempts, and touchdowns. James is 13th on the all-time rushing list, and a member of the 10,000 Yards rushing club. He was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame as a member of the Class of 2020.

==College career==

James was recruited out of Florida&#x27;s Immokalee High School by the University of Miami. He proved to be one of the most successful running backs in the school&#x27;s history.

James ranks third in all-time University of Miami rushing yards. He was the only running back in school history to post two consecutive seasons with 1,000-plus rushing yards, and he ranks first in school history with the most 100-plus rushing games (14). All single season records held by James have since been broken by former Baltimore Ravens running back Willis McGahee.

James was inducted into the University of Miami Sports Hall of Fame on April 23, 2009, at its 41st Annual Induction Banquet at Jungle Island in Miami.

===College statistics===
==Professional career==
===Indianapolis Colts===
The Indianapolis Colts selected James in the first round of the 1999 NFL draft as the fourth overall pick. James signed a seven-year, $49 million rookie contract. Some critics believed that the Colts made a mistake by choosing James over the reigning Heisman Trophy winner Ricky Williams.

James quieted the critics and was an immediate success, and was named the 1999 NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year by the Associated Press. James won the NFL rushing title in his first two seasons. He was the last NFL player to win the rushing title in his rookie season before Ezekiel Elliott. Six games into the 2001 season, he tore his ACL.

James had over 1,500 rushing yards in both the 2004 and 2005 seasons.

James left Indianapolis as its all-time leading rusher with 9,226 yards. After James&#x27;s departure in March 2006, the Colts won Super Bowl XLI the following season. Although he was not on the team at the time, Colts owner Jim Irsay still sent him a Super Bowl ring.

On September 23, 2012, James was inducted into the Indianapolis Colts Ring of Honor during the week 3 game against the Jacksonville Jaguars.

===Arizona Cardinals===
James signed a four-year, $30 million deal with the Arizona Cardinals on March 23, 2006. With the retirement of Corey Dillon, James became the active leader in career rushing yards at the start of 2007, and remained so through his last game in November 2009 (though he would be passed by LaDainian Tomlinson by the end of the season). James went through a stretch of 10 games out of the 2008 season where he carried the ball only 20 times. Through this time, Ken Whisenhunt brought him in strictly as a pass protector. In Week 17 against the Seattle Seahawks, James carried the ball 14 times for 100 yards. James said he would not come back to Arizona following the 2009 NFL playoffs, despite a year left on his contract. In the Cardinals&#x27; first playoff game since 1998, James averaged 4.6 yards per carry against the Atlanta Falcons in the Wild Card Round. In the Divisional Round of the playoffs, James rushed for 57 yards and a touchdown in the Cardinals&#x27; upset victory over the heavily favored Carolina Panthers. James rushed for 73 yards in the Cardinals&#x27; 32–25 win over the Philadelphia Eagles in the NFC Championship. James rushed 9 times for 33 yards in the Cardinals&#x27; 27–23 loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers in Super Bowl XLIII.

His long-time girlfriend, the mother of his children, died of cancer in April 2009. After this, he asked for his release from the team, and the Cardinals honored his request on April 28.

===Seattle Seahawks===
After spending the 2009 offseason grieving with his four children and declining NFL offers, James finally agreed to a one-year, $2 million contract with the Seattle Seahawks on August 24, 2009, missing the team&#x27;s training camp. The team released running back T. J. Duckett to make room for James on the roster. However, James rushed for only 125 yards on a career-low 46 carries. He played in only seven games, and on November 3, 2009, Seattle cut him from the team.

On July 26, 2011, James announced his retirement from professional football. He had amassed 12,246 rushing yards (11th all-time at the time of his last game in 2009) and 80 rushing touchdowns (15th).

===Colts franchise records===
* Most career rushing yards (9,226)
* Most career rushing touchdowns (64)
* Best career rushing yards per game average: 96.1
* Most seasons with 1,000 rushing yards (5)

==NFL career statistics==
===Regular season===
==Personal life==
James resides in Miami, Florida. He has 6 children. 4 of the children are with his long-time girlfriend Andia Wilson:
* Edquisha &quot;Qui&quot; James has a bachelor&#x27;s degree from Howard University and a juris doctor from the University of the District of Columbia.
* Eyahna James is an R&amp;B singer who goes by the stage name Eyahna J.
* Edgerrin &quot;Jizzle&quot; James Jr. is on the basketball team at the University of Cincinnati.
* Euro James.
Andia Wilson died in 2009 from leukemia at the age of 30. Her death led to James&#x27; retirement from the NFL, so he could focusing on raising his children. 
James&#x27; other children are: 
* Eden James, a running back for Howard.
* Emani James, who attends North Carolina A&amp;T.

Edgerrin James is the second cousin of LA Chargers safety Derwin James.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2081617" start="0" end="20" title="Edgerrin James" label="Edgerrin Tyree James"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="80" end="88" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="106" end="118" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="126" end="150" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="183" end="199" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="207" end="226" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827329" start="235" end="251" title="Miami Hurricanes football" label="Miami Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="276" end="294" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714942" start="317" end="331" title="1999 NFL draft" label="1999 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="359" end="376" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="381" end="397" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q837137" start="413" end="448" title="National Football League Rookie of the Year Award" label="AP NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="473" end="481" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706900" start="503" end="510" title="All-Pro" label="All-Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833896" start="679" end="704" title="List of National Football League career rushing yards leaders" label="10,000 Yards rushing club"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="728" end="753" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005273" start="851" end="872" title="Immokalee High School" label="Immokalee High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="880" end="899" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="944" end="957" title="running backs" label="running backs"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="1019" end="1038" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="1317" end="1333" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329520" start="1347" end="1361" title="Willis McGahee" label="Willis McGahee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="1594" end="1612" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714942" start="1654" end="1668" title="1999 NFL draft" label="1999 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="1841" end="1855" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349267" start="1863" end="1877" title="Ricky Williams" label="Ricky Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q837137" start="1959" end="1991" title="NFL Rookie of the Year Award" label="NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="1999" end="2015" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619019" start="2155" end="2170" title="Ezekiel Elliott" label="Ezekiel Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q611127" start="2216" end="2219" title="Anterior cruciate ligament" label="ACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q597607" start="2424" end="2438" title="Super Bowl XLI" label="Super Bowl XLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195842" start="2518" end="2527" title="Jim Irsay" label="Jim Irsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986057" start="2614" end="2646" title="Indianapolis Colts Ring of Honor" label="Indianapolis Colts Ring of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="2682" end="2702" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="2781" end="2798" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738" start="2841" end="2853" title="Corey Dillon" label="Corey Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q537463" start="3017" end="3036" title="LaDainian Tomlinson" label="LaDainian Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758635" start="3188" end="3202" title="Ken Whisenhunt" label="Ken Whisenhunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="3824" end="3843" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="3944" end="3963" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q853768" start="3967" end="3983" title="Super Bowl XLIII" label="Super Bowl XLIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="4354" end="4370" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="4448" end="4460" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668333" start="4461" end="4474" title="T. J. Duckett" label="T. J. Duckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="5153" end="5158" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="5160" end="5167" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="5553" end="5577" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="5624" end="5632" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="5818" end="5824" title="Howard University" label="Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272220" start="5917" end="5928" title="Los Angeles Chargers" label="LA Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22005616" start="5936" end="5948" title="Derwin James" label="Derwin James"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266454" wikidata="Q7812650" url="?curid=1266454" title="Todd Staples">
<text>Douglas Todd Staples (born August 24, 1963) is the President of the Texas Oil &amp; Gas Association, the oldest and largest oil and gas trade association in Texas representing all facets of the industry including production, pipelines, refineries and export facilities. Staples is the former two-term Texas Commissioner of Agriculture and served with distinction in the Texas Senate and House of Representatives for 12 years. He unsuccessfully ran for the Republican nomination for lieutenant governor in 2014.

==Background==
Staples was reared in Palestine, the seat of government of his native Anderson County in East Texas. He graduated from Palestine High School, where he was an active member of the Future Farmers of America. While in college, he served from 1981 to 1982 as state vice-president of the FFA. He attended Texas A&amp;M University in College Station and graduated magna cum laude in 1984 with a Bachelor of Science in Agricultural Economics. He started a plant nursery and later became involved in cattle ranching with his family. He also owned a real estate business. For a time, he was an instructor at Trinity Valley Community College in Palestine.

Staples has two adult children from his first marriage, which ended in divorce.

Staples is a Southern Baptist deacon in his local church.

==Leading the Texas Oil &amp; Gas Association==
After a national search, Staples was selected to lead the Texas Oil &amp; Gas Association (TXOGA) in 2014 because of his broad range of experience and leadership capabilities, according to the TXOGA Board of Directors. Representing the largest oil and national gas state in the nation, Staples implemented a multi-faceted approach to educate voters and elected officials on the industry&#x27;s operations, commitments and contributions including regular communications with the media, educational events, speaking engagements across Texas and robust digital outreach efforts.

During his tenure, Staples has led several bipartisan efforts, including the creation and funding of TexNet Seismic Monitoring Program at the University of Texas Bureau of Economic Geology and the creation of the Texas Methane and Flaring Coalition, an industry-led effort to reduce methane emissions in oil and natural gas operations. He created regional Energy Summits featuring leaders like the Mayor of Houston and the President of Nasdaq and an annual Energy Elevated Technology Showcase to highlight industry innovation.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, Texas Governor Greg Abbott and the Texas Railroad Commission called on Staples to serve in leadership roles to enable Texas to recover from the pandemic&#x27;s impact on the economy.

He serves as an expert witness for the Texas Legislature.

==Political career==
Staples served on the non-partisan Palestine City Council from 1989 to 1991. In February 1995, he was elected to the Texas House of Representatives District 11 seat in a special election to replace Elton Bomer, who had been appointed state insurance commissioner by newly elected Governor George W. Bush. In a contest against two Democrats, Staples avoided a runoff by about sixty votes, having collected 50.6 percent of the vote.

In 2000, Staples entered the race for the District 3 seat in the Texas Senate, vacated by Drew Nixon. Despite personal scandal surrounding Nixon, Staples held the seat for the Republican Party, having received more than 60 percent of the vote in the general election. He represented Anderson, Angelina, Cherokee, Hardin, Henderson, Jasper, Nacogdoches, Newton, Polk, Sabine, San Augustine, San Jacinto, Shelby and Tyler counties, and portions of Montgomery and Smith counties.

In the Senate, Staples was the chairman of the Transportation &amp; Homeland Security Committee, the Workers Compensation Select Interim Committee and the Texas Senate Republican Caucus. Staples sponsored and helped to pass a state constitutional amendment defining marriage as between one man and one woman. He was the vice-chair of the State Affairs Committee and the Veteran Affairs &amp; Military Installations Committee.

Staples was unopposed for the Republican nomination for Agriculture Commissioner in 2006 when the incumbent Susan Combs instead was elected Texas Comptroller to succeed Carole Strayhorn. Staples defeated Democrat Hank Gilbert and Libertarian Clay Woolam in the November 7, 2006, general election. He received 2,307,406 votes (54.77 percent), a margin of 547,000 votes over Gilbert.

In 2010, Staples ran for re-election as Agriculture Commissioner and won with more than 60 percent of the votes, again against Democrat Hank Gilbert.

Staples explained that in his role as commissioner he is compelled to tell the story of agricultural success: &quot;It&#x27;s up to us to engage with consumers because we know there are those who do not appreciate the work that&#x27;s being done and what that means for available and affordable food supply.&quot;

Staples was recognized by Texas A&amp;M University as an accomplished public servant and enthusiastic champion for rural Texas and was noted for protecting consumers by initiating an unprecedented sweeping investigation into fraudulent operators of convenience stores suspected of defrauding unaware buyers of fuel. He partnered with then-Attorney General Greg Abbott, who obtained a jury verdict of $30 million against a Houston-based owner of convenience stores.

On September 18, 2014, Staples announced his resignation as Texas Agriculture Commissioner to become the president of the Texas Oil &amp; Gas Association.

==2014 primary for lieutenant governor==
Though Staples enlisted baseball great Nolan Ryan as his campaign chairman, he finished third in the primary for lieutenant governor with 235,981 votes (17.8 percent).

==Positions==

=== Same-sex Marriage ===
In 2003, Staples sponsored a bill that prohibited the State of Texas from recognizing same-sex marriages, then again in 2005, sponsored and campaigned for another bill that successfully amended the Texas Constitution to limit marriage to one man and one woman.

=== &quot;Meatless Mondays&quot; ===
In 2014, Staples criticized school districts that adopted &quot;meatless Monday&quot; policies, stating that &quot;restricting children&#x27;s meal choice to not include meat is irresponsible and has no place in our schools.&quot;

==Electoral history==
;2014



;2010
Texas general election, 2010: Texas Commissioner of Agriculture
;2006



;2002


;2000


;2000


==References==


==External links==
* Campaign site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7812650" start="0" end="20" title="Todd Staples" label="Douglas Todd Staples"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707628" start="301" end="334" title="Texas Commissioner of Agriculture" label="Texas Commissioner of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="456" end="466" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156895" start="467" end="477" title="nomination" label="nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q639115" start="482" end="501" title="Lieutenant Governor of Texas" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="564" end="582" title="county seat" label="seat of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q108391" start="597" end="612" title="Anderson County, Texas" label="Anderson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576428" start="616" end="626" title="East Texas" label="East Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127300" start="646" end="667" title="Palestine High School (Texas)" label="Palestine High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039073" start="706" end="731" title="Future Farmers of America" label="Future Farmers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="827" end="851" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q695511" start="855" end="870" title="College Station, Texas" label="College Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="916" end="935" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q396340" start="939" end="961" title="Agricultural Economics" label="Agricultural Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q155511" start="976" end="989" title="nursery (horticulture)" label="plant nursery"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="1019" end="1025" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="1026" end="1034" title="ranching" label="ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="1068" end="1079" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843006" start="1126" end="1158" title="Trinity Valley Community College" label="Trinity Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="1268" end="1284" title="Southern Baptist" label="Southern Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="1285" end="1291" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="2783" end="2795" title="non-partisan" label="non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="2878" end="2908" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="Texas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="2931" end="2947" title="special election" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367839" start="2959" end="2970" title="Elton Bomer" label="Elton Bomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707634" start="3001" end="3023" title="Texas Department of Insurance" label="insurance commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="3041" end="3049" title="Governor of Texas" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="3050" end="3064" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3091" end="3100" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707980" start="3235" end="3245" title="Texas Senate, District 3" label="District 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="3258" end="3270" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307250" start="3283" end="3293" title="Drew Nixon" label="Drew Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108391" start="3476" end="3484" title="Anderson County, Texas" label="Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108379" start="3486" end="3494" title="Angelina County, Texas" label="Angelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q108842" start="3496" end="3504" title="Cherokee County, Texas" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q109270" start="3506" end="3512" title="Hardin County, Texas" label="Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112793" start="3514" end="3523" title="Henderson County, Texas" label="Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q110575" start="3525" end="3531" title="Jasper County, Texas" label="Jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q156455" start="3533" end="3544" title="Nacogdoches County, Texas" label="Nacogdoches"/>
<link wikidata="Q112565" start="3546" end="3552" title="Newton County, Texas" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q113375" start="3554" end="3558" title="Polk County, Texas" label="Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q26889" start="3560" end="3566" title="Sabine County, Texas" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26744" start="3568" end="3581" title="San Augustine County, Texas" label="San Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111744" start="3583" end="3594" title="San Jacinto County, Texas" label="San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q110389" start="3596" end="3602" title="Shelby County, Texas" label="Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q26502" start="3607" end="3612" title="Tyler County, Texas" label="Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q26756" start="3639" end="3649" title="Montgomery County, Texas" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q156278" start="3654" end="3659" title="Smith County, Texas" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="4196" end="4205" title="incumbent" label="incumbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647696" start="4206" end="4217" title="Susan Combs" label="Susan Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350359" start="4238" end="4255" title="Texas Comptroller" label="Texas Comptroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044694" start="4267" end="4283" title="Carole Strayhorn" label="Carole Strayhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708254" start="4359" end="4393" title="Texas general election, 2006" label="November 7, 2006, general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q721948" start="5649" end="5659" title="Nolan Ryan" label="Nolan Ryan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266457" wikidata="Q733598" url="?curid=1266457" title="Moses ben Jacob Cordovero">
<text>Moses ben Jacob Cordovero ( &quot;Moshe Kordovero&quot; ‎; 1522–1570) was a central figure in the historical development of Kabbalah, leader of a mystical school in the Ottoman Empire in 16th-century Safed, located in the modern State of Israel. He is known by the acronym the Ramak ().

After the medieval flourishing of Kabbalah, centered on the Zohar, attempts were made to give a complete intellectual system to its theology, such as by Meir ibn Gabbai. Influenced by the earlier success of Jewish philosophy in articulating a rational study of Jewish thought, Moshe Cordovero produced the first full integration of the previous differing schools in Kabbalistic interpretation. While he was a mystic inspired by the opaque imagery of the Zohar, &quot;Cordoverian Kabbalah&quot; utilised the conceptual framework of evolving cause and effect from the Infinite to the Finite in systemising Kabbalah, the method of philosophical style discourse he held most effective in describing a process that reflects sequential logic and coherence. His encyclopedic works became a central stage in the development of Kabbalah.

Immediately after him in Safed, Isaac Luria articulated a subsequent system of Kabbalistic theology, with new supra-rational doctrines recasting previous Kabbalistic thought. While Lurianism displaced the Cordoverian scheme and became predominant in Judaism, its followers read Cordoverian works in harmony with their teachings. Where to them, Lurianism described the &quot;World&quot; of Rectification, Cordovero described the pre-Rectification World. Both articulations of the 16th century mystical Renaissance in Safed gave Kabbalah an intellectual prominence to rival Medieval Rationalism, whose social influence on Judaism had waned after the Expulsion from Spain.

==Biography==
===Early life===
The name Cordovero indicates that his family originated in Córdoba, Spain and perhaps fled from there during the expulsion of 1492 ensuing from the Spanish Inquisition. His Hebrew signature, however (Cordoeiro), strongly suggests a long-lasting residence in Portugal.

Moses was either born in or moved to Safed in the Land of Israel, the city that was soon to become famed as a center of Kabbalah and mystical creativity. Albeit not involved in mystical studies until his twentieth year, he soon after gained a reputation of an extraordinary genius and a prolific writer. Besides his knowledge in kabbalah, he was a Talmudic scholar and a man of commanding mastery in Jewish philosophical thought who was respected in these fields. Contrary to popular belief, however, he was not one of the rabbis who received the special semicha (&quot;ordination&quot;) from Jacob Berab in 1538, alongside Joseph Karo, Cordovero&#x27;s teacher of halakha, Moses ben Joseph di Trani, Yosef Sagis, and Moshe Alshich. As a whole, Moses&#x27; contributions to posterity were in speculative and performative Kabbalah, but during his lifetime he was the renowned head of the Yeshiva for Portuguese immigrants in Safed.

===Scholarship===
According to his testimony in the introduction to &quot;Pardes Rimonim&quot;, in 1542, at the age of twenty, Moses heard a &quot;heavenly voice&quot; urging him to study Kabbalah with his brother-in-law, Shlomo Alkabetz, composer of the mystical song Lecha Dodi. He was thus initiated into the mysteries of the Zohar. The young Moses not only mastered the text but decided to organize the kabbalistic themes leading to his day and present them in an organized fashion. This led to the composition of his first book, &quot;Pardes Rimonim&quot; &quot;Orchard of Pomegranates&quot;, which was completed in 1548 and secured his reputation as a brilliant Kabbalist and a lucid thinker. The &quot;Pardes&quot;, as it is known, was a systemization of all Kabbalistic thought up to that time and featured the author&#x27;s attempt at a reconciliation of various early schools with the conceptual teachings of the &quot;Zohar&quot; to demonstrate an essential unity and self-consistent philosophical basis of Kabbalah.

His second work, a magnum opus titled &quot;Precious Light&quot; (), was a 16-volume commentary on the Zoharic literature in its entirety and a work to which Ramak had devoted most of his life. Some other books for which he is known are the &quot;Tomer Devorah&quot; (&quot;Palm Tree of Deborah&quot;), in which he utilizes the Kabbalistic concepts of the Sefirot to illuminate a system of morals and ethics; &quot;Ohr Neerav&quot;, a justification of and insistence upon the importance of Kabbalah study and an introduction to the methods explicated in Pardes Rimonim; &quot;Elimah Rabbati&quot;, a highly abstract treatise on kabbalistic concerns revolving around the Godhead and its relationship to the sefirot; and the &quot;Sefer Gerushin&quot;, a short and intimate composition which features the highly devotional slant of Cordovero, as well as his asceticism and religious piety. Certain parts of Moses&#x27; works are still manuscripts, whereas his existing writings suggest many other compositions which he either intended to write or had written, but were lost.

===Disciples===
Around 1550 he founded a Kabbalah academy in Safed in the Damascus Eyalet of Ottoman Palestine, which he led for approximately twenty years until his death. He is buried in Old Cemetery of Tzfat / Safed. His disciples included Eliyahu de Vidas, author of the &quot;Reshit Chochmah&quot; &quot;Beginning of Wisdom&quot;, and Chaim Vital, who later became the official recorder and disseminator of the teachings of Isaac Luria.

Moses was survived by a wife, the sister of Solomon Alkabetz, whose name remains unknown and by his son Gedaliah (1562–1625). Gedaliah was the impetus behind the publication of some of Moses&#x27; books in Venice c. 1584–7. Gedaliah was buried in Jerusalem in the Damascus Eyalet, where he had spent most of his adult life after returning from Venice.

==Succession of Kabbalistic interpretation after the Ramak==
According to tradition, Isaac Luria (known by the acronym &quot;Ari&quot; or &quot;Arizal&quot;) arrived in Safed on the exact day of the funeral of Moshe Cordovero in 1570. When he joined in the funeral procession, he realised that only he saw a pillar of fire following the Ramak&#x27;s presence. The Zohar describes this spiritual revelation as a sign to the individual who sees it, that he is meant to inherit the succession of leadership from the departed person. However, as Luria had been instructed to find his chosen disciple in Safed, Haim Vital, to reveal his new teachings to, he avoided accepting Kabbalistic leadership until six months later, when Rabbi Haim Vital approached him. The Ari only lived for two years after this, until 1572, but in those few months he revolutionised the conceptual system of Kabbalah, with his new doctrines and philosophical system.

The two schools of Cordoveran and Lurianic Kabbalah give two alternative accounts and synthesis of the complete theology of Kabbalah until then, based on their interpretation of the Zohar. After the public dissemination of the Zohar in medieval times, various attempts were made to give a complete intellectual system of theology to its different schools and interpretations. Influenced by the earlier rational success of Jewish philosophy, especially the work of Maimonides, in producing a systematic intellectual articulation of Judaism, the Ramak achieved the first accepted systemisation of Kabbalah, based on its rational categorisation and study. Subsequent followers of the Ari saw their teachings as harmonious with, and a deeper interpretation of the Zohar and the Ramak&#x27;s system, but the new system of Isaac Luria revealed completely new doctrines, as well as new descriptions of the earlier ideas of Kabbalah. In time, Lurianic Kabbalah emerged as the dominant system; however, the works of the Ramak are still highly esteemed and widely studied, as well.

==Among the Ramak&#x27;s most visible books==
# &quot;Pardes Rimonim&quot; (&quot;An Orchard of Pomegranates&quot;) — Ramak&#x27;s first book, an encyclopedic synthesis of the main trends of kabbalistic thought with numerous diagrams, which secured his reputation as a mystical genius.
# &quot;Ohr Yakar&quot; (&quot;A Precious Light&quot;) — a magnum opus of some 16 volumes in its extant manuscript form, which had occupied Ramak throughout his adult life - a classic commentary on the Zohar, Sefer Yetzirah and the Zoharic literary offshoots. Its publication ended around 2005 in Jerusalem (some 22 volumes). Certain parts, such as Tefilah le-Moshe and Shiur Qomah, were previously published as separate works.
#&quot;Tomer Devorah&quot; (&quot;The Palm Tree of Deborah&quot;) — a popular work of Musar literature based on kabbalistic principles. It has been translated into English by Louis Jacobs (1960) and by Rabbi Moshe Miller (1993). The first chapter was translated with an extensive commentary by Henry Abramson (2014).
# &quot;Eilima Rabbati&quot; — of which two-thirds is still unpublished.
# &quot;Or Ne&#x27;erav&quot; (&quot;A Pleasant Light,&quot; or perhaps &quot;A Mixed Light&quot; or &quot;A Darkened Light&quot;) — An annotated English edition was produced by Ira Robinson (1994).
# &quot;Sefer Gerushin&quot; (&quot;The Book of Banishments&quot;) — A disclosure of Ramak&#x27;s fellowship and their devotional piety in the Galilean outskirts of Safed. A highly informative text concerning Ramak&#x27;s devotional piety and the use of landscape as the negotiator between heaven and earth.

==Notes==
==External links==
* Rabbi Moshe Cordovero
* Tomer Devorah (The Palm Tree of Deborah) - Cordovero&#x27;s classic text
* Moses Cordovero&#x27;s Meditations for the Ten Days of Repentance
* The Ramak
* Jewish Encyclopedia article
* &quot;The Unity of God&quot; - from The Garden of Pomegranates
* Video Lecture on Rabbi Moshe Cordevero by Henry Abramson of Touro College South
* Translation of First Chapter of Tomer Devorah excepted from Henry Abramson&#x27;s The Kabbalah of Forgiveness.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q733598" start="0" end="25" title="Moses ben Jacob Cordovero" label="Moses ben Jacob Cordovero"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="124" end="132" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188336" start="200" end="205" title="Safed" label="Safed"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="229" end="244" title="Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148801" start="265" end="272" title="Hebrew acronyms" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q733598" start="277" end="282" title="Moses ben Jacob Cordovero" label="Ramak"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="322" end="330" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="348" end="353" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391090" start="441" end="456" title="Meir ben Ezekiel ibn Gabbai" label="Meir ibn Gabbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="495" end="512" title="Jewish philosophy" label="Jewish philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q846856" start="819" end="827" title="Emanationism" label="evolving"/>
<link wikidata="Q390874" start="828" end="844" title="Ohr" label="cause and effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302121" start="854" end="862" title="Ein Sof" label="Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093529" start="870" end="876" title="Four Worlds" label="Finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q339509" start="1150" end="1161" title="Isaac Luria" label="Isaac Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093529" start="1492" end="1497" title="Four Worlds" label="World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813312" start="1507" end="1520" title="Tikun (Kabbalah)" label="Rectification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813312" start="1546" end="1563" title="Tohu (Kabbalah)" label="pre-Rectification"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="1699" end="1710" title="Jewish philosophy" label="Rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424558" start="1766" end="1786" title="Expulsion of Jews from Spain" label="Expulsion from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="1879" end="1886" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1888" end="1893" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="1968" end="1987" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q188336" start="2126" end="2131" title="Safed" label="Safed"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="2139" end="2153" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="2209" end="2217" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="2437" end="2443" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="2489" end="2509" title="Jewish philosophy" label="Jewish philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788287" start="2644" end="2651" title="semicha" label="semicha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909966" start="2682" end="2693" title="Jacob Berab" label="Jacob Berab"/>
<link wikidata="Q467148" start="2713" end="2724" title="Joseph Karo" label="Joseph Karo"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="2754" end="2761" title="halakha" label="halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949234" start="2763" end="2788" title="Moses ben Joseph di Trani" label="Moses ben Joseph di Trani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2790" end="2801" title="Yosef Sagis" label="Yosef Sagis"/>
<link wikidata="Q786391" start="2807" end="2820" title="Moshe Alshich" label="Moshe Alshich"/>
<link wikidata="Q48217" start="3243" end="3258" title="Shlomo Alkabetz" label="Shlomo Alkabetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521662" start="3290" end="3300" title="Lecha Dodi" label="Lecha Dodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="3350" end="3355" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136547" start="3561" end="3575" title="Pardes Rimonim" label="Pardes Rimonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="4069" end="4080" title="masterpiece" label="magnum opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q367054" start="4297" end="4310" title="Tomer Devorah" label="Tomer Devorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q660267" start="4406" end="4413" title="Sefirot" label="Sefirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803873" start="4906" end="4916" title="Jewish asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934822" start="5198" end="5213" title="Damascus Eyalet" label="Damascus Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362066" start="5367" end="5383" title="Eliyahu de Vidas" label="Eliyahu de Vidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315371" start="5405" end="5420" title="Reshit Chochmah" label="Reshit Chochmah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302424" start="5464" end="5475" title="Chaim Vital" label="Chaim Vital"/>
<link wikidata="Q339509" start="5553" end="5564" title="Isaac Luria" label="Isaac Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="5814" end="5823" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q339509" start="6005" end="6016" title="Isaac Luria" label="Isaac Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="6284" end="6289" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302424" start="6526" end="6536" title="Haim Vital" label="Haim Vital"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="7042" end="7047" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="7282" end="7299" title="Jewish philosophy" label="Jewish philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="7324" end="7334" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="7455" end="7463" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136547" start="7987" end="8001" title="Pardes Rimonim" label="Pardes Rimonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q13188" start="8029" end="8040" title="Pomegranate" label="Pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="8278" end="8289" title="masterpiece" label="magnum opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147199" start="8428" end="8442" title="Sefer Yetzirah" label="Sefer Yetzirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q367054" start="8654" end="8667" title="Tomer Devorah" label="Tomer Devorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q213633" start="8698" end="8705" title="Deborah" label="Deborah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781249" start="8733" end="8749" title="Musar literature" label="Musar literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891071" start="8822" end="8834" title="Louis Jacobs" label="Louis Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q608773" start="8941" end="8955" title="Henry Abramson" label="Henry Abramson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436646" start="9215" end="9227" title="Ira Robinson" label="Ira Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q608773" start="9892" end="9906" title="Henry Abramson" label="Henry Abramson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739865" start="9910" end="9929" title="Touro College South" label="Touro College South"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266458" wikidata="Q1478089" url="?curid=1266458" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score">
<text>The Tony Award for Best Original Score is the Tony Award given to the composers and lyricists of the best original score written for a musical or play in that year. The score consists of music and/or lyrics. To be eligible, a score must be written specifically for the theatre and must be original; compilations of non-theatrical music or compilations of earlier theatrical music are not eligible for consideration.

==History==
The award has undergone a number of minor changes. In 1947, 1950, 1951, and 1962, the award went to the composer only. Otherwise, the award has gone to the composer and lyricist for their combined contributions, except for 1971 when the two awards were split (although Stephen Sondheim won both, for &quot;Company)&quot;.

The only tie in this category occurred in 1993, when Fred Ebb &amp; John Kander (&quot;Kiss of the Spider Woman&quot;) and Pete Townshend (&quot;The Who&#x27;s Tommy&quot;) shared the award.

In only ten years have non-musical plays been nominated for Tony Awards in this category: &quot;Much Ado About Nothing&quot; in 1973; &quot;The Good Doctor&quot; in 1974; &quot;The Song of Jacob Zulu&quot; in 1993; &quot;Twelfth Night&quot; in 1999; &quot;Enron&quot; and &quot;Fences&quot; in 2010; &quot;Peter and the Starcatcher&quot; and &quot;One Man, Two Guvnors&quot; in 2012; &quot;Angels in America&quot; in 2018; &quot;To Kill a Mockingbird&quot; in 2019; &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot;, &quot;The Inheritance&quot;, &quot;The Rose Tattoo&quot;, &quot;Slave Play&quot;, and &quot;The Sound Inside&quot; in 2020; and &quot;Stereophonic&quot; in 2024. Because the Broadway season of 2019-2020 was shortened due to the COVID-19 pandemic, only four musicals were eligible for Tony Awards; three were jukebox musicals and the fourth was &quot;The Lightning Thief&quot;, the only musical of the season with original music. &quot;The Lightning Thief&quot; was not nominated for any Tony Awards, meaning that every nominee in this category in 2020 was a play rather than a musical.

In 2013, Cyndi Lauper became the first woman to win the award solo for &quot;Kinky Boots&quot;. In 2015, Lisa Kron and Jeanine Tesori became the first all-woman team to win the award for &quot;Fun Home&quot;.

Toby Marlow is the youngest person to win the award; he was 27 when he won in tandem with Lucy Moss for &quot;Six&quot;. Adolph Green is the oldest person to win the award; he was 76 when he won for &quot;The Will Rogers Follies&quot;. If T. S. Eliot were alive when he won for &quot;Cats&quot;, he would have been 94. Eliot is one of two people to receive the award posthumously, the other being Jonathan Larson, who won for &quot;Rent&quot;. He would have been 36.

==Winners and nominees==
===1940s===
===1950s===
===1960s===
===1970s===
===1980s===
===1990s===
===2000s===
===2010s===
===2020s===
==Multiple wins==
; 6 Wins
* Stephen Sondheim (3 consecutive)

; 3 Wins
* Cy Coleman (2 consecutive)
* Betty Comden
* Fred Ebb
* Adolph Green
* John Kander
* Andrew Lloyd Webber
; 2 Wins
* Jerry Herman
* Robert Lopez
* Lin-Manuel Miranda
* Tim Rice
* Richard Rodgers
* Jeanine Tesori
* Maury Yeston
* Jason Robert Brown
==Multiple nominations==
; 11 Nominations
* Fred Ebb
* John Kander
* Andrew Lloyd Webber

; 10 Nominations
* Stephen Sondheim

; 9 Nominations
* Cy Coleman

; 7 Nominations
* Tim Rice

; 6 Nominations
* Jeanine Tesori

; 5 Nominations
* Don Black
* Jerry Herman
* Richard Maltby Jr.
* Alan Menken
* Stephen Schwartz
* David Yazbek

; 4 Nominations
* Jason Robert Brown
* Betty Comden
* Adolph Green
* Sheldon Harnick
* Tom Kitt
* Richard Rodgers
* Charles Strouse

; 3 Nominations
* Howard Ashman
* Chad Beguelin
* Jerry Bock
* Adam Guettel
* Elton John
* Alan Jay Lerner
* Robert Lopez
* Glenn Slater
* Maury Yeston
; 2 Nominations
* Lynn Ahrens
* Sara Bareilles
* Nell Benjamin
* Elmer Bernstein
* Susan Birkenhead
* Alain Boublil
* Leslie Bricusse
* Craig Carnelia
* Joe Darion
* Dorothy Fields
* William Finn
* Stephen Flaherty
* Micki Grant
* Amanda Green
* Larry Grossman
* Marvin Hamlisch
* Charles Hart
* Joel Hirschhorn
* Rupert Holmes
* Tom Jones
* Al Kasha
* Edward Kleban
* Michael Korie
* Henry Krieger
* Michael John LaChiusa
* Burton Lane
* Cyndi Lauper
* Carolyn Leigh
* David Lindsay-Abaire
* Peter Link
* Hugh Martin
* Tim Minchin
* Lin-Manuel Miranda
* Anthony Newley
* Benj Pasek
* Justin Paul
* Harvey Schmidt
* Claude-Michel Schönberg
* Marc Shaiman
* David Shire
* Matthew Sklar
* Michael Stewart
* Richard Stilgoe
* Jule Styne
* Kurt Weill
* Frank Wildhorn
* Scott Wittman
* Brian Yorkey
* David Zippel
==Female winners==
Only nine women have won this award, six of whom won without male writing partners, and for eleven shows:

* Betty Comden – &quot;Hallelujah, Baby!&quot; (1968), &quot;On the Twentieth Century&quot; (1978), and &quot;The Will Rogers Follies&quot; (1991), becoming the first woman to win this Tony multiple times.
* Lynn Ahrens – &quot;Ragtime&quot; (1998)
* Lisa Lambert – &quot;The Drowsy Chaperone&quot; (2006)
* Cyndi Lauper – &quot;Kinky Boots&quot; (2013), becoming the first woman to win this Tony without a writing partner
* Jeanine Tesori – &quot;Fun Home&quot; (2015) and &quot;Kimberly Akimbo&quot; (2023)
* Lisa Kron – &quot;Fun Home&quot; (2015), Kron and Jeanine Tesori becoming the first all-female songwriting team (music and lyrics) to win this Tony.
* Anaïs Mitchell – &quot;Hadestown&quot; (2019)
* Lucy Moss – &quot;Six&quot; (2022)
* Shaina Taub - &quot;Suffs&quot; (2024)

==See also==
* Tony Award for Best Book of a Musical
* Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music
* Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music in a Play
* Laurence Olivier Award for Best Original Score or New Orchestrations
* List of Tony Award-nominated productions

==References==
==External links==
*Official Tony Awards website
*Internet Broadway Database Awards</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1478089" start="4" end="38" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score" label="Tony Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="46" end="56" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="70" end="78" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q822146" start="84" end="92" title="lyricist" label="lyricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="135" end="142" title="musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="146" end="150" title="Play (theatre)" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="698" end="714" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915810" start="735" end="742" title="Company (musical)" label="Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274807" start="805" end="813" title="Fred Ebb" label="Fred Ebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685876" start="820" end="831" title="John Kander" label="John Kander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263085" start="839" end="863" title="Kiss of the Spider Woman (musical)" label="Kiss of the Spider Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="875" end="889" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774624" start="897" end="917" title="The Who&amp;#x27;s Tommy" label="The Who&amp;#x27;s Tommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130851" start="1040" end="1062" title="Much Ado About Nothing" label="Much Ado About Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737205" start="1084" end="1099" title="The Good Doctor (play)" label="The Good Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="1165" end="1178" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379886" start="1200" end="1205" title="ENRON (play)" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442998" start="1222" end="1228" title="Fences (play)" label="Fences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177879" start="1250" end="1275" title="Peter and the Starcatcher" label="Peter and the Starcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092864" start="1292" end="1312" title="One Man, Two Guvnors" label="One Man, Two Guvnors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337685" start="1334" end="1351" title="Angels in America" label="Angels in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635945" start="1373" end="1394" title="To Kill a Mockingbird (2018 play)" label="To Kill a Mockingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417547" start="1416" end="1433" title="A Christmas Carol (2017 play)" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q52698344" start="1447" end="1462" title="The Inheritance (play)" label="The Inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219620" start="1476" end="1491" title="The Rose Tattoo" label="The Rose Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q69387965" start="1505" end="1515" title="Slave Play" label="Slave Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q101004150" start="1533" end="1549" title="The Sound Inside (play)" label="The Sound Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q125371911" start="1575" end="1587" title="Stereophonic (play)" label="Stereophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q88641716" start="1669" end="1686" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New York City" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q643684" start="1749" end="1764" title="jukebox musical" label="jukebox musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q29832089" start="1791" end="1810" title="The Lightning Thief (musical)" label="The Lightning Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="2037" end="2049" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413943" start="2105" end="2116" title="Kinky Boots (musical)" label="Kinky Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454318" start="2133" end="2142" title="Lisa Kron" label="Lisa Kron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194364" start="2147" end="2161" title="Jeanine Tesori" label="Jeanine Tesori"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975010" start="2221" end="2229" title="Fun Home (musical)" label="Fun Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811844" start="2238" end="2249" title="Toby Marlow" label="Toby Marlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q67205843" start="2328" end="2337" title="Lucy Moss" label="Lucy Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752083" start="2348" end="2351" title="Six (musical)" label="Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q329849" start="2359" end="2371" title="Adolph Green" label="Adolph Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774978" start="2443" end="2466" title="The Will Rogers Follies" label="The Will Rogers Follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="2477" end="2488" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q337097" start="2522" end="2526" title="Cats (musical)" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q449002" start="2635" end="2650" title="Jonathan Larson" label="Jonathan Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q553890" start="2670" end="2674" title="Rent (musical)" label="Rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="2868" end="2884" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146861" start="2913" end="2923" title="Cy Coleman" label="Cy Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q175078" start="2942" end="2954" title="Betty Comden" label="Betty Comden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274807" start="2957" end="2965" title="Fred Ebb" label="Fred Ebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q329849" start="2968" end="2980" title="Adolph Green" label="Adolph Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685876" start="2983" end="2994" title="John Kander" label="John Kander"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="2997" end="3016" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363692" start="3028" end="3040" title="Jerry Herman" label="Jerry Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435778" start="3043" end="3055" title="Robert Lopez" label="Robert Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646482" start="3058" end="3076" title="Lin-Manuel Miranda" label="Lin-Manuel Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q298295" start="3079" end="3087" title="Tim Rice" label="Tim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q269094" start="3090" end="3105" title="Richard Rodgers" label="Richard Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194364" start="3108" end="3122" title="Jeanine Tesori" label="Jeanine Tesori"/>
<link wikidata="Q203977" start="3125" end="3137" title="Maury Yeston" label="Maury Yeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683976" start="3140" end="3158" title="Jason Robert Brown" label="Jason Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274807" start="3203" end="3211" title="Fred Ebb" label="Fred Ebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685876" start="3214" end="3225" title="John Kander" label="John Kander"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="3228" end="3247" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="3268" end="3284" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146861" start="3304" end="3314" title="Cy Coleman" label="Cy Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q298295" start="3334" end="3342" title="Tim Rice" label="Tim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194364" start="3362" end="3376" title="Jeanine Tesori" label="Jeanine Tesori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238931" start="3396" end="3405" title="Don Black (lyricist)" label="Don Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363692" start="3408" end="3420" title="Jerry Herman" label="Jerry Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327614" start="3423" end="3441" title="Richard Maltby Jr." label="Richard Maltby Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q317272" start="3444" end="3455" title="Alan Menken" label="Alan Menken"/>
<link wikidata="Q542484" start="3458" end="3474" title="Stephen Schwartz (composer)" label="Stephen Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241354" start="3477" end="3489" title="David Yazbek" label="David Yazbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683976" start="3509" end="3527" title="Jason Robert Brown" label="Jason Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q175078" start="3530" end="3542" title="Betty Comden" label="Betty Comden"/>
<link wikidata="Q329849" start="3545" end="3557" title="Adolph Green" label="Adolph Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354471" start="3560" end="3575" title="Sheldon Harnick" label="Sheldon Harnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816484" start="3578" end="3586" title="Tom Kitt (musician)" label="Tom Kitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q269094" start="3589" end="3604" title="Richard Rodgers" label="Richard Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960275" start="3607" end="3622" title="Charles Strouse" label="Charles Strouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334295" start="3642" end="3655" title="Howard Ashman" label="Howard Ashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066165" start="3658" end="3671" title="Chad Beguelin" label="Chad Beguelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q725042" start="3674" end="3684" title="Jerry Bock" label="Jerry Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679169" start="3687" end="3699" title="Adam Guettel" label="Adam Guettel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="3702" end="3712" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q961893" start="3715" end="3730" title="Alan Jay Lerner" label="Alan Jay Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435778" start="3733" end="3745" title="Robert Lopez" label="Robert Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427403" start="3748" end="3760" title="Glenn Slater" label="Glenn Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q203977" start="3763" end="3775" title="Maury Yeston" label="Maury Yeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q293323" start="3794" end="3805" title="Lynn Ahrens" label="Lynn Ahrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q230445" start="3808" end="3822" title="Sara Bareilles" label="Sara Bareilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q61902700" start="3825" end="3838" title="Nell Benjamin" label="Nell Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111436" start="3841" end="3856" title="Elmer Bernstein" label="Elmer Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647576" start="3859" end="3875" title="Susan Birkenhead" label="Susan Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q284540" start="3878" end="3891" title="Alain Boublil" label="Alain Boublil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305608" start="3894" end="3909" title="Leslie Bricusse" label="Leslie Bricusse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180808" start="3912" end="3926" title="Craig Carnelia" label="Craig Carnelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180042" start="3929" end="3939" title="Joe Darion" label="Joe Darion"/>
<link wikidata="Q435241" start="3942" end="3956" title="Dorothy Fields" label="Dorothy Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009056" start="3959" end="3971" title="William Finn" label="William Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973178" start="3974" end="3990" title="Stephen Flaherty" label="Stephen Flaherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838839" start="3993" end="4004" title="Micki Grant" label="Micki Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739639" start="4007" end="4019" title="Amanda Green" label="Amanda Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490433" start="4022" end="4036" title="Larry Grossman (composer)" label="Larry Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q337206" start="4039" end="4054" title="Marvin Hamlisch" label="Marvin Hamlisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496084" start="4057" end="4069" title="Charles Hart (lyricist)" label="Charles Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691721" start="4072" end="4087" title="Joel Hirschhorn" label="Joel Hirschhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383270" start="4090" end="4103" title="Rupert Holmes" label="Rupert Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439753" start="4106" end="4115" title="Tom Jones (writer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q570352" start="4118" end="4126" title="Al Kasha" label="Al Kasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343953" start="4129" end="4142" title="Edward Kleban" label="Edward Kleban"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730993" start="4145" end="4158" title="Michael Korie" label="Michael Korie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724487" start="4161" end="4174" title="Henry Krieger" label="Henry Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308276" start="4177" end="4198" title="Michael John LaChiusa" label="Michael John LaChiusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q364143" start="4201" end="4212" title="Burton Lane" label="Burton Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="4215" end="4227" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257369" start="4230" end="4243" title="Carolyn Leigh" label="Carolyn Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q532488" start="4246" end="4266" title="David Lindsay-Abaire" label="David Lindsay-Abaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175474" start="4269" end="4279" title="Peter Link" label="Peter Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931668" start="4282" end="4293" title="Hugh Martin" label="Hugh Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23527" start="4296" end="4307" title="Tim Minchin" label="Tim Minchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646482" start="4310" end="4328" title="Lin-Manuel Miranda" label="Lin-Manuel Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q573709" start="4331" end="4345" title="Anthony Newley" label="Anthony Newley"/>
<link wikidata="Q27660156" start="4348" end="4358" title="Benj Pasek" label="Benj Pasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317989" start="4361" end="4372" title="Justin Paul" label="Justin Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587936" start="4375" end="4389" title="Harvey Schmidt" label="Harvey Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q712004" start="4392" end="4415" title="Claude-Michel Schönberg" label="Claude-Michel Schönberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q979312" start="4418" end="4430" title="Marc Shaiman" label="Marc Shaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q719035" start="4433" end="4444" title="David Shire" label="David Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791232" start="4447" end="4460" title="Matthew Sklar" label="Matthew Sklar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834631" start="4463" end="4478" title="Michael Stewart (playwright)" label="Michael Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150690" start="4481" end="4496" title="Richard Stilgoe" label="Richard Stilgoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q587741" start="4499" end="4509" title="Jule Styne" label="Jule Styne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="4512" end="4522" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444457" start="4525" end="4539" title="Frank Wildhorn" label="Frank Wildhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022358" start="4542" end="4555" title="Scott Wittman" label="Scott Wittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q913276" start="4558" end="4570" title="Brian Yorkey" label="Brian Yorkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703386" start="4573" end="4585" title="David Zippel" label="David Zippel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642856" start="4735" end="4752" title="Hallelujah, Baby!" label="Hallelujah, Baby!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983180" start="4773" end="4797" title="On the Twentieth Century" label="On the Twentieth Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774978" start="4822" end="4845" title="The Will Rogers Follies" label="The Will Rogers Follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283247" start="4940" end="4947" title="Ragtime (musical)" label="Ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731075" start="4984" end="5004" title="The Drowsy Chaperone" label="The Drowsy Chaperone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413943" start="5041" end="5052" title="Kinky Boots (musical)" label="Kinky Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975010" start="5160" end="5168" title="Fun Home (musical)" label="Fun Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q112481527" start="5192" end="5207" title="Kimberly Akimbo (musical)" label="Kimberly Akimbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975010" start="5241" end="5249" title="Fun Home (musical)" label="Fun Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452845" start="5397" end="5406" title="Hadestown" label="Hadestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752083" start="5440" end="5443" title="Six (musical)" label="Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949099" start="5479" end="5484" title="Suffs" label="Suffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784838" start="5514" end="5551" title="Tony Award for Best Book of a Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Book of a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305717" start="5554" end="5592" title="Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music" label="Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305718" start="5595" end="5643" title="Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music in a Play" label="Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995976" start="5646" end="5714" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Original Score or New Orchestrations" label="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Original Score or New Orchestrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q122663654" start="5717" end="5757" title="List of Tony Award-nominated productions" label="List of Tony Award-nominated productions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1266461" wikidata="Q7097447" url="?curid=1266461" title="Operation Red Dragon (civil defense exercise)">
<text>Exercise Red Dragon is a recurring civil defense readiness exercise conducted in Fort McCoy, Wisconsin held during the summer, training Army Reserve, National Guard units, and civilian agencies, such as fire departments, police stations, hospitals, and non-governmental organizations (i.e. American Red Cross) to improve the Defense Support of Civil Authorities capabilities for large-scale chemical defense missions.

==History==
As a result of the 1995 sarin gas attack on a Tokyo subway and the growing concern about a terrorist chemical attack, the U.S. Congress passed laws to implement a program to train civilian agencies on responding to incidents involving Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD). In response, the U.S. Army Reserve Command&#x27;s Homeland Defense Office, then under the direction of LTC Jon M. Byrom, US Army Reserve developed an annual exercise to integrate collective training with specialized HAZMAT protection and decontamination equipment for Army Reserve units with this homeland defense mission. This annual exercise began in 2004 when the 472d Chemical Battalion, under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Scott S. Haraburda, was selected to provide operational command and control over nearly 400 Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and high- yield Explosives (CBRNE) defense soldiers. The following year, the exercise doubled in size to 800. In 2006, the 464th Chemical Brigade commanded this exercise, again under newly promoted Colonel Haraburda as the brigade commander, commanding over 1,100 chemical, military police, and medical soldiers, laying the groundwork for future training efforts with non-military organizations as part of the Defense Support of Civil Authorities for large-scale chemical defense missions. This exercise eventually grew to over 3,000 soldiers with ten civilian hospitals in 2009 and to include foreign contributions with Canadian soldiers in 2014.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7097447" start="9" end="19" title="Operation Red Dragon (civil defense exercise)" label="Red Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471614" start="81" end="91" title="Fort McCoy, Wisconsin" label="Fort McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="136" end="148" title="United States Army Reserve" label="Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="150" end="164" title="National Guard (United States)" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="203" end="218" title="fire department" label="fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q861951" start="221" end="235" title="police station" label="police station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="238" end="246" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="253" end="283" title="Non-governmental" label="non-governmental organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="290" end="308" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251425" start="325" end="361" title="Defense Support of Civil authorities" label="Defense Support of Civil Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146739" start="455" end="489" title="Tokyo subway sarin attack" label="sarin gas attack on a Tokyo subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="553" end="566" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="822" end="837" title="US Army Reserve" label="US Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q20789683" start="1133" end="1151" title="Scott S. Haraburda" label="Scott S. Haraburda"/>
<link wikidata="Q265653" start="1225" end="1295" title="CBRN" label="Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and high- yield Explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638306" start="1392" end="1414" title="464th Chemical Brigade" label="464th Chemical Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251425" start="1679" end="1715" title="Defense Support of Civil authorities" label="Defense Support of Civil Authorities"/>
</links>
</doc>
