<doc id="1280053" wikidata="Q1517472" url="?curid=1280053" title="History of radar">
<text>The history of radar (where radar stands for &quot;radio detection and ranging&quot;) started with experiments by Heinrich Hertz in the late 19th century that showed that radio waves were reflected by metallic objects. This possibility was suggested in James Clerk Maxwell&#x27;s seminal work on electromagnetism. However, it was not until the early 20th century that systems able to use these principles were becoming widely available, and it was German inventor Christian Hülsmeyer who first used them to build a simple ship detection device intended to help avoid collisions in fog (Reichspatent Nr. 165546 in 1904). True radar which provided directional and ranging information, such as the British Chain Home early warning system, was developed over the next two decades.

The development of systems able to produce short pulses of radio energy was the key advance that allowed modern radar systems to come into existence. By timing the pulses on an oscilloscope, the range could be determined and the direction of the antenna revealed the angular location of the targets. The two, combined, produced a &quot;fix&quot;, locating the target relative to the antenna. In the 1934–1939 period, eight nations developed independently, and in great secrecy, systems of this type: the United Kingdom, Germany, the United States, the USSR, Japan, the Netherlands, France, and Italy. In addition, Britain shared their information with the United States and four Commonwealth countries: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa, and these countries also developed their own radar systems. During the war, Hungary was added to this list. The term &quot;RADAR&quot; was coined in 1939 by the United States Signal Corps as it worked on these systems for the Navy.

Progress during the war was rapid and of great importance, probably one of the decisive factors for the victory of the Allies. A key development was the magnetron in the UK, which allowed the creation of relatively small systems with sub-meter resolution. By the end of hostilities, Britain, Germany, the United States, the USSR, and Japan had a wide variety of land- and sea-based radars as well as small airborne systems. After the war, radar use was widened to numerous fields, including civil aviation, marine navigation, radar guns for police, meteorology, and medicine. Key developments in the post-war period include the travelling wave tube as a way to produce large quantities of coherent microwaves, the development of signal delay systems that led to phased array radars, and ever-increasing frequencies that allow higher resolutions. Increases in signal processing capability due to the introduction of solid-state computers has also had a large impact on radar use.

== Significance ==
The place of radar in the larger story of science and technology is argued differently by different authors. On one hand, radar contributed very little to theory, which was largely known since the days of Maxwell and Hertz. Therefore radar did not advance science, but was instead a matter of technology and engineering. Maurice Ponte, one of the developers of radar in France, states:

But others point out the immense practical consequences of the development of radar. Far more than the atomic bomb, radar contributed to the Allied victory in World War II. Robert Buderi states that it was also the precursor of much modern technology. From a review of his book:
In later years radar was used in scientific instruments, such as weather radar and radar astronomy.

==Early contributors==

===Heinrich Hertz===
In 1886–1888 the German physicist Heinrich Hertz conducted his series of experiments that proved the existence of electromagnetic waves (including radio waves), predicted in equations developed in 1862–4 by the Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell. In Hertz&#x27;s 1887 experiment he found that these waves would transmit through different types of materials and also would reflect off metal surfaces in his lab as well as conductors and dielectrics. The nature of these waves being similar to visible light in their ability to be reflected, refracted, and polarized would be shown by Hertz and subsequent experiments by other physicists.

=== Guglielmo Marconi ===
Radio pioneer Guglielmo Marconi noticed radio waves were being reflected back to the transmitter by objects in radio beacon experiments he conducted on March 3, 1899, on Salisbury Plain. In 1916 he and British engineer Charles Samuel Franklin used short-waves in their experiments, critical to the practical development of radar. He would relate his findings 6 years later in a 1922 paper delivered before the Institution of Electrical Engineers in London:

===Christian Hülsmeyer===
In 1904, Christian Hülsmeyer gave public demonstrations in Germany and the Netherlands of the use of radio echoes to detect ships so that collisions could be avoided. His device consisted of a simple spark gap used to generate a signal that was aimed using a dipole antenna with a cylindrical parabolic reflector. When a signal reflected from a ship was picked up by a similar antenna attached to the separate coherer receiver, a bell sounded. During bad weather or fog, the device would be periodically spun to check for nearby ships. The apparatus detected the presence of ships up to , and Hülsmeyer planned to extend its capability to . It did not provide range (distance) information, only warning of a nearby object. He patented the device, called the &quot;telemobiloscope&quot;, but due to lack of interest by the naval authorities the invention was not put into production.

Hülsmeyer also received a patent amendment for estimating the range to the ship. Using a vertical scan of the horizon with the &quot;telemobiloscope&quot; mounted on a tower, the operator would find the angle at which the return was the most intense and deduce, by simple triangulation, the approximate distance. This is in contrast to the later development of pulsed radar, which determines distance via two-way transit time of the pulse.

==Germany==
A radio-based device for remotely indicating the presence of ships was built in Germany by Christian Hülsmeyer in 1904. This has been recognized by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers as the invention of the first working radar system by inauguration of an IEEE Historic Milestone in October 2019.

Over the following three decades in Germany, a number of radio-based detection systems were developed but none were pulsed radars. This situation changed before World War II. Developments in three leading industries are described.

===GEMA===
In the early 1930s, physicist Rudolf Kühnhold, Scientific Director at the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot; (German navy) &quot;Nachrichtenmittel-Versuchsanstalt&quot; (NVA—Experimental Institute of Communication Systems) in Kiel, was attempting to improve the acoustical methods of underwater detection of ships. He concluded that the desired accuracy in measuring distance to targets could be attained only by using pulsed electromagnetic waves.

During 1933, Kühnhold first attempted to test this concept with a transmitting and receiving set that operated in the microwave region at 13.5 cm (2.22 GHz). The transmitter used a Barkhausen–Kurz tube (the first microwave generator) that produced only 0.1 watt. Unsuccessful with this, he asked for assistance from Paul-Günther Erbslöh and Hans-Karl Freiherr von Willisen, amateur radio operators who were developing a VHF system for communications. They enthusiastically agreed, and in January 1934, formed a company, &quot;Gesellschaft für Elektroakustische und Mechanische Apparate&quot; (GEMA), for the effort. From the start, the firm was always called simply GEMA.

Work on a &quot;Funkmessgerät für Untersuchung&quot; (radio measuring device for research) began in earnest at GEMA. Hans Hollmann and Theodor Schultes, both affiliated with the prestigious Heinrich Hertz Institute in Berlin, were added as consultants. The first apparatus used a split-anode magnetron purchased from Philips in the Netherlands. This provided about 70 W at 50 cm (600 MHz), but suffered from frequency instability. Hollmann built a regenerative receiver and Schultes developed Yagi antennas for transmitting and receiving. In June 1934, large vessels passing through the Kiel Harbor were detected by Doppler-beat interference at a distance of about . In October, strong reflections were observed from an aircraft that happened to fly through the beam; this opened consideration of targets other than ships.

Kühnhold then shifted the GEMA work to a pulse-modulated system. A new 50 cm (600 MHz) Philips magnetron with better frequency stability was used. It was modulated with 2- μs pulses at a PRF of 2000 Hz. The transmitting antenna was an array of 10 pairs of dipoles with a reflecting mesh. The wide-band regenerative receiver used Acorn tubes from RCA, and the receiving antenna had three pairs of dipoles and incorporated lobe switching. A blocking device (a duplexer), shut the receiver input when the transmitter pulsed. A Braun tube (a CRT) was used for displaying the range.

The equipment was first tested at a NVA site at the Lübecker Bay near Pelzerhaken. During May 1935, it detected returns from woods across the bay at a range of . It had limited success, however, in detecting a research ship, &quot;Welle&quot;, only a short distance away. The receiver was then rebuilt, becoming a super-regenerative set with two intermediate-frequency stages. With this improved receiver, the system readily tracked vessels at up to range.

In September 1935, a demonstration was given to the Commander-in-Chief of the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot;. The system performance was excellent; the range was read off the Braun tube with a tolerance of 50 meters (less than 1 percent variance), and the lobe switching allowed a directional accuracy of 0.1 degree. Historically, this marked the first naval vessel equipped with radar. Although this apparatus was not put into production, GEMA was funded to develop similar systems operating around 50 cm (500 MHz). These became the Seetakt for the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot; and the Freya for the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; (German Air Force).

Kühnhold remained with the NVA, but also consulted with GEMA. He is considered by many in Germany as the Father of Radar. During 1933–6, Hollmann wrote the first comprehensive treatise on microwaves, &quot;Physik und Technik der ultrakurzen Wellen&quot; (Physics and Technique of Ultrashort Waves), Springer 1938.

===Telefunken===
In 1933, when Kühnhold at the NVA was first experimenting with microwaves, he had sought information from Telefunken on microwave tubes. (Telefunken was the largest supplier of radio products in Germany) There, Wilhelm Tolmé Runge had told him that no vacuum tubes were available for these frequencies. In fact, Runge was already experimenting with high-frequency transmitters and had Telefunken&#x27;s tube department working on cm-wavelength devices.

In the summer of 1935, Runge, now Director of Telefunken&#x27;s Radio Research Laboratory, initiated an internally funded project in radio-based detection. Using Barkhausen-Kurz tubes, a 50 cm (600 MHz) receiver and 0.5-W transmitter were built. With the antennas placed flat on the ground some distance apart, Runge arranged for an aircraft to fly overhead and found that the receiver gave a strong Doppler-beat interference signal.

Runge, now with Hans Hollmann as a consultant, continued in developing a 1.8 m (170 MHz) system using pulse-modulation. Wilhelm Stepp developed a transmit-receive device (a duplexer) for allowing a common antenna. Stepp also code-named the system &quot;Darmstadt&quot; after his home town, starting the practice in Telefunken of giving the systems names of cities. The system, with only a few watts transmitter power, was first tested in February 1936, detecting an aircraft at about distance. This led the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; to fund the development of a 50 cm (600 MHz) gun-laying system, the &quot;Würzburg&quot;.

===Lorenz===
Since before the First World War, Standard Elektrik Lorenz had been the main supplier of communication equipment for the German military and was the main rival of Telefunken. In late 1935, when Lorenz found that Runge at Telefunken was doing research in radio-based detection equipment, they started a similar activity under Gottfried Müller. A pulse-modulated set called &quot;Einheit für Abfragung&quot; (DFA – Device for Detection) was built. It used a type DS-310 tube (similar to the Acorn) operating at 70 cm (430 MHz) and about 1 kW power, it had identical transmitting and receiving antennas made with rows of half-wavelength dipoles backed by a reflecting screen.
In early 1936, initial experiments gave reflections from large buildings at up to about . The power was doubled by using two tubes, and in mid-1936, the equipment was set up on cliffs near Kiel, and good detections of ships at and aircraft at were attained. 
The success of this experimental set was reported to the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot;, but they showed no interest; they were already fully engaged with GEMA for similar equipment. Also, because of extensive agreements between Lorenz and many foreign countries, the naval authorities had reservations concerning the company handling classified work. The DFA was then demonstrated to the &quot;Heer&quot; (German Army), and they contracted with Lorenz for developing &quot;Kurfürst&quot; (Elector), a system for supporting &quot;Flugzeugabwehrkanone&quot; (Flak, anti-aircraft guns).

==United Kingdom==

In 1915, Robert Watson Watt joined the Meteorological Office as a meteorologist, working at an outstation at Aldershot in Hampshire. Over the next 20 years, he studied atmospheric phenomena and developed the use of radio signals generated by lightning strikes to map out the position of thunderstorms. The difficulty in pinpointing the direction of these fleeting signals using rotatable directional antennas led, in 1923, to the use of oscilloscopes in order to display the signals. The operation eventually moved to the outskirts of Slough in Berkshire, and in 1927 formed the Radio Research Station (RRS), Slough, an entity under the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR). Watson Watt was appointed the RRS Superintendent.

As war clouds gathered over Britain, the likelihood of air raids and the threat of invasion by air and sea drove a major effort in applying science and technology to defence. In November 1934, the Air Ministry established the Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Defence (CSSAD) with the official function of considering &quot;how far recent advances in scientific and technical knowledge can be used to strengthen the present methods of defence against hostile aircraft&quot;. Commonly called the &quot;Tizard Committee&quot; after its Chairman, Sir Henry Tizard, this group had a profound influence on technical developments in Britain.

H. E. Wimperis, Director of Scientific Research at the Air Ministry and a member of the Tizard Committee, had read about a German newspaper article claiming that the Germans had built a death ray using radio signals, accompanied by an image of a very large radio antenna. Both concerned and potentially excited by this possibility, but highly skeptical at the same time, Wimperis looked for an expert in the field of radio propagation who might be able to pass judgement on the concept. Watt, Superintendent of the RRS, was now well established as an authority in the field of radio, and in January 1935, Wimperis contacted him asking if radio might be used for such a device. After discussing this with his scientific assistant, Arnold F. &#x27;Skip&#x27; Wilkins, Wilkins quickly produced a back-of-the-envelope calculation that showed the energy required would be enormous. Watt wrote back that this was unlikely, but added the following comment: &quot;Attention is being turned to the still difficult, but less unpromising, problem of radio detection and numerical considerations on the method of detection by reflected radio waves will be submitted when required&quot;.

Over the following several weeks, Wilkins considered the radio detection problem. He outlined an approach and backed it with detailed calculations of necessary transmitter power, reflection characteristics of an aircraft, and needed receiver sensitivity. He proposed using a directional receiver based on Watt&#x27;s lightning detection concept, listening for powerful signals from a separate transmitter. Timing, and thus distance measurements, would be accomplished by triggering the oscilloscope&#x27;s trace with a muted signal from the transmitter, and then simply measuring the returns against a scale. Watson Watt sent this information to the Air Ministry on February 12, 1935, in a secret report titled &quot;The Detection of Aircraft by Radio Methods&quot;.

Reflection of radio signals was critical to the proposed technique, and the Air Ministry asked if this could be proven. To test this, Wilkins set up receiving equipment in a field near Upper Stowe, Northamptonshire. On February 26, 1935, a Handley Page Heyford bomber flew along a path between the receiving station and the transmitting towers of a BBC shortwave station in nearby Daventry. The aircraft reflected the 6 MHz (49 m) BBC signal, and this was readily detected by Arnold &quot;Skip&quot; Wilkins using Doppler-beat interference at ranges up to . This convincing test, known as the &quot;Daventry Experiment&quot;, was witnessed by a representative from the Air Ministry, and led to the immediate authorization to build a full demonstration system. This experiment was later reproduced by Wilkins for the 1977 BBC television series &quot;The Secret War&quot; episode &quot;To See a Hundred Miles&quot;.

Based on pulsed transmission as used for probing the ionosphere, a preliminary system was designed and built at the RRS by the team. Their existing transmitter had a peak power of about 1 kW, and Wilkins had estimated that 100 kW would be needed. Edward George Bowen was added to the team to design and build such a transmitter. Bowens’ transmitter operated at 6 MHz (50 m), had a pulse-repetition rate of 25 Hz, a pulse width of 25 μs, and approached the desired power.

Orfordness, a narrow peninsula in Suffolk along the coast of the North Sea, was selected as the test site. Here the equipment would be openly operated in the guise of an ionospheric monitoring station. In mid-May 1935, the equipment was moved to Orfordness. Six wooden towers were erected, two for stringing the transmitting antenna, and four for corners of crossed receiving antennas. In June, general testing of the equipment began.

On June 17, the first target was detected — a Supermarine Scapa flying boat at range. It is historically correct that, on June 17, 1935, radio-based detection and ranging was first demonstrated in Britain . Watson Watt, Wilkins, and Bowen are generally credited with initiating what would later be called radar in this nation.

In December 1935, the British Treasury appropriated £60,000 for a five-station system called Chain Home (CH), covering approaches to the Thames Estuary. The secretary of the Tizard Committee, Albert Percival Rowe, coined the acronym RDF as a cover for the work, meaning Range and Direction Finding but suggesting the already well-known Radio Direction Finding.

Late in 1935, responding to Lindemann&#x27;s recognition of the need for night detection and interception gear, and realizing existing transmitters were too heavy for aircraft, Bowen proposed fitting only receivers, what would later be called bistatic radar. Frederick Lindemann&#x27;s proposals for infrared sensors and aerial mines would prove impractical. It would take Bowen&#x27;s efforts — at the urging of Tizard, who became increasingly concerned about the need — to see air-to-surface-vessel (ASV) radar and, through it, aircraft interception (AI) radar, to fruition.

In 1937, Bowen&#x27;s team set their crude ASV radar, the world&#x27;s first airborne set, to detect the Home Fleet in dismal weather. Only in spring 1939, &quot;as a matter of great urgency&quot; after the failure of the searchlight system Silhouette, did attention turn to using ASV for air-to-air interception (AI). Demonstrated in June 1939, AI got a warm reception from Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding, and even more so from Churchill. This proved problematic. Its accuracy, dependent on the height of the aircraft, meant that CH, capable of only , was not accurate enough to place an aircraft within its detection range, and an additional system was required. Its wooden chassis had a disturbing tendency to catch fire (even with attention from expert technicians), so much so that Dowding, when told that Watson-Watt could provide hundreds of sets, demanded &quot;ten that work&quot;. The Cossor and MetroVick sets were overweight for aircraft use and the RAF lacked night fighter pilots, observers, and suitable aircraft.

In 1940, John Randall and Harry Boot developed the cavity magnetron, which made ten-centimetre ( wavelength ) radar a reality. This device, the size of a small dinner plate, could be carried easily on aircraft and the short wavelength meant the antenna would also be small and hence suitable for mounting on aircraft. The short wavelength and high power made it very effective at spotting submarines from the air.

To aid Chain Home in making height calculations, at Dowding&#x27;s request, the Electrical Calculator Type Q (commonly called the &quot;Fruit Machine&quot;) was introduced in 1940.

The solution to night intercepts would be provided by Dr. W. B. &quot;Ben&quot; Lewis, who proposed a new, more accurate ground control display, the Plan Position Indicator (PPI), a new Ground-Controlled Interception (GCI) radar, and reliable AI radar. The AI sets would ultimately be built by EMI. GCI was unquestionably delayed by Watson-Watt&#x27;s opposition to it and his belief that CH was sufficient, as well as by Bowen&#x27;s preference for using ASV for navigation, despite Bomber Command disclaiming a need for it, and by Tizard&#x27;s reliance on the faulty Silhouette system.

===Air Ministry===

In March 1936, the work at Orfordness was moved to Bawdsey Manor, nearby on the mainland. Until this time, the work had officially still been under the DSIR, but was now transferred to the Air Ministry. At the new Bawdsey Research Station, the Chain Home (CH) equipment was assembled as a prototype. There were equipment problems when the Royal Air Force (RAF) first exercised the prototype station in September 1936. These were cleared by the next April, and the Air Ministry started plans for a larger network of stations.
Initial hardware at CH stations was as follows: The transmitter operated on four pre-selected frequencies between 20 and 55 MHz, adjustable within 15 seconds, and delivered a peak power of 200 kW. The pulse duration was adjustable between 5 and 25 μs, with a repetition rate selectable as either 25 or 50 Hz. For synchronization of all CH transmitters, the pulse generator was locked to the 50 Hz of the British power grid. Four steel towers supported transmitting antennas, and four wooden towers supported cross-dipole arrays at three different levels. A goniometer was used to improve the directional accuracy from the multiple receiving antennas.

By the summer of 1937, 20 initial CH stations were in check-out operation. A major RAF exercise was performed before the end of the year, and was such a success that £10,000,000 was appropriated by the Treasury for an eventual full chain of coastal stations. At the start of 1938, the RAF took over control of all CH stations, and the network began regular operations.

In May 1938, Rowe replaced Watson Watt as Superintendent at Bawdsey. In addition to the work on CH and successor systems, there was now major work in airborne RDF equipment. This was led by E. G. Bowen and centered on 200-MHz (1.5 m) sets. The higher frequency allowed smaller antennas, appropriate for aircraft installation.

From the initiation of RDF work at Orfordness, the Air Ministry had kept the British Army and the Royal Navy generally informed; this led to both of these forces having their own RDF developments.

===British Army===
In 1931, at the Woolwich Research Station of the Army&#x27;s Signals Experimental Establishment (SEE), W. A. S. Butement and P. E. Pollard had examined pulsed 600 MHz (50-cm) signals for detection of ships. Although they prepared a memorandum on this subject and performed preliminary experiments, for undefined reasons the War Office did not give it consideration.

As the Air Ministry&#x27;s work on RDF progressed, Colonel Peter Worlledge of the Royal Engineer and Signals Board met with Watson Watt and was briefed on the RDF equipment and techniques being developed at Orfordness. His report, &quot;The Proposed Method of Aeroplane Detection and Its Prospects&quot;, led the SEE to set up an &quot;Army Cell&quot; at Bawdsey in October 1936. This was under E. Talbot Paris and the staff included Butement and Pollard. The Cell&#x27;s work emphasize two general types of RDF equipment: gun-laying (GL) systems for assisting anti-aircraft guns and searchlights, and coastal- defense (CD) systems for directing coastal artillery and defense of Army bases overseas.

Pollard led the first project, a gun-laying RDF code-named Mobile Radio Unit (MRU). This truck-mounted system was designed as a small version of a CH station. It operated at 23 MHz (13 m) with a power of 300 kW. A single tower supported a transmitting antenna, as well as two receiving antennas set orthogonally for estimating the signal bearing. In February 1937, a developmental unit detected an aircraft at a range of 60 miles (96 km). The Air Ministry also adopted this system as a mobile auxiliary to the CH system.

In early 1938, Butement started the development of a CD system based on Bowen&#x27;s evolving 200-MHz (1.5-m) airborne sets. The transmitter had a 400 Hz pulse rate, a 2-μs pulse width, and 50 kW power (later increased to 150 kW). Although many of Bowen&#x27;s transmitter and receiver components were used, the system would not be airborne so there were no limitations on antenna size.
Primary credit for introducing beamed RDF systems in Britain must be given to Butement. For the CD, he developed a large dipole array, high and wide, giving much narrower beams and higher gain. This could be rotated at a speed up to 1.5 revolutions per minute. For greater directional accuracy, lobe switching on the receiving antennas was adopted. As a part of this development, he formulated the first – at least in Britain – mathematical relationship that would later become well known as the &quot;radar range equation&quot;.

By May 1939, the CD RDF could detect aircraft flying as low as and at a range of . With an antenna above sea level, it could determine the range of a 2,000-ton ship at and with an angular accuracy of as little as a quarter of a degree.

===Royal Navy===
Although the Royal Navy maintained close contact with the Air Ministry work at Bawdsey, they chose to establish their own RDF development at the Experimental Department of His Majesty&#x27;s Signal School (HMSS) in Portsmouth, Hampshire, on the south coast.

HMSS started RDF work in September 1935. Initial efforts, under R. F. Yeo, were in frequencies between 75 MHz (4 m) and 1.2 GHz (25 cm). All of the work was under the utmost secrecy; it could not even be discussed with other scientists and engineers at Portsmouth. A 75 MHz range-only set was eventually developed and designated Type 79X. Basic tests were done using a training ship, but the operation was unsatisfactory.

In August 1937, the RDF development at HMSS changed, with many of their best researchers brought into the activity. John D. S. Rawlinson was made responsible for improving the Type 79X. To increase the efficiency, he decreased the frequency to 43 MHz ( 7 metre wavelength ). Designated Type 79Y, it had separate, stationary transmitting and receiving antennas.

Prototypes of the Type 79Y air-warning system were successfully tested at sea in early 1938. The detection range on aircraft was between 30 and 50 miles (48 and 80 km), depending on height. The systems were then placed into service in August on the cruiser and in October on the battleship HMS &quot;Rodney&quot;. These were the first vessels in the Royal Navy with RDF systems.

==United States==
In the United States, both the Navy and Army needed means of remotely locating enemy ships and aircraft. In 1930, both services initiated the development of radio equipment that could meet this need. There was little coordination of these efforts; thus, they will be described separately.

===United States Navy===
In the autumn of 1922, Albert H. Taylor and Leo C. Young at the U.S. Naval Aircraft Radio Laboratory were conducting communication experiments when they noticed that a wooden ship in the Potomac River was interfering with their signals. They prepared a memorandum suggesting that this might be used for ship detection in a harbor defense, but their suggestion was not taken up. In 1930, Lawrence A. Hyland working with Taylor and Young, now at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in Washington, D.C., used a similar arrangement of radio equipment to detect a passing aircraft. This led to a proposal and patent for using this technique for detecting ships and aircraft.

A simple wave-interference apparatus can detect the presence of an object, but it cannot determine its location or velocity. That had to await the invention of pulsed radar, and later, additional encoding techniques to extract this information from a CW signal. When Taylor&#x27;s group at the NRL were unsuccessful in getting interference radio accepted as a detection means, Young suggested trying pulsing techniques. This would also allow the direct determination of range to the target. In 1924, Hyland and Young had built such a transmitter for Gregory Breit and Merle A. Tuve at the Carnegie Institution of Washington for successfully measuring the height of the ionosphere.

Robert Morris Page was assigned by Taylor to implement Young&#x27;s suggestion. Page designed a transmitter operating at 60 MHz and pulsed 10 μs in duration and 90 μs between pulses. In December 1934, the apparatus was used to detect a plane at a distance of one mile (1.6 km) flying up and down the Potomac. Although the detection range was small and the indications on the oscilloscope monitor were almost indistinct, it demonstrated the basic concept of a pulsed radar system. Based on this, Page, Taylor, and Young are usually credited with building and demonstrating the world&#x27;s first pulsed radar.

An important subsequent development by Page was the duplexer, a device that allowed the transmitter and receiver to use the same antenna without overwhelming or destroying the sensitive receiver circuitry. This also solved the problem associated with synchronization of separate transmitter and receiver antennas which is critical to accurate position determination of long-range targets.

The experiments with pulsed radar were continued, primarily in improving the receiver for handling the short pulses. In June 1936, the NRL&#x27;s first prototype radar system, now operating at 28.6 MHz, was demonstrated to government officials, successfully tracking an aircraft at distances up to . Their radar was based on low frequency signals, at least by today&#x27;s standards, and thus required large antennas, making it impractical for ship or aircraft mounting.
Antenna size is inversely proportional to the operating frequency; therefore, the operating frequency of the system was increased to 200 MHz, allowing much smaller antennas. The frequency of 200 MHz was the highest possible with existing transmitter tubes and other components. The new system was successfully tested at the NRL in April 1937, That same month, the first sea-borne testing was conducted. The equipment was temporarily installed on the USS &quot;Leary&quot;, with a Yagi antenna mounted on a gun barrel for sweeping the field of view.

Based on success of the sea trials, the NRL further improved the system. Page developed the ring oscillator, allowing multiple output tubes and increasing the pulse-power to 15 kW in 5-μs pulses. A 20-by-23 ft (6 x 7 m), stacked-dipole &quot;bedspring&quot; antenna was used. In laboratory test during 1938, the system, now designated XAF, detected planes at ranges up to . It was installed on the battleship USS &quot;New York&quot; for sea trials starting in January 1939, and became the first operational radio detection and ranging set in the U.S. fleet.

In May 1939, a contract was awarded to RCA for production. Designated CXAM, deliveries started in May 1940. The acronym RADAR was coined from &quot;Radio Detection And Ranging&quot;. One of the first CXAM systems was placed aboard the USS &quot;California&quot;, a battleship that was sunk in the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.

===United States Army===
As the Great Depression started, economic conditions led the U.S. Army Signal Corps to consolidate its widespread laboratory operations to Fort Monmouth, New Jersey. On June 30, 1930, these were designated the Signal Corps Laboratories (SCL) and Lt. Colonel (Dr.) William R. Blair was appointed the SCL Director.

Among other activities, the SCL was made responsible for research in the detection of aircraft by acoustical and infrared radiation means. Blair had performed his doctoral research in the interaction of electromagnet waves with solid materials, and naturally gave attention to this type of detection. Initially, attempts were made to detect infrared radiation, either from the heat of aircraft engines or as reflected from large searchlights with infrared filters, as well as from radio signals generated by the engine ignition.

Some success was made in the infrared detection, but little was accomplished using radio. In 1932, progress at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) on radio interference for aircraft detection was passed on to the Army. While it does not appear that any of this information was used by Blair, the SCL did undertake a systematic survey of what was then known throughout the world about the methods of generating, modulating, and detecting radio signals in the microwave region.

The SCL&#x27;s first definitive efforts in radio-based target detection started in 1934 when the Chief of the Army Signal Corps, after seeing a microwave demonstration by RCA, suggested that radio-echo techniques be investigated. The SCL called this technique radio position-finding (RPF). Based on the previous investigations, the SCL first tried microwaves. During 1934 and 1935, tests of microwave RPF equipment resulted in Doppler-shifted signals being obtained, initially at only a few hundred feet distance and later greater than a mile. These tests involved a bi-static arrangement, with the transmitter at one end of the signal path and the receiver at the other, and the reflecting target passing through or near the path.

Blair was evidently not aware of the success of a pulsed system at the NRL in December 1934. In an internal 1935 note, Blair had commented:
 
In 1936, W. Delmar Hershberger, SCL&#x27;s Chief Engineer at that time, started a modest project in pulsed microwave transmission. Lacking success with microwaves, Hershberger visited the NRL (where he had earlier worked) and saw a demonstration of their pulsed set. Back at the SCL, he and Robert H. Noyes built an experimental apparatus using a 75 watt, 110 MHz (2.73 m) transmitter with pulse modulation and a receiver patterned on the one at the NRL. A request for project funding was turned down by the War Department, but $75,000 for support was diverted from a previous appropriation for a communication project.

In October 1936, Paul E. Watson became the SCL Chief Engineer and led the project. A field setup near the coast was made with the transmitter and receiver separated by a mile. On December 14, 1936, the experimental set detected at up to range aircraft flying in and out of New York City.

Work then began on a prototype system. Ralph I. Cole headed receiver work and William S. Marks lead transmitter improvements. Separate receivers and antennas were used for azimuth and elevation detection. Both receiving and the transmitting antennas used large arrays of dipole wires on wooden frames. The system output was intended to aim a searchlight. The first demonstration of the full set was made on the night of May 26, 1937. A bomber was detected and then illuminated by the searchlight. The observers included the Secretary of War, Henry A. Woodring; he was so impressed that the next day orders were given for the full development of the system. Congress gave an appropriation of $250,000.

The frequency was increased to 200 MHz (1.5 m). The transmitter used 16 tubes in a ring oscillator circuit (developed at the NRL), producing about 75 kW peak power. Major James C. Moore was assigned to head the complex electrical and mechanical design of lobe switching antennas. Engineers from Western Electric and Westinghouse were brought in to assist in the overall development. Designated SCR-268, a prototype was successfully demonstrated in late 1938 at Fort Monroe, Virginia. The production of SCR-268 sets was started by Western Electric in 1939, and it entered service in early 1941.

Even before the SCR-268 entered service, it had been greatly improved. In a project led by Major (Dr.) Harold A. Zahl, two new configurations evolved – the SCR-270 (mobile) and the SCR-271 (fixed-site). Operation at 106 MHz (2.83 m) was selected, and a single water-cooled tube provided 8 kW (100 kW pulsed) output power. Westinghouse received a production contract, and started deliveries near the end of 1940.

The Army deployed five of the first SCR-270 sets around the island of Oahu in Hawaii. At 7:02 on the morning of December 7, 1941, one of these radars detected a flight of aircraft at a range of due north. The observation was passed on to an aircraft warning center where it was misidentified as a flight of U.S. bombers known to be approaching from the mainland. The alarm went unheeded, and at 7:48, the Japanese aircraft first struck at Pearl Harbor.

==USSR==
In 1895, Alexander Stepanovich Popov, a physics instructor at the Imperial Russian Navy school in Kronstadt, developed an apparatus using a coherer tube for detecting distant lightning strikes. The next year, he added a spark-gap transmitter and demonstrated the first radio communication set in Russia. During 1897, while testing this in communicating between two ships in the Baltic Sea, he took note of an interference beat caused by the passage of a third vessel. In his report, Popov wrote that this phenomenon might be used for detecting objects, but he did nothing more with this observation.

In a few years following the 1917 Russian Revolution and the establishment the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR or Soviet Union) in 1924, Germany&#x27;s &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had aircraft capable of penetrating deep into Soviet territory. Thus, the detection of aircraft at night or above clouds was of great interest to the Soviet Air Defense Forces (PVO).

The PVO depended on optical devices for locating targets, and had physicist Pavel K. Oshchepkov conducting research in possible improvement of these devices. In June 1933, Oshchepkov changed his research from optics to radio techniques and started the development of a &quot;razvedyvlatl’naya elektromagnitnaya stantsiya&quot; (reconnaissance electromagnetic station). In a short time, Oshchepkov was made responsible for a technical expertise sector of PVO devoted to &quot;radiolokatory&quot; (radio-location) techniques as well as heading a Special Design Bureau (SKB, spetsialnoe konstruktorskoe byuro) in Leningrad.

===Radio-location beginnings===
The &quot;Glavnoe Artilleriyskoe Upravlenie&quot; (GAU, Main Artillery Administration) was considered the &quot;brains&quot; of the Red Army. It not only had competent engineers and physicists on its central staff, but also had a number of scientific research institutes. Thus, the GAU was also assigned the aircraft detection problem, and Lt. Gen. M. M. Lobanov was placed in charge.

After examining existing optical and acoustical equipment, Lobanov also turned to radio-location techniques. For this he approached the &quot;Tsentral’naya Radiolaboratoriya&quot; (TsRL, Central Radio Laboratory) in Leningrad. Here, Yu. K. Korovin was conducting research on VHF communications, and had built a 50 cm (600 MHz), 0.2 W transmitter using a Barkhausen–Kurz tube. For testing the concept, Korovin arranged the transmitting and receiving antennas along the flight path of an aircraft. On January 3, 1934, a Doppler signal was received by reflections from the aircraft at some 600 m range and 100–150 m altitude.

For further research in detection methods, a major conference on this subject was arranged for the PVO by the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAN). The conference was held in Leningrad in mid-January 1934, and chaired by Abram Fedorovich Ioffe, Director of the Leningrad Physical-Technical Institute (LPTI). Ioffe was generally considered the top Russian physicist of his time. All types of detection techniques were discussed, but radio-location received the greatest attention.

To distribute the conference findings to a wider audience, the proceedings were published the following month in a journal. This included all of the then-existing information on radio-location in the USSR, available (in Russian language) to researchers in this field throughout the world.

Recognizing the potential value of radio-location to the military, the GAU made a separate agreement with the Leningrad Electro-Physics Institute (LEPI), for a radio-location system. This technical effort was led by B. K. Shembel. The LEPI had built a transmitter and receiver to study the radio-reflection characteristics of various materials and targets. Shembel readily made this into an experimental bi-static radio-location system called &quot;Bistro&quot; (Rapid).
The &quot;Bistro&quot; transmitter, operating at 4.7 m (64 MHz), produced near 200 W and was frequency-modulated by a 1 kHz tone. A fixed transmitting antenna gave a broad coverage of what was called a &quot;radioekran&quot; (radio screen). A regenerative receiver, located some distance from the transmitter, had a dipole antenna mounted on a hand-driven reciprocating mechanism. An aircraft passing into the screened zone would reflect the radiation, and the receiver would detect the Doppler-interference beat between the transmitted and reflected signals.
&quot;Bistro&quot; was first tested during the summer of 1934. With the receiver up to 11 km away from the transmitter, the set could only detect an aircraft entering a screen at about range and under 1,000 m. With improvements, it was believed to have a potential range of 75 km, and five sets were ordered in October for field trials. &quot;Bistro&quot; is often cited as the USSR&#x27;s first radar system; however, it was incapable of directly measuring range and thus could not be so classified.

LEPI and TsRL were both made a part of &quot;Nauchno-issledovatelsky institut-9&quot; (NII-9, Scientific Research Institute #9), a new GAU organization opened in Leningrad in 1935. Mikhail A. Bonch-Bruyevich, a renowned radio physicist previously with TsRL and the University of Leningrad, was named the NII-9 Scientific Director.

Research on magnetrons began at Kharkov University in Ukraine during the mid-1920s. Before the end of the decade this had resulted in publications with worldwide distribution, such as the German journal &quot;Annalen der Physik&quot; (&quot;Annals of Physics&quot;). Based on this work, Ioffe recommended that a portion of the LEPI be transferred to the city of Kharkiv, resulting in the Ukrainian Institute of Physics and Technology (LIPT) being formed in 1930. Within the LIPT, the Laboratory of Electromagnetic Oscillations (LEMO), headed by Abram A. Slutskin, continued with magnetron development. Led by Aleksandr S. Usikov, a number of advanced segmented-anode magnetrons evolved. (It is noted that these and other early magnetrons developed in the USSR suffered from frequency instability, a problem in their use in Soviet radar systems.)

In 1936, one of Usikov&#x27;s magnetrons producing about 7 W at 18 cm (1.7 GHz) was used by Shembel at the NII-9 as a transmitter in a &quot;radioiskatel&quot; (radio-seeker) called &quot;Burya&quot; (Storm). Operating similarly to &quot;Bistro&quot;, the range of detection was about 10 km, and provided azimuth and elevation coordinates estimated to within 4 degrees. No attempts were made to make this into a pulsed system, thus, it could not provide range and was not qualified to be classified as a radar. It was, however, the first microwave radio-detection system.

While work by Shembel and Bonch-Bruyevich on continuous-wave systems was taking place at NII-9, Oshehepkov at the SKB and V. V. Tsimbalin of Ioffe&#x27;s LPTI were pursuing a pulsed system. In 1936, they built a radio-location set operating at 4 m (75 MHz) with a peak-power of about 500 W and a 10-μs pulse duration. Before the end of the year, tests using separated transmitting and receiving sites resulted in an aircraft being detected at 7 km. In April 1937, with the peak-pulse power increased to 1 kW and the antenna separation also increased, test showed a detection range of near 17 km at a height of 1.5 km. Although a pulsed system, it was not capable of directly providing range – the technique of using pulses for determining range had not yet been developed.

===Pre-war radio location systems===
In June 1937, all of the work in Leningrad on radio-location suddenly stopped. The infamous Great Purge of dictator Joseph Stalin swept over the military high commands and its supporting scientific community. The PVO chief was executed. Oshchepkov, charged with &quot;high crime&quot;, was sentenced to 10 years at a Gulag penal labor camp. NII-9 as an organization was saved, but Shenbel was dismissed and Bonch-Bruyevich was named the new director.

The &quot;Nauchnoissledovatel&#x27;skii ispytalel&#x27;nyi institut svyazi RKKA&quot; (NIIIS-KA, Scientific Research Institute of Signals of the Red Army), had initially opposed research in radio-location, favoring instead acoustical techniques. However, this portion of the Red Army gained power as a result of the Great Purge, and did an about face, pressing hard for speedy development of radio-location systems. They took over Oshchepkov&#x27;s laboratory and were made responsible for all existing and future agreements for research and factory production. Writing later about the Purge and subsequent effects, General Lobanov commented that it led to the development being placed under a single organization, and the rapid reorganization of the work.

At Oshchepkov&#x27;s former laboratory, work with the 4 m (75 MHz) pulsed-transmission system was continued by A. I. Shestako. Through pulsing, the transmitter produced a peak power of 1 kW, the highest level thus far generated. In July 1938, a fixed-position, bi-static experimental system detected an aircraft at about 30 km range at heights of 500 m, and at 95 km range, for high-flying targets at 7.5 km altitude. The system was still incapable of directly determining the range. The project was then taken up by Ioffe&#x27;s LPTI, resulting in the development of a mobile system designated &quot;Redut&quot; (Redoubt). An arrangement of new transmitter tubes was used, giving near 50 kW peak-power with a 10 μs pulse-duration. Yagi antennas were adopted for both transmitting and receiving.

The &quot;Redut&quot; was first field tested in October 1939, at a site near Sevastopol, a port in Ukraine on the coast of the Black Sea. This testing was in part to show the NKKF (Soviet Navy) the value of early-warning radio-location for protecting strategic ports. With the equipment on a cliff about 160 meters above sea level, a flying boat was detected at ranges up to 150 km. The Yagi antennas were spaced about 1,000 meters; thus, close coordination was required to aim them in synchronization. An improved version of the Redut, the Redut-K, was developed by Aksel Berg in 1940 and placed aboard the light cruiser &quot;Molotov&quot; in April 1941. &quot;Molotov&quot; became the first Soviet warship equipped with radar.

At the NII-9 under Bonch-Bruyevich, scientists developed two types of very advanced microwave generators. In 1938, a linear-beam, velocity-modulated vacuum tube (a klystron) was developed by Nikolay Devyatkov, based on designs from Kharkiv. This device produced about 25 W at 15–18 cm (2.0–1.7 GHz) and was later used in experimental systems. Devyatkov followed this with a simpler, single-resonator device (a reflex klystron). At this same time, D. E. Malyarov and N. F. Alekseyev were building a series of magnetrons, also based on designs from Kharkov; the best of these produced 300 W at 9 cm (3 GHz).
Also at NII-9, D. S. Stogov was placed in charge of the improvements to the &quot;Bistro&quot; system. Redesignated as &quot;Reven&quot; (Rhubarb), it was tested in August 1938, but was only marginally better than the predecessor. With additional minor operational improvements, it was made into a mobile system called &quot;Radio Ulavlivatel Samoletov&quot; (RUS, Radio Catcher of Aircraft), soon designated as &quot;RUS-1&quot;. This continuous-wave, bi-static system had a truck-mounted transmitter operating at 4.7 m (64 MHz) and two truck-mounted receivers.

Although the &quot;RUS-1&quot; transmitter was in a cabin on the rear of a truck, the antenna had to be strung between external poles anchored to the ground. A second truck carrying the electrical generator and other equipment was backed against the transmitter truck. Two receivers were used, each in a truck-mounted cabin with a dipole antenna on a rotatable pole extended overhead. In use, the receiver trucks were placed about 40 km apart; thus, with two positions, it would be possible to make a rough estimate of the range by triangulation on a map.

The &quot;RUS-1&quot; system was tested and put into production in 1939, then entered service in 1940, becoming the first deployed radio-location system in the Red Army. About 45 &quot;RUS-1&quot; systems were built at the Svetlana Factory in Leningrad before the end of 1941, and deployed along the western USSR borders and in the Far East. Without direct ranging capability, however, the military found the &quot;RUS-1&quot; to be of little value.

Even before the demise of efforts in Leningrad, the NIIIS-KA had contracted with the UIPT in Kharkov to investigate a pulsed radio-location system for anti-aircraft applications. This led the LEMO, in March 1937, to start an internally funded project with the code name &quot;Zenit&quot; (a popular football team at the time). The transmitter development was led by Usikov, supplier of the magnetron used earlier in the &quot;Burya&quot;. For the &quot;Zenit&quot;, Usikov used a 60 cm (500 MHz) magnetron pulsed at 10–20 μs duration and providing 3 kW pulsed power, later increased to near 10 kW. Semion Braude led the development of a superheterodyne receiver using a tunable magnetron as the local oscillator. The system had separate transmitting and receiving antennas set about 65 m apart, built with dipoles backed by 3-meter parabolic reflectors. 
&quot;Zenit&quot; was first tested in October 1938. In this, a medium-sized bomber was detected at a range of 3 km. The testing was observed by the NIIIS-KA and found to be sufficient for starting a contracted effort. An agreement was made in May 1939, specifying the required performance and calling for the system to be ready for production by 1941. The transmitter was increased in power, the antennas had selsens added to allow them to track, and the receiver sensitivity was improved by using an RCA 955 acorn triode as the local oscillator.

A demonstration of the improved &quot;Zenit&quot; was given in September 1940. In this, it was shown that the range, altitude, and azimuth of an aircraft flying at heights between 4,000 and 7,000 meters could be determined at up to 25 km distance. The time required for these measurements, however, was about 38 seconds, far too long for use by anti-aircraft batteries. Also, with the antennas aimed at a low angle, there was a dead zone of some distance caused by interference from ground-level reflections. While this performance was not satisfactory for immediate gun-laying applications, it was the first full three-coordinate radio-location system in the Soviet Union and showed the way for future systems.

Work at the LEMO continued on &quot;Zenit&quot;, particularly in converting it into a single-antenna system designated &quot;Rubin&quot;. This effort, however, was disrupted by the invasion of the USSR by Germany in June 1941. In a short while, the development activities at Kharkov were ordered to be evacuated to the Far East. The research efforts in Leningrad were similarly dispersed.

After eight years of effort by highly qualified physicists and engineers, the USSR entered World War II without a fully developed and fielded radar system.

==Japan==
As a seafaring nation, Japan had an early interest in wireless (radio) communications. The first known use of wireless telegraphy in warfare at sea was by the Imperial Japanese Navy, in defeating the Russian Imperial Fleet in 1904 at the Battle of Port Arthur. There was an early interest in equipment for radio direction-finding, for use in both navigation and military surveillance. The Imperial Navy developed an excellent receiver for this purpose in 1921, and soon most of the Japanese warships had this equipment.

In the two decades between the two World Wars, radio technology in Japan made advancements on a par with that in the western nations. There were often impediments, however, in transferring these advancements into the military. For a long time, the Japanese had believed that they had the best fighting capability of any military force in the world. The military leaders, who were then also in control of the government, sincerely felt that the weapons, aircraft, and ships that they had built were fully sufficient and, with these as they were, the Japanese Army and Navy were invincible. In 1936, Japan joined Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in a Tripartite Pact.

===Technology background===
Radio engineering was strong in Japan&#x27;s higher education institutions, especially the Imperial (government-financed) universities. This included undergraduate and graduate study, as well as academic research in this field. Special relationships were established with foreign universities and institutes, particularly in Germany, with Japanese teachers and researchers often going overseas for advanced study.

The academic research tended toward the improvement of basic technologies, rather than their specific applications. There was considerable research in high-frequency and high-power oscillators, such as the magnetron, but the application of these devices was generally left to industrial and military researchers.

One of Japan&#x27;s best-known radio researchers in the 1920s–1930s era was Professor Hidetsugu Yagi. After graduate study in Germany, England, and America, Yagi joined Tohoku University, where his research centered on antennas and oscillators for high-frequency communications. A summary of the radio research work at Tohoku University was contained in a 1928 seminal paper by Yagi.

Jointly with Shintaro Uda, one of Yagi&#x27;s first doctoral students, a radically new antenna emerged. It had a number of parasitic elements (directors and reflectors) and would come to be known as the Yagi-Uda or Yagi antenna. A U.S. patent, issued in May 1932, was assigned to RCA. To this day, this is the most widely used directional antenna worldwide.

The cavity magnetron was also of interest to Yagi. This HF (~10-MHz) device had been invented in 1921 by Albert W. Hull at General Electric, and Yagi was convinced that it could function in the VHF or even the UHF region. In 1927, Kinjiro Okabe, another of Yagi&#x27;s early doctoral students, developed a split-anode device that ultimately generated oscillations at wavelengths down to about 12 cm (2.5 GHz).

Researchers at other Japanese universities and institutions also started projects in magnetron development, leading to improvements in the split-anode device. These included Kiyoshi Morita at the Tokyo Institute of Technology, and Tsuneo Ito at Tokoku University.

Shigeru Nakajima at Japan Radio Company (JRC) saw a commercial potential of these devices and began the further development and subsequent very profitable production of magnetrons for the medical dielectric heating (diathermy) market. The only military interest in magnetrons was shown by Yoji Ito at the Naval Technical Research Institute (NTRI).

The NTRI was formed in 1922, and became fully operational in 1930. Located at Meguro, Tokyo, near the Tokyo Institute of Technology, first-rate scientists, engineers, and technicians were engaged in activities ranging from designing giant submarines to building new radio tubes. Included were all of the precursors of radar, but this did not mean that the heads of the Imperial Navy accepted these accomplishments.

In 1936, Tsuneo Ito (no relationship to Yoji Ito) developed an 8-split-anode magnetron that produced about 10 W at 10 cm (3 GHz). Based on its appearance, it was named &quot;Tachibana&quot; (or Mandarin, an orange citrus fruit). Tsuneo Ito also joined the NTRI and continued his research on magnetrons in association with Yoji Ito. In 1937, they developed the technique of coupling adjacent segments (called push-pull), resulting in frequency stability, an extremely important magnetron breakthrough.

By early 1939, NTRI/JRC had jointly developed a 10-cm (3-GHz), stable-frequency Mandarin-type magnetron (No. M3) that, with water cooling, could produce 500-W power. In the same time period, magnetrons were built with 10 and 12 cavities operating as low as 0.7 cm (40 GHz). The configuration of the M3 magnetron was essentially the same as that used later in the magnetron developed by Boot and Randall at Birmingham University in early 1940, including the improvement of strapped cavities. Unlike the high-power magnetron in Britain, however, the initial device from the NTRI generated only a few hundred watts.

In general, there was no lack of scientific and engineering capabilities in Japan; their warships and aircraft clearly showed high levels of technical competency. They were ahead of Britain in the development of magnetrons, and their Yagi antenna was the world standard for VHF systems. It was simply that the top military leaders failed to recognize how the application of radio in detection and ranging – what was often called the Radio Range Finder (RRF) – could be of value, particularly in any defensive role; offense not defense, totally dominated their thinking.

===Imperial Army===
In 1938, engineers from the Research Office of Nippon Electric Company (NEC) were making coverage tests on high-frequency transmitters when rapid fading of the signal was observed. This occurred whenever an aircraft passed over the line between the transmitter and receiving meter. Masatsugu Kobayashi, the Manager of NEC&#x27;s Tube Department, recognized that this was due to the beat-frequency interference of the direct signal and the Doppler-shifted signal reflected from the aircraft.

Kobayashi suggested to the Army Science Research Institute that this phenomenon might be used as an aircraft warning method. Although the Army had rejected earlier proposals for using radio-detection techniques, this one had appeal because it was based on an easily understandable method and would require little developmental cost and risk to prove its military value. NEC assigned Kinji Satake of their Research Institute to develop a system called the Bi-static Doppler Interference Detector (BDID).
For testing the prototype system, it was set up on an area recently occupied by Japan along the coast of China. The system operated between 4.0–7.5 MHz (75–40 m) and involved a number of widely spaced stations; this formed a radio screen that could detect the presence (but nothing more) of an aircraft at distances up to . The BDID was the Imperial Army&#x27;s first deployed radio-based detection system, placed into operation in early 1941.

A similar system was developed by Satake for the Japanese homeland. Information centers received oral warnings from the operators at BDID stations, usually spaced between 65 and 240 km (40 and 150 mi). To reduce homing vulnerability – a great fear of the military – the transmitters operated with only a few watts power. Although originally intended to be temporary until better systems were available, they remained in operation throughout the war. It was not until after the start of war that the Imperial Army had equipment that could be called radar.

===Imperial Navy===
In the mid-1930s, some of the technical specialists in the Imperial Navy became interested in the possibility of using radio to detect aircraft. For consultation, they turned to Professor Yagi who was the Director of the Radio Research Laboratory at Osaka Imperial University. Yagi suggested that this might be done by examining the Doppler frequency-shift in a reflected signal.
Funding was provided to the Osaka Laboratory for experimental investigation of this technique. Kinjiro Okabe, the inventor of the split-anode magnetron and who had followed Yagi to Osaka, led the effort. Theoretical analyses indicated that the reflections would be greater if the wavelength was approximately the same as the size of aircraft structures. Thus, a VHF transmitter and receiver with Yagi antennas separated some distance were used for the experiment.
In 1936, Okabe successfully detected a passing aircraft by the Doppler-interference method; this was the first recorded demonstration in Japan of aircraft detection by radio. With this success, Okabe&#x27;s research interest switched from magnetrons to VHF equipment for target detection. This, however, did not lead to any significant funding. The top levels of the Imperial Navy believed that any advantage of using radio for this purpose were greatly outweighed by enemy intercept and disclosure of the sender&#x27;s presence.

Historically, warships in formation used lights and horns to avoid collision at night or when in fog. Newer techniques of VHF radio communications and direction-finding might also be used, but all of these methods were highly vulnerable to enemy interception. At the NTRI, Yoji Ito proposed that the UHF signal from a magnetron might be used to generate a very narrow beam that would have a greatly reduced chance of enemy detection.
Development of microwave system for collision avoidance started in 1939, when funding was provided by the Imperial Navy to JRC for preliminary experiments. In a cooperative effort involving Yoji Ito of the NTRI and Shigeru Nakajima of JRC, an apparatus using a 3-cm (10-GHz) magnetron with frequency modulation was designed and built. The equipment was used in an attempt to detect reflections from tall structures a few kilometers away. This experiment gave poor results, attributed to the very low power from the magnetron.

The initial magnetron was replaced by one operating at 16 cm (1.9 GHz) and with considerably higher power. The results were then much better, and in October 1940, the equipment obtained clear echoes from a ship in Tokyo Bay at a distance of about . There was still no commitment by top Japanese naval officials for using this technology aboard warships. Nothing more was done at this time, but late in 1941, the system was adopted for limited use.

In late 1940, Japan arranged for two technical missions to visit Germany and exchange information about their developments in military technology. Commander Yoji Ito represented the Navy&#x27;s interest in radio applications, and Lieutenant Colonel Kinji Satake did the same for the Army. During a visit of several months, they exchanged significant general information, as well as limited secret materials in some technologies, but little directly concerning radio-detection techniques. Neither side even mentioned magnetrons, but the Germans did apparently disclose their use of pulsed techniques.

After receiving the reports from the technical exchange in Germany, as well as intelligence reports concerning the success of Britain with firing using RDF, the Naval General Staff reversed itself and tentatively accepted pulse-transmission technology. On August 2, 1941, even before Yoji Ito returned to Japan, funds were allocated for the initial development of pulse-modulated radars. Commander Chuji Hashimoto of the NTRI was responsible for initiating this activity.

A prototype set operating at 4.2 m (71 MHz) and producing about 5 kW was completed on a crash basis. With the NTRI in the lead, the firm NEC and the Research Laboratory of Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK) made major contributions to the effort. Kenjiro Takayanagi, Chief Engineer of NHK&#x27;s experimental television station and called &quot;the father of Japanese television&quot;, was especially helpful in rapidly developing the pulse-forming and timing circuits, as well as the receiver display. In early September 1941, the prototype set was first tested; it detected a single bomber at and a flight of aircraft at .
The system, Japan&#x27;s first full Radio Range Finder (RRF – radar), was designated Mark 1 Model 1. Contracts were given to three firms for serial production; NEC built the transmitters and pulse modulators, Japan Victor the receivers and associated displays, and Fuji Electrical the antennas and their servo drives. The system operated at 3.0 m (100 MHz) with a peak-power of 40 kW. Dipole arrays with matte+-type reflectors were used in separate antennas for transmitting and receiving.

In November 1941, the first manufactured RRF was placed into service as a land-based early-warning system at Katsuura, Chiba, a town on the Pacific coast about from Tokyo. A large system, it weighed close to 8,700 kg (19,000 lb). The detection range was about for single aircraft and for groups.

==Netherlands==
Early radio-based detection in the Netherlands was along two independent lines: one a microwave system at the firm Philips and the other a VHF system at a laboratory of the Armed Forces.
The Philips Company in Eindhoven, Netherlands, operated &quot;Natuurkundig Laboratorium&quot; (NatLab) for fundamental research related to its products. NatLab researcher Klaas Posthumus developed a magnetron split into four elements. 
In developing a communication system using this magnetron, C.H.J.A. Staal was testing the transmission by using parabolic transmitting and receiving antennas set side-by-side, both aimed at a large plate some distance away. To overcome frequency instability of the magnetron, pulse modulation was used. It was found that the plate reflected a strong signal.

Recognizing the potential importance of this as a detection device, NatLab arranged a demonstration for the &quot;Koninklijke Marine&quot; (Royal Netherlands Navy). This was conducted in 1937 across the entrance to the main naval port at Marsdiep. Reflections from sea waves obscured the return from the target ship, but the Navy was sufficiently impressed to initiate sponsorship of the research. In 1939, an improved set was demonstrated at Wijk aan Zee, detecting a vessel at a distance of .

A prototype system was built by Philips, and plans were started by the firm Nederlandse Seintoestellen Fabriek (a Philips subsidiary) for building a chain of warning stations to protect the primary ports. Some field testing of the prototype was conducted, but the project was discontinued when Germany invaded the Netherlands on May 10, 1940. Within the NatLab, however, the work was continued in great secrecy until 1942.

In the late 20&#x27;s and early 30&#x27;s, there were widespread rumours of a &quot;death ray&quot; being developed. Nobel prize winner Kamerlingh Onnes quickly discounted death rays. However, he recommended to set up a committee to investigate issues with physics in Weaponry. In November 1924, the Minister of War secretly established the Committee for Physical Armament chaired by Prof. G.J. Elias. In 1927, the Committee established a laboratory in support the Netherlands Armed Forces, called &quot;Meetgebouw&quot; (Measurements Building) located on the Plain of Waalsdorp. 

In 1934, J.L.W.C. von Weiler joined the LFO and, with S.G. Gratama, began research on a 1.25-m (240-MHz) communication system for artillery spotting.

In 1935, while tests were being conducted on this system, a passing flock of birds disturbed the signal. Realizing that this might be a potential method for detecting aircraft, the Minister of War ordered the experiments to continue. Weiler and Gratama set about developing a system for directing searchlights and aiming anti-aircraft guns.

The experimental &quot;electrical listening device&quot; operated at 70 cm (430 MHz) and used pulsed transmission at an RPF of 10 kHz. A transmit-receive blocking circuit was developed to allow a common antenna. The received signal was displayed on a CR tube with a circular time base. This set was demonstrated to the Army in April 1938 and detected an aircraft at a range of . An Army general was not convinced about the operational use, however, because it could not withstand the harsh environment of Army combat conditions.

Nevertheless, funding was provided for final production of the &quot;M39&quot;, and Max Staal was added to the team. To maintain secrecy, the production was assigned to different organizations: The transmitter was built at the Delft Technical College and the receiver at the University of Leiden. The mechanical construction was built by van Heijst in The Hague. Ten sets would be assembled under the personal supervision of J.J.A. Schagen van Leeuwen, head of the firm Hazemeijer Fabriek van Signaalapparaten.The Dutch electric listening device

The prototype had a peak-power of 1 kW, and used a pulse length of 2 to 3 μs with a 10- to 20 kHz PRF. The receiver was a super-heterodyne type using Acorn tubes and a 6 MHz IF stage. The antenna consisted of 4 rows of 16 half-wave dipoles backed by a 3- by 3-meter mesh screen. The operator used a bicycle-type drive to rotate the antenna and the elevation could be changed using a hand crank. 

Several sets were completed, and one was put into operation on the Malieveld in The Hague just before the Netherlands fell to Germany in May 1940. The set worked well, spotting enemy aircraft during the first days of fighting. To prevent capture, operating units and plans for the system were destroyed. Von Weiler and Max Staal fled to England aboard one of the last ships able to leave with a set of mechanical and electric drawings of the M39. Via another route, two disassembled transmitter/receiver sets arrived in England. Later, Gratama [* other sources show that he stayed behind as director of the PTT Physics Laboratory group] and van Leeuwen also escaped to England.
Based on the electric listening device sets, Van Weiler and Staal developed a Range and Direction Finder (&quot;radar&quot;) for the two Hazemeijer fire control units controlling the twin-mounted Bofors 400 mm guns of the HNLMS Isaac Sweers. The set was called RDF 289.

==France==
In 1927, French physicists Camille Gutton and Emile Pierret experimented with magnetrons and other devices generating wavelengths going down to 16 cm. Camille&#x27;s son, Henri Gutton, was with the Compagnie générale de la télégraphie sans fil (CSF) where he and Robert Warneck improved his father&#x27;s magnetrons.

In 1934, following systematic studies on the magnetron, the research branch of the CSF, headed by Maurice Ponte, submitted a patent application for a device designed to detect obstacles using continuous radiation of ultra-short wavelengths produced by a magnetron. These were still CW systems and depended on Doppler interference for detection. However, as most modern radars, antennas were collocated. The device was measuring distance and azimuth but not directly as in the later &quot;radar&quot; on a screen (1939). Still, this was the first patent of an operational radio-detection apparatus using centimetric wavelengths.

The system was tested in late 1934 aboard the cargo ship &quot;Oregon&quot;, with two transmitters working at 80 cm and 16 cm wavelengths. Coastlines and boats were detected from a range of 10–12 nautical miles. The shortest wavelength was chosen for the final design, which equipped the liner as early as mid-1935 for operational use.

In late 1937, Maurice Elie at SFR developed a means of pulse-modulating transmitter tubes. This led to a new 16-cm system with a peak power near 500 W and a pulse width of 6 μs. French and U.S. patents were filed in December 1939. The system was planned to be sea-tested aboard the &quot;Normandie&quot;, but this was cancelled at the outbreak of war.

At the same time, Pierre David at the &quot;Laboratoire National de Radioélectricité&quot; (National Laboratory of Radioelectricity, LNR) experimented with reflected radio signals at about a meter wavelength. Starting in 1931, he observed that aircraft caused interference to the signals. The LNR then initiated research on a detection technique called &quot;barrage électromagnétique&quot; (electromagnetic curtain). While this could indicate the general location of penetration, precise determination of direction and speed was not possible.

In 1936, the &quot;Défense Aérienne du Territoire&quot; (Defence of Air Territory), ran tests on David&#x27;s electromagnetic curtain. In the tests, the system detected most of the entering aircraft, but too many were missed. As the war grew closer, the need for an aircraft detection was critical. David realized the advantages of a pulsed system, and in October 1938 he designed a 50 MHz, pulse-modulated system with a peak-pulse power of 12 kW. This was built by the firm SADIR.

France declared war on Germany on September 3, 1939, and there was a great need for an early-warning detection system. The SADIR system was taken to near Toulon, and detected and measured the range of invading aircraft as far as . The SFR pulsed system was set up near Paris where it detected aircraft at ranges up to . However, the German advance was overwhelming and emergency measures had to be taken; it was too late for France to develop radars alone and it was decided that her breakthroughs would be shared with her allies.

In mid-1940, Maurice Ponte, from the laboratories of CSF in Paris, presented a cavity magnetron designed by Henri Gutton at SFR (see above) to the GEC laboratories at Wembley, Britain. This magnetron was designed for pulsed operation at a wavelength of 16 cm. Unlike other magnetron designs to that day, such as the Boots and Randall magnetron (see British contributions above), this tube used an oxide-coated cathode with a peak power output of 1 kW, demonstrating that oxide cathodes were the solution for producing high-power pulses at short wavelengths, a problem which had eluded British and American researchers for years. The significance of this event was underlined by Eric Megaw, in a 1946 review of early radar developments: &quot;This was the starting point of the use of the oxide cathode in practically all our subsequent pulsed transmitting waves and as such was a significant contribution to British radar. The date was the 8th May 1940&quot;. A tweaked version of this magnetron reached a peak output of 10 kW by August 1940. It was that model which, in turn, was handed to the Americans as a token of good faith during the negotiations made by the Tizard delegation in 1940 to obtain from the U.S. the resources necessary for Britain to exploit the full military potential of her research and development work.

==Italy==
Guglielmo Marconi initiated the research in Italy on radio-based detection technology. In 1933, while participating with his Italian firm in experiments with a 600 MHz communications link across Rome, he noted transmission disturbances caused by moving objects adjacent to its path. This led to the development at his laboratory at Cornegliano of a 330-MHz (0.91-m) CW Doppler detection system that he called &quot;radioecometro&quot;. Barkhausen–Kurz tubes were used in both the transmitter and receiver.

In May 1935, Marconi demonstrated his system to the Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini and members of the military General Staff; however the output power was insufficient for military use. While Marconi&#x27;s demonstration raised considerable interest, little more was done with his apparatus.

Mussolini directed that radio-based detection technology be further developed, and it was assigned to the &quot;Regio Istituto Elettrotecnico e delle Comunicazioni&quot; (RIEC, Royal Institute for Electro-technics and Communications). The RIEC had been established in 1916 on the campus of the Italian Naval Academy in Livorno. Lieutenant Ugo Tiberio, a physics and radio-technology instructor at the Academy, was assigned to head the project on a part-time basis.

Tiberio prepared a report on developing an experimental apparatus that he called &quot;telemetro radiofonico del rivelatore&quot; (RDT, Radio-Detector Telemetry). The report, submitted in mid-1936, included what was later known as the radar range equation. When the work got underway, Nello Carrara, a civilian physics instructor who had been doing research at the RIEC in microwaves, was added to be responsible for developing the RDT transmitter.

Before the end of 1936, Tiberio and Carrara had demonstrated the EC-1, the first Italian RDT system. This had an FM transmitter operating at 200 MHz (1.5 m) with a single parabolic cylinder antenna. It detected by mixing the transmitted and the Doppler-shifted reflected signals, resulting in an audible tone.

The EC-1 did not provide a range measurement; to add this capability, development of a pulsed system was initiated in 1937. Captain Alfeo Brandimarte joined the group and primarily designed the first pulsed system, the EC-2. This operated at 175 MHz (1.7 m) and used a single antenna made with a number of equi-phased dipoles. The detected signal was intended to be displayed on an oscilloscope. There were many problems, and the system never reached the testing stage.
Work then turned to developing higher power and operating frequencies. Carrara, in cooperation with the firm FIVRE, developed a magnetron-like device. This was composed of a pair of triodes connected to a resonate cavity and produced 10 kW at 425 MHz (70 cm). It was used in designing two versions of the EC-3, one for shipboard and the other for coastal defense.

Italy, joining Germany, entered WWII in June 1940 without an operational RDT. A breadboard of the EC-3 was built and tested from atop a building at the Academy, but most RDT work was stopped as direct support of the war took priority.

==Others==
In early 1939, the British Government invited representatives from the most technically advanced Commonwealth Nations to visit England for briefings and demonstrations on the highly secret RDF (radar) technology. Based on this, RDF developments were started in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa by September 1939. In addition, this technology was independently developed in Hungary early in the war period.

Australia: the Radiophysics Laboratory in Australia was established at Sydney University under the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research; John H. Piddington was responsible for RDF development. The first project was a 200-MHz (1.5-m) shore-defense system for the Australian Army. Designated ShD, this was first tested in September 1941, and eventually installed at 17 ports. Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, the Royal Australian Air Force urgently needed an air-warning system, and Piddington&#x27;s team, using the ShD as a basis, put the AW Mark I together in five days. It was being installed in Darwin, Northern Territory, when Australia received the first Japanese attack on February 19, 1942. A short time later, it was converted to a light-weight transportable version, the LW-AW Mark II; this was used by the Australian forces, as well as the U.S. Army, in early island landings in the South Pacific.

Canada: The early RDF developments in Canada were at the Radio Section of the National Research Council of Canada. Using commercial components and with essentially no further assistance from Britain, John Tasker Henderson led a team in developing the Night Watchman, a surface-warning system for the Royal Canadian Navy to protect the entrance to the Halifax Harbour. Successfully tested in July 1940, this set operated at 200 MHz (1.5 m), had a 1 kW output with a pulse length of 0.5 μs, and used a relatively small, fixed antenna. This was followed by a ship-borne set designated Surface Warning 1st Canadian (SW1C) with the antenna hand-rotated through the use of a Chevrolet steering wheel in the operator&#x27;s compartment. The SW1C was first tested at sea in mid-May 1941, but the performance was so poor compared to the Royal Navy&#x27;s Model 271 ship-borne radar that the Royal Canadian Navy eventually adopted the British 271 in place of the SW1C.

For coastal defense by the Canadian Army, a 200 MHz set with a transmitter similar to the Night Watchman was developed. Designated CD, it used a large, rotating antenna atop a wooden tower. The CD was put into operation in January 1942.

New Zealand: Ernest Marsden represented New Zealand at the briefings in England, and then established two facilities for RDF development – one in Wellington at the Radio Section of the Central NZ Post Office, and another at Canterbury University College in Christchurch. Charles N. Watson-Munro led the development of land-based and airborne sets at Wellington, while Frederick W. G. White led the development of shipboard sets at Christchurch.

Before the end of 1939, the Wellington group had converted an existing 180-MHz (1.6-m), 1 kW transmitter to produce 2-μs pulses and tested it to detect large vessels at up to 30 km; this was designated CW (Coastal Watching). A similar set, designated CD (Coast Defense) used a CRT for display and had lobe-switching on the receiving antenna; this was deployed in Wellington in late 1940. A partially completed ASV 200 MHz set was brought from Britain by Marsden, and another group at Wellington built this into an aircraft set for the Royal New Zealand Air Force; this was first flown in early 1940. At Christchurch, there was a smaller staff and work went slower, but by July 1940, a 430-MHz (70-cm), 5 kW set was tested. Two types, designated SW (Ship Warning) and SWG (Ship Warning, Gunnery), were placed into service by the Royal New Zealand Navy starting in August 1941. In all some 44 types were developed in New Zealand during WWII. 

Radar systems were developed from 1939; initially New Zealand made but then (because of difficulty on sourcing components) British made. Transportable GCI radar sets were deployed in the Pacific, including one with RNZAF personnel at the American aerodrome at Henderson Field, Guadalcanal in September 1942, where the American SCR 270-B sets could not plot heights so were inadequate against frequent Japanese night raids. In the first half of 1943 additional New Zealand radar units and staff were sent to the Pacific at the request of COMOSPAC, Admiral Halsey.

South Africa did not have a representative at the 1939 meetings in England, but in mid-September, as Ernest Marsden was returning by ship to New Zealand, Basil F. J. Schonland came aboard and received three days of briefings. Schonland, a world authority on lightning and Director of the Bernard Price Institute of Geophysics at Witwatersrand University, immediately started an RDF development using amateur radio components and Institute&#x27;s lightning-monitoring equipment. Designated JB (for Johannesburg), the 90-MHz (3.3-m), 500-W mobile system was tested in November 1939, just two months after its start. The prototype was operated in Durban before the end of 1939, detecting ships and aircraft at distances up to 80 km, and by the next March a system was fielded by anti-aircraft brigades of the South African Defence Force.

Hungary: Zoltán Lajos Bay in Hungary was a Professor of Physics at the Technical University of Budapest as well as the Research Director of Egyesült Izzolampa (IZZO), a radio and electrical manufacturing firm. In late 1942, IZZO was directed by the Minister of Defense to develop a radio-location (&quot;rádiólokáció&quot;, radar) system. Using journal papers on ionospheric measurements for information on pulsed transmission, Bay developed a system called &quot;Sas&quot; (Eagle) around existing communications hardware.

The &quot;Sas&quot; operated at 120 MHz (2.5 m) and was in a cabin with separate transmitting and receiving dipole arrays attached; the assembly was all on a rotatable platform. According to published records, the system was tested in 1944 atop Mount János and had a range of &quot;better than 500 km&quot;. A second &quot;Sas&quot; was installed at another location. There is no indication that either &quot;Sas&quot; installation was ever in regular service. After the war, Bay used a modified &quot;Sas&quot; to successfully bounce a signal off the moon.

==World War II radar==

At the start of World War II in September 1939, both the United Kingdom and Germany knew of each other&#x27;s ongoing efforts in radio navigation and its countermeasures – the &quot;Battle of the beams&quot;. Also, both nations were generally aware of, and intensely interested in, the other&#x27;s developments in radio-based detection and tracking, and engaged in an active campaign of espionage and false leaks about their respective equipment. By the time of the Battle of Britain, both sides were deploying range and direction-finding units (radars) and control stations as part of integrated air defense capability. However, the German &quot;Funkmessgerät&quot; (radio measuring device) systems could not assist in an offensive role and was thus not supported by Adolf Hitler. Also, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; did not sufficiently appreciate the importance of British Range and Direction Finding (RDF) stations as part of RAF&#x27;s air defense capability, contributing to their failure.

While the United Kingdom and Germany led in pre-war advances in the use of radio for detection and tracking of aircraft, there were also developments in the United States, the Soviet Union, and Japan. Wartime systems in all of these nations will be summarized. The acronym RADAR (for RAdio Detection And Ranging) was coined by the U.S. Navy in 1940, and the subsequent name &quot;radar&quot; was soon widely used. The XAF and CXAM search radars were designed by the Naval Research Laboratory, and were the first operational radars in the US fleet, produced by RCA.

When France had just fallen to the Nazis and Britain had no money to develop the cavity magnetron on a massive scale, Churchill agreed that Sir Henry Tizard should offer the cavity magnetron to the Americans in exchange for their financial and industrial help (the Tizard Mission). An early 6 kW version, built in England by the General Electric Company Research Laboratories, Wembley, London (not to be confused with the similarly named American company General Electric), was given to the US government in September 1940. The British magnetron was a thousand times more powerful than the best American transmitter at the time and produced accurate pulses. At the time the most powerful equivalent microwave producer available in the US (a klystron) had a power of only ten watts. The cavity magnetron was widely used during World War II in microwave radar equipment and is often credited with giving Allied radar a considerable performance advantage over German and Japanese radars, thus directly influencing the outcome of the war. It was later described by noted Historian James Phinney Baxter III as &quot;The most valuable cargo ever brought to our shores&quot;.

The Bell Telephone Laboratories made a producible version from the magnetron delivered to America by the Tizard Mission, and before the end of 1940, the Radiation Laboratory had been set up on the campus of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop various types of radar using the magnetron. By early 1941, portable centimetric airborne radars were being tested in American and British aircraft. In late 1941, the Telecommunications Research Establishment in Great Britain used the magnetron to develop a revolutionary airborne, ground-mapping radar codenamed H2S; and was partly developed by Alan Blumlein and Bernard Lovell. The magnetron radars used by the US (e.g. H2X) and Britain could spot the periscope of a U-boat.

==Post-war radar==
World War II, which gave impetus to the great surge in radar development, ended between the Allies and Germany in May 1945, followed by Japan in August. With this, radar activities in Germany and Japan ceased for a number of years. In other countries, particularly the United States, Britain, and the USSR, the politically unstable post-war years saw continued radar improvements for military applications. In fact, these three nations all made significant efforts in bringing scientists and engineers from Germany to work in their weapon programs; in the U.S., this was under Operation Paperclip.

Even before the end of the war, various projects directed toward non-military applications of radar and closely related technologies were initiated. The US Army Air Forces and the British RAF had made wartime advances in using radar for handling aircraft landing, and this was rapidly expanded into the civil sector. The field of radio astronomy was one of the related technologies; although discovered before the war, it immediately flourished in the late 1940s with many scientists around the world establishing new careers based on their radar experience.

Four techniques, highly important in post-war radars, were matured in the late 1940s-early 1950s: pulse Doppler, monopulse, phased array, and synthetic aperture; the first three were known and even used during wartime developments, but were matured later.
*Pulse-Doppler radar (often known as moving target indication or MTI), uses the Doppler-shifted signals from targets to better detect moving targets in the presence of clutter.
*Monopulse radar (also called simultaneous lobing) was conceived by Robert Page at the NRL in 1943. With this, the system derives error-angle information from a single pulse, greatly improving the tracking accuracy.
*Phased-array radar has the many segments of a large antenna separately controlled, allowing the beam to be quickly directed. This greatly reduces the time necessary to change the beam direction from one point to another, allowing almost simultaneous tracking of multiple targets while maintaining overall surveillance.
*Synthetic-aperture radar (SAR), was invented in the early 1950s at Goodyear Aircraft Corporation. Using a single, relatively small antenna carried on an aircraft, a SAR combines the returns from each pulse to produce a high-resolution image of the terrain comparable to that obtained by a much larger antenna. SAR has wide applications, particularly in and remote sensing.

One of the early applications of digital computers was in switching the signal phase in elements of large phased-array antennas. As smaller computers came into being, these were quickly applied to digital signal processing using algorithms for improving radar performance.

Other advances in radar systems and applications in the decades following WWII are far too many to be included herein. The following sections are intended to provide representative samples.

===Military radars===
In the United States, the Rad Lab at MIT officially closed at the end of 1945. The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and the Army&#x27;s Evans Signal Laboratory continued with new activities in centimeter radar development. The United States Air Force (USAF) – separated from the Army in 1946 – concentrated radar research at their Cambridge Research Center (CRC) at Hanscom Field, Massachusetts. In 1951, MIT opened the Lincoln Laboratory for joint developments with the CRC. While the Bell Telephone Laboratories embarked on major communications upgrades, they continued with the Army in radar for their ongoing Nike air-defense program

In Britain, the RAF&#x27;s Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE) and the Army&#x27;s Radar Research and Development Establishment (RRDE) both continued at reduced levels at Malvern, Worcestershire, then in 1953 were combined to form the Radar Research Establishment. In 1948, all of the Royal Navy&#x27;s radio and radar R&amp;D activities were combined to form the Admiralty Signal and Radar Establishment, located near Portsmouth, Hampshire. The USSR, although devastated by the war, immediately embarked on the development of new weapons, including radars.

During the Cold War period following WWII, the primary &quot;axis&quot; of combat shifted to lie between the United States and the Soviet Union. By 1949, both sides had nuclear weapons carried by bombers. To provide early warning of an attack, both deployed huge radar networks of increasing sophistication at ever-more remote locations. In the West, the first such system was the Pinetree Line, deployed across Canada in the early 1950s, backed up with radar pickets on ships and oil platforms off the east and west coasts.

The Pinetree Line initially used vintage pulsed radars and was soon supplemented with the Mid-Canada Line (MCL). Soviet technology improvements made these Lines inadequate and, in a construction project involving 25,000 persons, the Distant Early Warning Line (DEW Line) was completed in 1957. Stretching from Alaska to Baffin Island and covering over , the DEW Line consisted of 63 stations with AN/FPS-19 high-power, pulsed, L-Band radars, most augmented by AN/FPS-23 pulse-Doppler systems. The Soviet Unit tested its first Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) in August 1957, and in a few years the early-warning role was passed almost entirely to the more capable DEW Line.

Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union then had ICBMs with nuclear warheads, and each began the development of a major anti-ballistic missile (ABM) system. In the USSR, this was the Fakel V-1000, and for this they developed powerful radar systems. This was eventually deployed around Moscow as the A-35 anti-ballistic missile system, supported by radars designated by NATO as the Cat House, Dog House, and Hen House.

In 1957, the U.S. Army initiated an ABM system first called Nike-X; this passed through several names, eventually becoming the Safeguard Program. For this, there was a long-range Perimeter Acquisition Radar (PAR) and a shorter-range, more precise Missile Site Radar (MSR).

The PAR was housed in a -high nuclear-hardened building with one face sloping 25 degrees facing north. This contained 6,888 antenna elements separated in transmitting and receiving phased arrays. The L-Band transmitter used 128 long-life traveling-wave tubes (TWTs), having a combined power in the megawatt range The PAR could detect incoming missiles outside the atmosphere at distances up to .

The MSR had an , truncated pyramid structure, with each face holding a phased-array antenna in diameter and containing 5,001 array elements used for both transmitting and receiving. Operating in the S-Band, the transmitter used two klystrons functioning in parallel, each with megawatt-level power. The MSR could search for targets from all directions, acquiring them at up to range.

One Safeguard site, intended to defend Minuteman ICBM missile silos near the Grand Forks AFB in North Dakota, was finally completed in October 1975, but the U.S. Congress withdrew all funding after it was operational but a single day. During the following decades, the U.S. Army and the U.S. Air Force developed a variety of large radar systems, but the long-serving BTL gave up military development work in the 1970s.

A modern radar developed by of the U.S. Navy is the AN/SPY-1. First fielded in 1973, this S-Band, 6 MW system has gone through a number of variants and is a major component of the Aegis Combat System. An automatic detect-and-track system, it is computer controlled using four complementary three-dimensional passive electronically scanned array antennas to provide hemispherical coverage.

Radar signals, traveling with line-of-sight propagation, normally have a range to ground targets limited by the visible horizon, or less than about . Airborne targets can be detected by ground-level radars at greater ranges, but, at best, several hundred miles. Since the beginning of radio, it had been known that signals of appropriate frequencies (3 to 30 MHz) could be &quot;bounced&quot; from the ionosphere and received at considerable distances. As long-range bombers and missiles came into being, there was a need to have radars give early warnings at great ranges. In the early 1950s, a team at the Naval Research Laboratory came up with the Over-the-Horizon (OTH) radar for this purpose.

To distinguish targets from other reflections, it was necessary to use a phase-Doppler system. Very sensitive receivers with low-noise amplifiers had to be developed. Since the signal going to the target and returning had a propagation loss proportional to the range raised to the fourth power, a powerful transmitter and large antennas were required. A digital computer with considerable capability (new at that time) was necessary for analyzing the data. In 1950, their first experimental system was able to detect rocket launches away at Cape Canaveral, and the cloud from a nuclear explosion in Nevada distant.

In the early 1970s, a joint American-British project, code named Cobra Mist, used a 10-MW OTH radar at Orfordness (the birthplace of British radar), England, in an attempt to detect aircraft and missile launchings over the Western USSR. Because of US-USSR ABM agreements, this was abandoned within two years. In the same time period, the Soviets were developing a similar system; this successfully detected a missile launch at . By 1976, this had matured into an operational system named &quot;Duga&quot; (&quot;Arc&quot; in English), but known to western intelligence as Steel Yard and called Woodpecker by radio amateurs and others who suffered from its interference – the transmitter was estimated to have a power of 10 MW. Australia, Canada, and France also developed OTH radar systems.

With the advent of satellites with early-warning capabilities, the military lost most of its interest in OTH radars. However, in recent years, this technology has been reactivated for detecting and tracking ocean shipping in applications such as maritime reconnaissance and drug enforcement.

Systems using an alternate technology have also been developed for over-the-horizon detection. Due to diffraction, electromagnetic surface waves are scattered to the rear of objects, and these signals can be detected in a direction opposite from high-powered transmissions. Called OTH-SW (SW for Surface Wave), Russia is using such a system to monitor the Sea of Japan, and Canada has a system for coastal surveillance.

===Civil aviation radars===
The post-war years saw the beginning of a revolutionary development in Air Traffic Control (ATC) – the introduction of radar. In 1946, the Civil Aeronautics Administration (CAA) unveiled an experimental radar-equipped tower for control of civil flights. By 1952, the CAA had begun its first routine use of radar for approach and departure control. Four years later, it placed a large order for long-range radars for use in &quot;en route&quot; ATC; these had the capability, at higher altitudes, to see aircraft within 200 nautical miles (370 km). In 1960, it became required for aircraft flying in certain areas to carry a radar transponder that identified the aircraft and helped improve radar performance. Since 1966, the responsible agency has been called the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).

A Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON) is an ATC facility usually located within the vicinity of a large airport. In the US Air Force it is known as RAPCON (Radar Approach Control), and in the US Navy as a RATCF (Radar Air Traffic Control Facility). Typically, the TRACON controls aircraft within a 30 to 50 nautical mile (56 to 93 km) radius of the airport at an altitude between 10,000 and 15,000 feet (3,000 to 4,600 m). This uses one or more Airport Surveillance Radars (ASR-8, 9 and 11, ASR-7 is obsolete), sweeping the sky once every few seconds. These Primary ASR radars are typically paired with secondary radars (Air Traffic Radar Beacon Interrogators, or ATCBI) of the ATCBI-5, Mode S or MSSR types. Unlike primary radar, secondary radar relies upon an aircraft based transponder, which receives an interrogation from the ground and replies with an appropriate digital code which includes the aircraft id and reports the aircraft&#x27;s altitude. The principle is similar to the military IFF Identification friend or foe. The secondary radar antenna array rides atop the primary radar dish at the radar site, with both rotating at approximately 12 revolutions per minute.

The Digital Airport Surveillance Radar (DASR) is a newer TRACON radar system, replacing the old analog systems with digital technology. The civilian nomenclature for these radars is the ASR-9 and the ASR-11, and AN/GPN-30 is used by the military.

In the ASR-11, two radar systems are included. The primary is an S-Band (~2.8 GHz) system with 25 kW pulse power. It provides 3-D tracking of target aircraft and also measures rainfall intensity. The secondary is a P-Band (~1.05 GHz) system with a peak-power of about 25 kW. It uses a transponder set to interrogate aircraft and receive operational data. The antennas for both systems rotate atop a tall tower.

===Weather radar===
During World War II, military radar operators noticed noise in returned echoes due to weather elements like rain, snow, and sleet. Just after the war, military scientists returned to civilian life or continued in the Armed Forces and pursued their work in developing a use for those echoes. In the United States, David Atlas, for the Air Force group at first, and later for MIT, developed the first operational weather radars. In Canada, J.S. Marshall and R.H. Douglas formed the &quot;Stormy Weather Group &quot; in Montreal. Marshall and his doctoral student Walter Palmer are well known for their work on the drop size distribution in mid-latitude rain that led to understanding of the Z-R relation, which correlates a given radar reflectivity with the rate at which water is falling on the ground. In the United Kingdom, research continued to study the radar echo patterns and weather elements such as stratiform rain and convective clouds, and experiments were done to evaluate the potential of different wavelengths from 1 to 10 centimetres.

Between 1950 and 1980, reflectivity radars, which measure position and intensity of precipitation, were built by weather services around the world. In United States, the U.S. Weather Bureau, established in 1870 with the specific mission of to provide meteorological observations and giving notice of approaching storms, developed the WSR-1 (Weather Surveillance Radar-1), one of the first weather radars. This was a modified version of the AN/APS-2F radar, which the Weather Bureau acquired from the Navy. The WSR-1A, WSR-3, and WSR-4 were also variants of this radar. This was followed by the WSR-57 (Weather Surveillance Radar – 1957) was the first weather radar designed specifically for a national warning network. Using WWII technology based on vacuum tubes, it gave only coarse reflectivity data and no velocity information. Operating at 2.89 GHz (S-Band), it had a peak-power of 410 kW and a maximum range of about . AN/FPS-41 was the military designation for the WSR-57.

The early meteorologists had to watch a cathode-ray tube. During the 1970s, radars began to be standardized and organized into larger networks. The next significant change in the United States was the WSR-74 series, beginning operations in 1974. There were two types: the WSR-74S, for replacements and filling gaps in the WSR-57 national network, and the WSR-74C, primarily for local use. Both were transistor-based, and their primary technical difference was indicated by the letter, S band (better suited for long range) and C band, respectively. Until the 1990s, there were 128 of the WSR-57 and WSR-74 model radars were spread across that country.

The first devices to capture radar images were developed during the same period. The number of scanned angles was increased to get a three-dimensional view of the precipitation, so that horizontal cross-sections (CAPPI) and vertical ones could be performed. Studies of the organization of thunderstorms were then possible for the Alberta Hail Project in Canada and National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL) in the US in particular. The NSSL, created in 1964, began experimentation on dual polarization signals and on Doppler effect uses. In May 1973, a tornado devastated Union City, Oklahoma, just west of Oklahoma City. For the first time, a Dopplerized 10-cm wavelength radar from NSSL documented the entire life cycle of the tornado. The researchers discovered a mesoscale rotation in the cloud aloft before the tornado touched the ground : the tornadic vortex signature. NSSL&#x27;s research helped convince the National Weather Service that Doppler radar was a crucial forecasting tool.

Between 1980 and 2000, weather radar networks became the norm in North America, Europe, Japan and other developed countries. Conventional radars were replaced by Doppler radars, which in addition to position and intensity of could track the relative velocity of the particles in the air. In the United States, the construction of a network consisting of wavelength radars, called NEXRAD or WSR-88D (Weather Service Radar 1988 Doppler), was started in 1988 following NSSL&#x27;s research. In Canada, Environment Canada constructed the King City station, with a five centimeter research Doppler radar, by 1985; McGill University dopplerized its radar (J. S. Marshall Radar Observatory) in 1993. This led to a complete Canadian Doppler network between 1998 and 2004. France and other European countries switched to Doppler network by the end of the 1990s to early 2000s. Meanwhile, rapid advances in computer technology led to algorithms to detect signs of severe weather and a plethora of &quot;products&quot; for media outlets and researchers.

After 2000, research on dual polarization technology moved into operational use, increasing the amount of information available on precipitation type (e.g. rain vs. snow). &quot;Dual polarization&quot; means that microwave radiation which is polarized both horizontally and vertically (with respect to the ground) is emitted. Wide-scale deployment is expected by the end of the decade in some countries such as the United States, France, and Canada.

Since 2003, the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has been experimenting with phased-array radar as a replacement for conventional parabolic antenna to provide more time resolution in atmospheric sounding. This would be very important in severe thunderstorms as their evolution can be better evaluated with more timely data.

Also in 2003, the National Science Foundation established the Engineering Research Center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere, &quot;CASA&quot;, a multidisciplinary, multi-university collaboration of engineers, computer scientists, meteorologists, and sociologists to conduct fundamental research, develop enabling technology, and deploy prototype engineering systems designed to augment existing radar systems by sampling the generally undersampled lower troposphere with inexpensive, fast scanning, dual polarization, mechanically scanned and phased array radars.

===Mapping radar===
The plan position indicator, dating from the early days of radar and still the most common type of display, provides a map of the targets surrounding the radar location. If the radar antenna on an aircraft is aimed downward, a map of the terrain is generated, and the larger the antenna, the greater the image resolution. After centimeter radar came into being, downward-looking radars – the H2S ( L-Band) and H2X (C-Band) – provided real-time maps used by the U.S. and Britain in bombing runs over Europe at night and through dense clouds.

==== Synthetic-aperture radar ====

In 1951, Carl Wiley led a team at Goodyear Aircraft Corporation (later Goodyear Aerospace) in developing a technique for greatly expanding and improving the resolution of radar-generated images. Called synthetic aperture radar (SAR), an ordinary-sized antenna fixed to the side of an aircraft is used with highly complex signal processing to give an image that would otherwise require a much larger, scanning antenna; thus, the name synthetic aperture. As each pulse is emitted, it is radiated over a lateral band onto the terrain. The return is spread in time, due to reflections from features at different distances. Motion of the vehicle along the flight path gives the horizontal increments. The amplitude and phase of returns are combined by the signal processor using Fourier transform techniques in forming the image. The overall technique is closely akin to optical holography.

Through the years, many variations of the SAR have been made with diversified applications resulting. In initial systems, the signal processing was too complex for on-board operation; the signals were recorded and processed later. Processors using optical techniques were then tried for generating real-time images, but advances in high-speed electronics now allow on-board processes for most applications. Early systems gave a resolution in tens of meters, but more recent airborne systems provide resolutions to about 10 cm. Current ultra-wideband systems have resolutions of a few millimeters.

===Other radars and applications===
There are many other post-war radar systems and applications. Only a few will be noted.

====Radar gun====
The most widespread radar device today is undoubtedly the radar gun. This is a small, usually hand-held, Doppler radar that is used to detect the speed of objects, especially trucks and automobiles in regulating traffic, as well as pitched baseballs, runners, or other moving objects in sports. This device can also be used to measure the surface speed of water and continuously manufactured materials. A radar gun does not return information regarding the object&#x27;s position; it uses the Doppler effect to measure the speed of a target. First developed in 1954, most radar guns operate with very low power in the X or Ku Bands. Some use infrared radiation or laser light; these are usually called LIDAR. A related technology for velocity measurements in flowing liquids or gasses is called laser Doppler velocimetry; this technology dates from the mid-1960s.

====Impulse radar====
As pulsed radars were initially being developed, the use of very narrow pulses was examined. The pulse length governs the accuracy of distance measurement by radar – the shorter the pulse, the greater the precision. Also, for a given pulse repetition frequency (PRF), a shorter pulse results in a higher peak power. Harmonic analysis shows that the narrower the pulse, the wider the band of frequencies that contain the energy, leading to such systems also being called wide-band radars. In the early days, the electronics for generating and receiving these pulses was not available; thus, essentially no applications of this were initially made.

By the 1970s, advances in electronics led to renewed interest in what was often called short-pulse radar. With further advances, it became practical to generate pulses having a width on the same order as the period of the RF carrier (T = 1/f). This is now generally called impulse radar.

The first significant application of this technology was in ground-penetrating radar (GPR). Developed in the 1970s, GPR is now used for structural foundation analysis, archeological mapping, treasure hunting, unexploded ordnance identification, and other shallow investigations. This is possible because impulse radar can concisely locate the boundaries between the general media (the soil) and the desired target. The results, however, are non-unique and are highly dependent upon the skill of the operator and the subsequent interpretation of the data.

In dry or otherwise favorable soil and rock, penetration up to is often possible. For distance measurements at these short ranges, the transmitted pulse is usually only one radio-frequency cycle in duration; With a 100 MHz carrier and a PRF of 10 kHz (typical parameters), the pulse duration is only 10 ns (nanosecond). leading to the &quot;impulse&quot; designation. A variety of GPR systems are commercially available in back-pack and wheeled-cart versions with pulse-power up to a kilowatt.

With continued development of electronics, systems with pulse durations measured in picoseconds became possible. Applications are as varied as security and motion sensors, building stud-finders, collision-warning devices, and cardiac-dynamics monitors. Some of these devices are matchbox sized, including a long-life power source.

====Radar astronomy====
As radar was being developed, astronomers considered its application in making observations of the Moon and other near-by extraterrestrial objects. In 1944, Zoltán Lajos Bay had this as a major objective as he developed a radar in Hungary. His radar telescope was taken away by the conquering Soviet army and had to be rebuilt, thus delaying the experiment. Under Project Diana conducted by the Army&#x27;s Evans Signal Laboratory in New Jersey, a modified SCR-271 radar (the fixed-position version of the SCR-270) operating at 110 MHz with 3 kW peak-power, was used in receiving echoes from the Moon on January 10, 1946. Zoltán Bay accomplished this on the following February 6.

Radio astronomy also had its start following WWII, and many scientists involved in radar development then entered this field. A number of radio observatories were constructed during the following years; however, because of the additional cost and complexity of involving transmitters and associated receiving equipment, very few were dedicated to radar astronomy. In fact, essentially all major radar astronomy activities have been conducted as adjuncts to radio astronomy observatories.

The radio telescope at the Arecibo Observatory, opened in 1963, was the largest in the world. Owned by the U.S. National Science Foundation and contractor operated, it was used primarily for radio astronomy, but equipment was available for radar astronomy. This included transmitters operating at 47 MHz, 439 MHz, and 2.38 GHz, all with very-high pulse power. It has a 305-m (1,000-ft) primary reflector fixed in position; the secondary reflector is on tracks to allow precise pointing to different parts of the sky. Many significant scientific discoveries have been made using the Arecibo radar telescope, including mapping of surface roughness of Mars and observations of Saturn and its largest moon, Titan. In 1989, the observatory radar-imaged an asteroid for the first time in history.

After an auxiliary and main cable failure on the telescope in August and November 2020, respectively, the NSF announced the decision that they would decommission the telescope through controlled demolition, but that the other facilities on the Observatory would remain operational in the future. However, before the safe decommission of the telescope could occur, remaining support cables from one tower rapidly failed in the morning of December 1, 2020, causing the instrument platform to crash through the dish, shearing off the tops of the support towers, and partially damaging some of the other buildings, though there were no injuries. NSF has stated that it is still their intention to continue to have the other Observatory facilities operational as soon as possible and are looking at plans to rebuild a new telescope instrument in its place

Several spacecraft orbiting the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, and Saturn have carried radars for surface mapping; a ground-penetration radar was carried on the Mars Express mission. Radar systems on a number of aircraft and orbiting spacecraft have mapped the entire Earth for various purposes; on the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission, the entire planet was mapped at a 30-m resolution.

The Jodrell Bank Observatory, an operation of the University of Manchester in Britain, was originally started by Bernard Lovell to be a radar astronomy facility. It initially used a war-surplus GL-II radar system operating at 71 MHz (4.2 m). The first observations were of ionized trails in the Geminids meteor shower during December 1945. While the facility soon evolved to become the third largest radio observatory in the world, some radar astronomy continued. The largest (250-ft or 76-m in diameter) of their three fully steerable radio telescopes became operational just in time to radar track &quot;Sputnik 1&quot;, the first artificial satellite, in October 1957.

==See also==
* Cavity magnetron
* History of smart antennas
* Klystron
* List of German inventions and discoveries
* List of World War II electronic warfare equipment
* Secrets of Radar Museum

==References==
==Further reading==
* Blanchard, Yves, &quot;Le radar. 1904–2004 : Histoire d&#x27;un siècle d&#x27;innovations techniques et opérationnelles&quot;, éditions Ellipses,(in French)
* Bowen, E. G.; &quot;The development of airborne radar in Great Britain 1935–1945&quot;, in &quot;Radar Development to 1945&quot;, ed. by Russell Burns; Peter Peregrinus, 1988, 
* Bowen, E. G., &quot;Radar Days&quot;, Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol, 1987, 
* Bragg, Michael., &quot;RDF1 The Location of Aircraft by Radio Methods 1935–1945&quot;, Hawkhead Publishing, 1988, 
* Brown, Jim, &quot;Radar – how it all began&quot;, Janus Pub., 1996, 
* Brown, Louis, &quot;A Radar History of World War 2 – Technical and Military Imperatives&quot;, Institute of Physics Publishing, 1999, 
* Buderi, Robert: &quot;The invention that changed the world: the story of radar from war to peace&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster, 1996, 
* Burns, Peter (editor): &quot;Radar Development to 1945&quot;, Peter Peregrinus Ltd., 1988, 
* Clark, Ronald W., &quot;Tizard&quot;, MIT Press, 1965, (An authorized biography of radar&#x27;s champion in the 1930s.)
* Dummer, G. W. A., &quot;Electronic Inventions and Discoveries&quot;, Elsevier, 1976, Pergamon, 1977, 
* Erickson, John; &quot;Radio-location and the air defense problem: The design and development of Soviet Radar 1934–40&quot;, &quot;Social Studies of Science&quot;, vol. 2, p. 241, 1972
* Frank, Sir Charles, &quot;Operation Epsilon: The Farm Hall Transcripts&quot; U. Cal. Press, 1993 (How German scientists dealt with Nazism.)
* Guerlac, Henry E., &quot;Radar in World War II&quot; (in two volumes), Tomash Publishers / Am Inst. of Physics, 1987, 
* Hanbury Brown, Robert, &quot;Boffin: A Personal Story of the early Days of Radar and Radio Astronomy and Quantum Optics&quot;, Taylor and Francis, 1991, 
* Howse, Derek, &quot;Radar At Sea The Royal Navy in World War 2&quot;, Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, Maryland, US, 1993, 
* Jones, R. V., &quot;Most Secret War&quot;, Hamish Hamilton, 1978, (Account of British Scientific Intelligence between 1939 and 1945, working to anticipate Germany&#x27;s radar and other developments.)
* Kroge, Harry von, &quot;GEMA: Birthplace of German Radar and Sonar&quot;, translated by Louis Brown, Inst. of Physics Publishing, 2000, 
* Latham, Colin, and Anne Stobbs, &quot;Radar A Wartime Miracle&quot;, Sutton Publishing Ltd, 1996, (A history of radar in the UK during WWII told by the men and women who worked on it.)
* Latham, Colin, and Anne Stobbs, &quot;The Birth of British Radar: The Memoirs of Arnold &#x27;Skip&#x27; Wilkins&quot;, 2nd Ed., Radio Society of Great Britain, 2006, 
* Lovell, Sir Bernard Lovel, &quot;Echoes of War – The History of H2S&quot;, Adam Hilger, 1991, 
* Nakagawa, Yasudo; &quot;Japanese Radar and Related Weapons of World War II&quot;, translated and edited by Louis Brown, John Bryant, and Naohiko Koizumi, Aegean Park Press, 1997, 
* Pritchard, David., &quot;The Radar War Germany&#x27;s Pioneering Achievement 1904–1945&quot; Patrick Stephens Ltd, Wellingborough 1989, 
* Rawnsley, C. F., and Robert Wright, &quot;Night Fighter&quot;, Mass Market Paperback, 1998
* Sayer, A. P., &quot;Army Radar – Historical Monograph&quot;, War Office, 1950
* Swords, Seán S., &quot;Technical History of the Beginnings of Radar&quot;, IEE/Peter Peregrinus, 1986, 
* Watson, Raymond C., Jr. &quot;Radar Origins Worldwide: History of Its Evolution in 13 Nations Through World War II&quot;. Trafford Pub., 2009, 
* Watson-Watt, Sir Robert, &quot;The Pulse of Radar&quot;, Dial Press, 1959, (no ISBN) (An autobiography of Sir Robert Watson-Watt)
* Zimmerman, David., &quot;Britain&#x27;s Shield Radar and the Defeat of the Luftwaffe&quot;, Sutton Publishing, 2001, 

==External links==

*Radarworld.org: Radar World website
:* Radarworld.org: &quot;Radar Family Tree&quot; — by Martin Hollmann.
* PenleyRadarArchives.org: &quot;Early Radar History – an Introduction&quot; — by Bill + Jonathan Penley (2002).
* Fas.org: &quot;Introduction to Naval Weapons Engineering&quot; — &quot;Radar fundamentals section&quot;.
* Foundation Centre for German Communications and Related Technologies: &quot;Christian Hülsmeyer and about the early days of radar inventions&quot; — by Arthur O. Bauer.
* Purbeckradar.org: Early radar development in the UK
* Hist.rloc.ru: &quot;A History of Radio Location in the USSR&quot;—
*Jahre-radar.de: &quot;100 Years of Radar&quot;—
:* Jahre-radar.de: &quot;The Century of Radar – from Christian Hülsmeyer to Shuttle Radar Topography Mission&quot;—, by Wolfgang Holpp.

;World War II
* The Radar Pages.uk: &quot;All you ever wanted to know about British air defence radar&quot; — history and details of various British radar systems, by Dick Barrett.
:* The Radar Pages.uk: &quot;Deflating British Radar Myths of World War II&quot; — by Maj. Gregory C. Clark (1997).
* The Secrets of Radar Museum: &quot;Canada&#x27;s involvement in WWII Radar&quot;
* Navweaps.com: German Radar Equipment of World War II</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1517472" start="4" end="20" title="History of radar" label="history of radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="28" end="33" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41257" start="114" end="128" title="Heinrich Hertz" label="Heinrich Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="253" end="272" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="296" end="312" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q67152" start="464" end="483" title="Christian Hülsmeyer" label="Christian Hülsmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="703" end="713" title="Chain Home" label="Chain Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="955" end="967" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1307" end="1324" title="the United States" label="the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1330" end="1334" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1883" end="1889" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="1917" end="1926" title="magnetron" label="magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q206814" start="2255" end="2269" title="civil aviation" label="civil aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032075" start="2290" end="2299" title="radar gun" label="radar gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="2313" end="2324" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164091" start="2392" end="2412" title="travelling wave tube" label="travelling wave tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="2462" end="2471" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q727898" start="2526" end="2544" title="phased array radar" label="phased array radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="3494" end="3507" title="weather radar" label="weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125423" start="3512" end="3527" title="radar astronomy" label="radar astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="3599" end="3608" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41257" start="3609" end="3623" title="Heinrich Hertz" label="Heinrich Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="3689" end="3710" title="electromagnetic waves" label="electromagnetic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="3722" end="3732" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="3805" end="3824" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="4000" end="4009" title="Electrical conductor" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="4015" end="4025" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="4071" end="4084" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="4257" end="4274" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Guglielmo Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27369" start="4462" end="4485" title="Charles Samuel Franklin" label="Charles Samuel Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q67152" start="4736" end="4755" title="Christian Hülsmeyer" label="Christian Hülsmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182767" start="4834" end="4840" title="echo (phenomenon)" label="echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="4851" end="4855" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076457" start="4927" end="4936" title="spark gap" label="spark gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="4986" end="5000" title="dipole antenna" label="dipole antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="5008" end="5019" title="cylindrical" label="cylindrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="5020" end="5039" title="parabolic reflector" label="parabolic reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q944090" start="5137" end="5144" title="coherer" label="coherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="5145" end="5153" title="receiver (radio)" label="receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="5549" end="5554" title="naval" label="naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q67152" start="6155" end="6174" title="Christian Huelsmeyer" label="Christian Hülsmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="6216" end="6265" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q104996" start="6654" end="6669" title="Rudolf Kühnhold" label="Rudolf Kühnhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="6704" end="6716" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="6840" end="6844" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="7040" end="7061" title="electromagnetic waves" label="electromagnetic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="7182" end="7191" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q808270" start="7245" end="7265" title="Barkhausen–Kurz tube" label="Barkhausen–Kurz tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="7484" end="7487" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q95586" start="7854" end="7867" title="Hans Hollmann" label="Hans Hollmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="8054" end="8061" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q608052" start="8185" end="8197" title="regenerative circuit" label="regenerative"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="8230" end="8242" title="Yagi antenna" label="Yagi antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q842015" start="8733" end="8735" title="microsecond" label="μs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663612" start="8982" end="8996" title="lobe switching" label="lobe switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266530" start="9019" end="9027" title="duplexer" label="duplexer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="9085" end="9095" title="Braun tube" label="Braun tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q635042" start="10126" end="10133" title="Seetakt" label="Seetakt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455960" start="10175" end="10180" title="Freya radar" label="Freya"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="10670" end="10680" title="Telefunken" label="Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078" start="10775" end="10794" title="Wilhelm Runge" label="Wilhelm Tolmé Runge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266530" start="11626" end="11634" title="duplexer" label="duplexer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849277" start="12050" end="12070" title="Würzburg radar" label="&amp;quot;Würzburg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q342591" start="13627" end="13645" title="Robert Watson-Watt" label="Robert Watson Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851405" start="13657" end="13678" title="Met Office" label="Meteorological Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="13684" end="13697" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q646980" start="13727" end="13736" title="Aldershot" label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="13740" end="13749" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="13860" end="13869" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="13905" end="13917" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="14055" end="14067" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q211907" start="14153" end="14159" title="Slough" label="Slough"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="14163" end="14172" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513783" start="14255" end="14303" title="Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Scientific and Industrial Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="14560" end="14572" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152989" start="14589" end="14639" title="Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Defence" label="Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q901295" start="14920" end="14932" title="Henry Tizard" label="Henry Tizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638786" start="15195" end="15204" title="death ray" label="death ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795048" start="15739" end="15773" title="Arnold Frederic Wilkins" label="Arnold F. &amp;#x27;Skip&amp;#x27; Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839010" start="15802" end="15834" title="back-of-the-envelope calculation" label="back-of-the-envelope calculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="17151" end="17167" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499781" start="17193" end="17213" title="Handley Page Heyford" label="Handley Page Heyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="17302" end="17305" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="17306" end="17315" title="shortwave" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q641756" start="17334" end="17342" title="Daventry" label="Daventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795048" start="17429" end="17460" title="Arnold Wilkins" label="Arnold &amp;quot;Skip&amp;quot; Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="17467" end="17474" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763113" start="17802" end="17816" title="The Secret War (TV series)" label="The Secret War"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="17921" end="17931" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048530" start="18115" end="18134" title="Edward George Bowen" label="Edward George Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q842015" start="18301" end="18303" title="microsecond" label="μs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029730" start="18340" end="18350" title="Orfordness" label="Orfordness"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="18361" end="18370" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="18374" end="18381" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="18405" end="18414" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q262571" start="18822" end="18839" title="Supermarine Scapa" label="Supermarine Scapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="19197" end="19207" title="Chain Home" label="Chain Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059075" start="19241" end="19255" title="Thames Estuary" label="Thames Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711002" start="19296" end="19316" title="A. P. Rowe" label="Albert Percival Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="19440" end="19463" title="Radio direction finder" label="Radio Direction Finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625855" start="19709" end="19723" title="bistatic radar" label="bistatic radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335593" start="19725" end="19744" title="Frederick Lindemann, 1st Viscount Cherwell" label="Frederick Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="19766" end="19774" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="19787" end="19798" title="aerial mine" label="aerial mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081141" start="19945" end="19978" title="air-to-surface-vessel radar" label="air-to-surface-vessel (ASV) radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055846" start="19996" end="20028" title="aircraft interception radar" label="aircraft interception (AI) radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081141" start="20087" end="20096" title="ASV radar" label="ASV radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="20419" end="20436" title="Air Chief Marshal" label="Air Chief Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="20437" end="20449" title="Hugh Dowding, 1st Baron Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="20473" end="20482" title="Winston Churchill" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647052" start="20939" end="20945" title="A.C. Cossor" label="Cossor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468032" start="20950" end="20959" title="Metropolitan-Vickers" label="MetroVick"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="21017" end="21030" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645453" start="21083" end="21095" title="John Randall (physicist)" label="John Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127792" start="21100" end="21110" title="Harry Boot" label="Harry Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="21125" end="21141" title="cavity magnetron" label="cavity magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21569" end="21597" title="Electrical Calculator Type Q" label="Electrical Calculator Type Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840725" start="21820" end="21843" title="Plan Position Indicator" label="Plan Position Indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610846" start="21857" end="21887" title="Ground-Controlled Interception" label="Ground-Controlled Interception"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055846" start="21914" end="21922" title="AI radar" label="AI radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="21965" end="21968" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873771" start="22332" end="22345" title="Bawdsey Manor" label="Bawdsey Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="22525" end="22535" title="Chain Home" label="Chain Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="22620" end="22635" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126161" start="23363" end="23373" title="goniometer" label="goniometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945300" start="24475" end="24492" title="W. A. S. Butement" label="W. A. S. Butement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663612" start="26644" end="26658" title="lobe switching" label="lobe switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="27349" end="27359" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="27361" end="27370" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q855635" start="28468" end="28490" title="HMS Rodney (29)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Rodney&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q553662" start="28914" end="28930" title="Albert H. Taylor" label="Albert H. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523603" start="28935" end="28947" title="Leo C. Young" label="Leo C. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="29078" end="29091" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809111" start="29278" end="29296" title="Lawrence A. Hyland" label="Lawrence A. Hyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="29344" end="29369" title="Naval Research Laboratory" label="Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221906" start="29670" end="29678" title="location (geography)" label="location"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="29682" end="29690" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545341" start="30117" end="30130" title="Gregory Breit" label="Gregory Breit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921901" start="30135" end="30148" title="Merle A. Tuve" label="Merle A. Tuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043963" start="30156" end="30190" title="Carnegie Institution of Washington" label="Carnegie Institution of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="30236" end="30246" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q963902" start="30249" end="30267" title="Robert Morris Page" label="Robert Morris Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q842015" start="30391" end="30393" title="microsecond" label="μs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266530" start="30911" end="30919" title="duplexer" label="duplexer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156810" start="31574" end="31587" title="low frequency" label="low frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="31657" end="31665" title="antenna (radio)" label="antennas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51379" start="31736" end="31758" title="inversely proportional" label="inversely proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552098" start="32180" end="32185" title="USS Leary (DD-158)" label="Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="32200" end="32212" title="Yagi antenna" label="Yagi antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153973" start="32362" end="32377" title="ring oscillator" label="ring oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041676" start="32605" end="32608" title="XAF RADAR" label="XAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236405" start="32679" end="32703" title="USS New York (BB-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;New York&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="32869" end="32872" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416353" start="32900" end="32904" title="CXAM radar" label="CXAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="33127" end="33158" title="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="33213" end="33229" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q736213" start="33267" end="33289" title="U.S. Army Signal Corps" label="U.S. Army Signal Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471699" start="33345" end="33370" title="Fort Monmouth, New Jersey" label="Fort Monmouth, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512644" start="33416" end="33441" title="Signal Corps Laboratories" label="Signal Corps Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017178" start="33470" end="33486" title="William R. Blair" label="William R. Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="33618" end="33628" title="acoustical" label="acoustical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="33633" end="33641" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="33861" end="33869" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="34165" end="34190" title="Naval Research Laboratory" label="Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="34508" end="34517" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="34698" end="34701" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="35910" end="35924" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150440" start="36040" end="36054" title="Paul E. Watson" label="Paul E. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q124274" start="36484" end="36491" title="azimuth" label="azimuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="36496" end="36505" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="36583" end="36589" title="dipole" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q946042" start="36654" end="36665" title="searchlight" label="searchlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="36836" end="36852" title="Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153973" start="37097" end="37112" title="ring oscillator" label="ring oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663612" start="37269" end="37283" title="lobe switching" label="lobe switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="37309" end="37325" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="37330" end="37342" title="Westinghouse Electric (1886)" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027363" start="37408" end="37415" title="SCR-268" label="SCR-268"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="37475" end="37486" title="Fort Monroe" label="Fort Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659889" start="37712" end="37726" title="Harold A. Zahl" label="Harold A. Zahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416362" start="37765" end="37772" title="SCR-270" label="SCR-270"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="38092" end="38096" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191799" start="38494" end="38521" title="Alexander Stepanovich Popov" label="Alexander Stepanovich Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="38551" end="38572" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Imperial Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="38583" end="38592" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q944090" start="38625" end="38632" title="coherer" label="coherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776868" start="38705" end="38726" title="spark-gap transmitter" label="spark-gap transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="38863" end="38873" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="39115" end="39138" title="1917 Russian Revolution" label="1917 Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="39165" end="39200" title="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics" label="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="39254" end="39263" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q631009" start="39420" end="39445" title="Soviet Air Defense Forces" label="Soviet Air Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340845" start="39530" end="39549" title="Pavel K. Oshchepkov" label="Pavel K. Oshchepkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="40064" end="40073" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40118" end="40151" title="Glavnoe Artilleriyskoe Upravlenie" label="Glavnoe Artilleriyskoe Upravlenie"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="40240" end="40248" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="40769" end="40772" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q808270" start="40848" end="40868" title="Barkhausen–Kurz tube" label="Barkhausen–Kurz tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="41012" end="41019" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="41228" end="41255" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q331067" start="41336" end="41358" title="Abram Fedorovich Ioffe" label="Abram Fedorovich Ioffe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41376" end="41414" title="Leningrad Physical-Technical Institute" label="Leningrad Physical-Technical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41996" end="42031" title="Leningrad Electro-Physics Institute" label="Leningrad Electro-Physics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625855" start="42290" end="42299" title="Bistatic radar" label="bi-static"/>
<link wikidata="Q608052" start="42600" end="42612" title="regenerative circuit" label="regenerative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282952" start="43600" end="43626" title="Mikhail A. Bonch-Bruevich" label="Mikhail A. Bonch-Bruyevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="43763" end="43772" title="magnetron" label="magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458695" start="43783" end="43801" title="Kharkov University" label="Kharkov University"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="43805" end="43812" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q275655" start="43960" end="43978" title="Annalen der Physik" label="Annalen der Physik"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="44113" end="44120" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q331019" start="44296" end="44313" title="Abram A. Slutskin" label="Abram A. Slutskin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44360" end="44379" title="Aleksandr S. Usikov" label="Aleksandr S. Usikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="46074" end="46085" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="46098" end="46111" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="46299" end="46304" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="47924" end="47928" title="Yagi antenna" label="Yagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="48066" end="48076" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="48116" end="48125" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q421478" start="48556" end="48566" title="Aksel Berg" label="Aksel Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300934" start="48617" end="48624" title="Soviet cruiser Molotov" label="Molotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q863109" start="48884" end="48892" title="klystron" label="klystron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156522" start="48911" end="48928" title="Nikolay Devyatkov" label="Nikolay Devyatkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155686" start="49130" end="49145" title="reflex klystron" label="reflex klystron"/>
<link wikidata="Q188056" start="50422" end="50435" title="triangulation" label="triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341873" start="51496" end="51509" title="Semion Braude" label="Semion Braude"/>
<link wikidata="Q332683" start="51535" end="51559" title="superheterodyne receiver" label="superheterodyne receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238887" start="51593" end="51609" title="local oscillator" label="local oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="51730" end="51749" title="parabolic reflector" label="parabolic reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="52254" end="52257" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646000" start="52258" end="52274" title="955 acorn triode" label="955 acorn triode"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="53681" end="53700" title="wireless telegraphy" label="wireless telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="53730" end="53752" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="53771" end="53793" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Imperial Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363925" start="53809" end="53830" title="Battle of Port Arthur" label="Battle of Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="53877" end="53900" title="radio direction-finding" label="radio direction-finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="54703" end="54715" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="54720" end="54733" title="Italian Fascism" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="54739" end="54754" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115271" start="55351" end="55365" title="high-frequency" label="high-frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="55406" end="55415" title="cavity magnetron" label="magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347561" start="55600" end="55614" title="Hidetsugu Yagi" label="Hidetsugu Yagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062129" start="55683" end="55700" title="Tohoku Imperial University" label="Tohoku University"/>
<link wikidata="Q933177" start="55912" end="55924" title="Shintaro Uda" label="Shintaro Uda"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="56114" end="56126" title="Yagi antenna" label="Yagi antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="56179" end="56182" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q769152" start="56226" end="56245" title="directional antenna" label="directional antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="56262" end="56278" title="cavity magnetron" label="cavity magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115271" start="56314" end="56316" title="High frequency" label="HF"/>
<link wikidata="Q719033" start="56363" end="56377" title="Albert W. Hull" label="Albert W. Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="56381" end="56397" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="56452" end="56455" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="56468" end="56471" title="UHF" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473876" start="56489" end="56502" title="Kinjiro Okabe" label="Kinjiro Okabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q587326" start="56865" end="56894" title="Tokyo Institute of Technology" label="Tokyo Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062129" start="56914" end="56931" title="Tohoku Imperial University" label="Tokoku University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077305" start="56954" end="56973" title="Japan Radio Company" label="Japan Radio Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q466500" start="57130" end="57148" title="dielectric heating" label="dielectric heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182969" start="57223" end="57231" title="Yoji Ito" label="Yoji Ito"/>
<link wikidata="Q233903" start="57361" end="57374" title="Meguro, Tokyo" label="Meguro, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127792" start="58587" end="58603" title="Harry Boot" label="Boot and Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="58607" end="58628" title="Birmingham University" label="Birmingham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="59478" end="59481" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="63972" end="63981" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="65485" end="65488" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473588" start="65530" end="65548" title="Kenjiro Takayanagi" label="Kenjiro Takayanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q696418" start="66508" end="66523" title="Katsuura, Chiba" label="Katsuura, Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="66827" end="66834" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="66903" end="66910" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="66922" end="66931" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741148" start="66994" end="67000" title="Philips Natuurkundig Laboratorium" label="NatLab"/>
<link wikidata="" start="67070" end="67085" title=":nl:Klaas Posthumus" label="Klaas Posthumus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="67247" end="67256" title="parabolic reflector" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q931281" start="67634" end="67656" title="Royal Netherlands Navy" label="Royal Netherlands Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q430043" start="67732" end="67740" title="Marsdiep" label="Marsdiep"/>
<link wikidata="Q752663" start="70246" end="70269" title="Delft University of Technology" label="Delft Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="70294" end="70314" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603617" start="71030" end="71039" title="Malieveld" label="Malieveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="71043" end="71052" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983199" start="71863" end="71881" title="HNLMS_Isaac_Sweers_(1940)" label="HNLMS Isaac Sweers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934948" start="71950" end="71964" title="Camille Gutton" label="Camille Gutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="72001" end="72010" title="magnetron" label="magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990179" start="72121" end="72166" title="Compagnie générale de la télégraphie sans fil" label="Compagnie générale de la télégraphie sans fil"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="72550" end="72557" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="74742" end="74748" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q146858" start="75287" end="75294" title="Wembley" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316767" start="76286" end="76303" title="Tizard Mission" label="Tizard delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="76460" end="76477" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Guglielmo Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q808270" start="76896" end="76916" title="Barkhausen–Kurz tube" label="Barkhausen–Kurz tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="77036" end="77052" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q497499" start="77557" end="77578" title="Accademia Navale di Livorno" label="Italian Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761" start="77582" end="77589" title="Livorno" label="Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002907" start="77602" end="77613" title="Ugo Tiberio" label="Ugo Tiberio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975490" start="78014" end="78027" title="Nello Carrara" label="Nello Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="78292" end="78294" title="frequency modulation" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928259" start="78350" end="78359" title="parabolic antenna" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611060" start="78622" end="78639" title="Alfeo Brandimarte" label="Alfeo Brandimarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="79669" end="79689" title="Commonwealth Nations" label="Commonwealth Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="80066" end="80083" title="Sydney University" label="Sydney University"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988981" start="80142" end="80160" title="Jack Piddington" label="John H. Piddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="80267" end="80282" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="80402" end="80424" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="80430" end="80456" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="80617" end="80643" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin, Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437507" start="81006" end="81041" title="National Research Council of Canada" label="National Research Council of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="81228" end="81247" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405050" start="81279" end="81294" title="Halifax Harbour" label="Halifax Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="81915" end="81928" title="Canadian Forces Land Force Command" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q714452" start="82139" end="82153" title="Ernest Marsden" label="Ernest Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="82272" end="82282" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="82350" end="82379" title="Canterbury University College" label="Canterbury University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="82383" end="82395" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="83107" end="83134" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q575932" start="83400" end="83422" title="Royal New Zealand Navy" label="Royal New Zealand Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q810043" start="84232" end="84253" title="Basil Schonland" label="Basil F. J. Schonland"/>
<link wikidata="Q534643" start="84407" end="84431" title="Witwatersrand University" label="Witwatersrand University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="84575" end="84587" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="84722" end="84728" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779935" start="84884" end="84911" title="South African Defence Force" label="South African Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q218889" start="84923" end="84939" title="Zoltán Lajos Bay" label="Zoltán Lajos Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186843" start="84985" end="85017" title="Technical University of Budapest" label="Technical University of Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="86037" end="86049" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413038" start="86150" end="86166" title="radio navigation" label="radio navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123516842" start="86175" end="86189" title="countermeasure" label="countermeasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q384768" start="86203" end="86222" title="Battle of the beams" label="Battle of the beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="86409" end="86418" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="86488" end="86505" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="86790" end="86802" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="86820" end="86829" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517472" start="86894" end="86921" title="Range and Direction Finding" label="Range and Direction Finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="86948" end="86951" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="87616" end="87620" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="87662" end="87678" title="cavity magnetron" label="cavity magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q901295" start="87721" end="87737" title="Henry Tizard" label="Sir Henry Tizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316767" start="87846" end="87860" title="Tizard Mission" label="Tizard Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="87874" end="87876" title="Kilowatt" label="kW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="87910" end="87934" title="General Electric Company plc" label="General Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q146858" start="87958" end="87965" title="Wembley" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="88072" end="88085" title="US government" label="US government"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="88407" end="88419" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="88755" end="88782" title="Bell Telephone Laboratories" label="Bell Telephone Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354699" start="88904" end="88924" title="Radiation Laboratory" label="Radiation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="88962" end="88999" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q376223" start="89177" end="89218" title="Telecommunications Research Establishment" label="Telecommunications Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q521916" start="89323" end="89326" title="H2S radar" label="H2S"/>
<link wikidata="Q724082" start="89356" end="89369" title="Alan Blumlein" label="Alan Blumlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q319234" start="89374" end="89388" title="Bernard Lovell" label="Bernard Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416356" start="89432" end="89435" title="H2X" label="H2X"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="89479" end="89485" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q444698" start="90084" end="90103" title="Operation Paperclip" label="Operation Paperclip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="90436" end="90451" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029151" start="90923" end="90942" title="Pulse-Doppler radar" label="Pulse-Doppler radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q622911" start="91100" end="91115" title="Monopulse radar" label="Monopulse radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q963902" start="91167" end="91178" title="Robert Morris Page" label="Robert Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q727898" start="91316" end="91334" title="Phased array" label="Phased-array radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q740686" start="91636" end="91660" title="Synthetic-aperture radar" label="Synthetic-aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="91993" end="92007" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="92043" end="92060" title="computer" label="digital computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="92207" end="92232" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354699" start="92523" end="92537" title="Radiation Laboratory (MIT)" label="Rad Lab at MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="92723" end="92746" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498988" start="92862" end="92875" title="Hanscom Air Force Base" label="Hanscom Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138607" start="92916" end="92934" title="Lincoln Laboratory" label="Lincoln Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417957" start="93109" end="93125" title="Nike (rocket)" label="Nike air-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q376223" start="93162" end="93203" title="Telecommunications Research Establishment" label="Telecommunications Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512789" start="93230" end="93274" title="Signals Research and Development Establishment" label="Radar Research and Development Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q623323" start="93318" end="93341" title="Malvern, Worcestershire" label="Malvern, Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633359" start="93511" end="93551" title="HMS Mercury (shore establishment)" label="Admiralty Signal and Radar Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="93566" end="93576" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="93578" end="93587" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="93717" end="93725" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="93837" end="93849" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q774916" start="94087" end="94100" title="Pinetree Line" label="Pinetree Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387973" start="94160" end="94172" title="radar picket" label="radar picket"/>
<link wikidata="Q763592" start="94322" end="94337" title="Mid-Canada Line" label="Mid-Canada Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229395" start="94465" end="94491" title="Distant Early Warning Line" label="Distant Early Warning Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="94552" end="94565" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="94758" end="94792" title="Intercontinental Ballistic Missile" label="Intercontinental Ballistic Missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093254" start="95210" end="95244" title="A-35 anti-ballistic missile system" label="A-35 anti-ballistic missile system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="95280" end="95284" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4170742" start="95292" end="95301" title="Cat House radar" label="Cat House"/>
<link wikidata="Q338745" start="95457" end="95474" title="Safeguard Program" label="Safeguard Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164091" start="95842" end="95861" title="traveling-wave tube" label="traveling-wave tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q863109" start="96233" end="96241" title="klystron" label="klystron"/>
<link wikidata="Q861662" start="96425" end="96439" title="LGM-30 Minuteman" label="Minuteman ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q853409" start="96440" end="96452" title="missile silo" label="missile silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577056" start="96463" end="96478" title="Grand Forks AFB" label="Grand Forks AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="96482" end="96494" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322778" start="96858" end="96866" title="AN/SPY-1" label="AN/SPY-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q380682" start="96986" end="97005" title="Aegis Combat System" label="Aegis Combat System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142806" start="97114" end="97150" title="passive electronically scanned array" label="passive electronically scanned array"/>
<link wikidata="Q605931" start="97226" end="97251" title="line-of-sight propagation" label="line-of-sight propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="97308" end="97323" title="horizon" label="visible horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="97598" end="97608" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q332548" start="97847" end="97875" title="Over-the-horizon radar" label="Over-the-Horizon (OTH) radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151304" start="98020" end="98039" title="low-noise amplifier" label="low-noise amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138977" start="98576" end="98586" title="Cobra Mist" label="Cobra Mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029730" start="98614" end="98624" title="Orfordness" label="Orfordness"/>
<link wikidata="Q902605" start="99105" end="99115" title="Russian Woodpecker" label="Woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="99322" end="99331" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="99698" end="99709" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q889796" start="99727" end="99739" title="surface wave" label="surface wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="99952" end="99964" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="100116" end="100135" title="Air traffic control" label="Air Traffic Control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100184" end="100216" title="United States government role in civil aviation#Civil Aeronautics Authority" label="Civil Aeronautics Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332920" start="100675" end="100686" title="transponder (aviation)" label="transponder"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="100809" end="100840" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="100851" end="100882" title="Terminal Control Center" label="Terminal Radar Approach Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q409037" start="101299" end="101325" title="Airport Surveillance Radar" label="Airport Surveillance Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196868" start="101457" end="101473" title="secondary surveillance radar" label="secondary radars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063245" start="101855" end="101883" title="Identification friend or foe" label="Identification friend or foe"/>
<link wikidata="Q409037" start="102040" end="102074" title="Airport surveillance radar" label="Digital Airport Surveillance Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="102723" end="102735" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11050195" start="102840" end="102845" title="Ice pellets" label="sleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017421" start="103029" end="103040" title="David Atlas" label="David Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="103050" end="103059" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="103090" end="103093" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q663650" start="103450" end="103462" title="reflectivity" label="reflectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40526" start="103622" end="103632" title="Stratus cloud" label="stratiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q931652" start="103642" end="103659" title="Atmospheric convection" label="convective clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="103935" end="103954" title="National Weather Service" label="U.S. Weather Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566961" start="104099" end="104104" title="WSR-1" label="WSR-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416344" start="104205" end="104214" title="AN/APS-2F" label="AN/APS-2F"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566960" start="104359" end="104365" title="WSR-57" label="WSR-57"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="104785" end="104801" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566959" start="104946" end="104952" title="WSR-74" label="WSR-74"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018880" start="105230" end="105236" title="S band" label="S band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344775" start="105272" end="105278" title="C band (IEEE)" label="C band"/>
<link wikidata="Q119724" start="105611" end="105616" title="CAPPI" label="CAPPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711644" start="105728" end="105748" title="Alberta Hail Project" label="Alberta Hail Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656840" start="105763" end="105796" title="National Severe Storms Laboratory" label="National Severe Storms Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="105886" end="105898" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="105914" end="105928" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470566" start="105969" end="105989" title="Union City, Oklahoma" label="Union City, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="106004" end="106017" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399824" start="106164" end="106173" title="mesoscale meteorology" label="mesoscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483651" start="106246" end="106271" title="tornadic vortex signature" label="tornadic vortex signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="106314" end="106338" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088597" start="106771" end="106777" title="NEXRAD" label="NEXRAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q348789" start="106890" end="106908" title="Environment Canada" label="Environment Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q932381" start="106925" end="106934" title="King City weather radar station" label="King City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348486" start="107041" end="107073" title="J. S. Marshall Radar Observatory" label="J. S. Marshall Radar Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456612" start="107107" end="107131" title="Canadian weather radar network" label="Canadian Doppler network"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="107677" end="107686" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="107907" end="107954" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q727898" start="107983" end="108001" title="phased-array radar" label="phased-array radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q381517" start="108089" end="108109" title="atmospheric sounding" label="atmospheric sounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377855" start="108293" end="108373" title="Engineering Research Center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere" label="Engineering Research Center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840725" start="108839" end="108862" title="plan position indicator" label="plan position indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q521916" start="109227" end="109230" title="H2S radar" label="H2S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416356" start="109245" end="109248" title="H2X radar" label="H2X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583748" start="109484" end="109502" title="Goodyear Aerospace" label="Goodyear Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q740686" start="109615" end="109639" title="synthetic aperture radar" label="synthetic aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="110187" end="110204" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="110287" end="110297" title="holography" label="holography"/>
<link wikidata="Q851424" start="110835" end="110849" title="ultra-wideband" label="ultra-wideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032075" start="111099" end="111108" title="radar gun" label="radar gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334213" start="111146" end="111159" title="Doppler radar" label="Doppler radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="111534" end="111548" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="111683" end="111691" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="111705" end="111710" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="111743" end="111748" title="LIDAR" label="LIDAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420475" start="111836" end="111861" title="laser Doppler velocimetry" label="laser Doppler velocimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q575887" start="112162" end="112188" title="pulse repetition frequency" label="pulse repetition frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q876215" start="112244" end="112261" title="Harmonic analysis" label="Harmonic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503560" start="112925" end="112949" title="ground-penetrating radar" label="ground-penetrating radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902709" start="114000" end="114010" title="picosecond" label="picosecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q218889" start="114429" end="114445" title="Zoltán Lajos Bay" label="Zoltán Lajos Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249063" start="114636" end="114649" title="Project Diana" label="Project Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416362" start="114778" end="114785" title="SCR-270 radar" label="SCR-270"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="114953" end="114968" title="Radio astronomy" label="Radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="115446" end="115461" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q102327045" start="115469" end="115488" title="Arecibo Observatory" label="Arecibo Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="115554" end="115581" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q613628" start="115828" end="115845" title="primary mirror" label="primary reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395645" start="115869" end="115888" title="secondary mirror" label="secondary reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="116091" end="116095" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="116116" end="116122" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="116145" end="116150" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="116193" end="116201" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q205672" start="117244" end="117256" title="Mars Express" label="Mars Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q965136" start="117386" end="117418" title="Shuttle Radar Topography Mission" label="Shuttle Radar Topography Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569783" start="117476" end="117500" title="Jodrell Bank Observatory" label="Jodrell Bank Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="117522" end="117546" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q319234" start="117585" end="117599" title="Bernard Lovell" label="Bernard Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237067" start="117767" end="117775" title="Geminids" label="Geminids"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="118078" end="118087" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="118160" end="118176" title="Cavity magnetron" label="Cavity magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030166" start="118179" end="118204" title="History of smart antennas" label="History of smart antennas"/>
<link wikidata="Q863109" start="118207" end="118215" title="Klystron" label="Klystron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571838" start="118218" end="118259" title="List of German inventions and discoveries" label="List of German inventions and discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572584" start="118262" end="118311" title="List of World War II electronic warfare equipment" label="List of World War II electronic warfare equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444498" start="118314" end="118337" title="Secrets of Radar Museum" label="Secrets of Radar Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795048" start="120925" end="120956" title="Arnold Frederic Wilkins" label="Arnold &amp;#x27;Skip&amp;#x27; Wilkins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280061" wikidata="Q1362573" url="?curid=1280061" title="Naikan">
<text>Naikan (Japanese: 内観, ) is a structured method of self-reflection developed by Yoshimoto Ishin (1916–1988) in the 1940s. The practice is based around asking oneself three questions about a person in one&#x27;s life:

* What did I receive from this person?
* What did I return to this person?
* What troubles, worries, unhappiness did I cause this person?

There are many forms of Naikan practice, all focusing on these three questions. The most rigorous form of Naikan is practiced in week-long Naikan retreats, which start by focusing on the three questions on the individual&#x27;s relationship to their mother. The questions can then later be expanded outwards to other relationships. During the sessions a guide comes and listens to the participant from time to time allowing them to put into words what they have discovered.

A related fourth question, &quot;What troubles and difficulties has this person caused me?&quot;, is purposely ignored in Naikan. Naikan presupposes that people are naturally able to see answers to this fourth question, and that too much focus on this question is responsible for unhappiness in day-to-day life.

==History==
Yoshimoto Ishin was a businessman and devout Jodo Shinshu Buddhist who, as a young man, had engaged in an ascetic contrition (&quot;mishirabe&quot;) practice involving sensory deprivation, by dwelling in a dark cave without food, water or sleep. Wishing to make such introspection available to others he developed Naikan as a less difficult method which he first introduced to young people who had been incarcerated for committing crime and social disturbances. Later the practice was introduced to the general public. Naikan practitioners claim that Naikan helps people understand themselves and their relationships.

Today, there are around 30 Naikan centers in Japan, and it is used in mental health counseling, and in rehabilitation of prisoners. The practice has also taken root in Europe, with Naikan centers now established in Austria and Germany.

The &quot;mishirabe&quot; practices from which Naikan is derived are also still conducted in a religious context within some Jodo Shinshu temples and communities but the harsh, ascetic nature of Yoshimoto Ishin&#x27;s original practice is unusual given the Jodo Shinshu rejection of self-power practice.

== Self-reflection ==

The practice of self-reflection goes back many centuries and is rooted in the world’s great spiritual traditions. Early adherents of such practices include the Christian desert fathers and Japanese samurai. More contemporary proponents included Albert Schweitzer, Ben Franklin, and Bishop Fulton J. Sheen. Franklin, in particular, had a rather comprehensive and systematic approach to self-reflection. He developed a list of thirteen virtues and each day he would evaluate his conduct relative to a particular virtue. Daily self-reflection was a fundamental aspect of Franklin’s life.

Formal methods of self-reflection generally involve certain basic characteristics. First, there is the requirement for time which is set aside exclusively for the purpose of self-reflection. Second, use of a space, preferably with some degree of isolation that limits external distraction. And third, the application of questions or structure which helps us examine our lives with an emphasis on our conduct in relation to other people, creatures and objects.

Its structure uses our relationships with others as the mirror in which people can see themselves. We reflect on what we have received from others, what we have given, and what troubles we have caused.

The family-relationship focus of traditional Naikan may sometimes be less appropriate to those with fragmented or seriously dysfunctional family backgrounds. However, as with Buddhist metta meditation (&quot;mettā bhāvanā&quot;), there is no reason why Naikan practice need necessarily take family relationships as starting point. The benefit of looking at family relationships is that these are often most emotionally complex and connected with our sense of &#x27;self&#x27; .

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Chikako Ozawa-de Silva (2007). Demystifying Japanese Therapy: An Analysis of Naikan and the Ajase Complex through Buddhist Thought, Ethos 35, (4), 411–446</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1362573" start="0" end="6" title="Naikan" label="Naikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609257" start="79" end="94" title="Yoshimoto Ishin" label="Yoshimoto Ishin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912221" start="1201" end="1213" title="Jodo Shinshu" label="Jodo Shinshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1214" end="1222" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="1262" end="1269" title="ascetic" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q944333" start="1324" end="1343" title="sensory deprivation" label="sensory deprivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1943" end="1949" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2022" end="2031" title="mishirabe" label="mishirabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q912221" start="2137" end="2149" title="Jodo Shinshu" label="Jodo Shinshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609257" start="2207" end="2222" title="Yoshimoto Ishin" label="Yoshimoto Ishin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912221" start="2269" end="2281" title="Jodo Shinshu" label="Jodo Shinshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q490548" start="2295" end="2305" title="Jiriki_and_tariki" label="self-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066990" start="2510" end="2524" title="desert fathers" label="desert fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="2538" end="2545" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325" start="2585" end="2602" title="Albert Schweitzer" label="Albert Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="2604" end="2616" title="Ben Franklin" label="Ben Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q954398" start="2622" end="2644" title="Bishop Fulton J. Sheen" label="Bishop Fulton J. Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="3443" end="3449" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q906343" start="3714" end="3734" title="dysfunctional family" label="dysfunctional family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434717" start="3774" end="3779" title="Maitrī" label="metta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280066" wikidata="Q56436842" url="?curid=1280066" title="George Walkem">
<text>George Walkem may refer to:

* George Anthony Walkem (1834–1908), British Columbian politician and jurist
* George Alexander Walkem (1872–1946), mechanical engineer, businessman and political figure in British Columbia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182697" start="31" end="52" title="George Anthony Walkem" label="George Anthony Walkem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536166" start="108" end="131" title="George Alexander Walkem" label="George Alexander Walkem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280067" wikidata="Q1904899" url="?curid=1280067" title="Martin Ručinský">
<text>Martin Ručinský (; born 11 March 1971) is a Czech former professional ice hockey player who played 16 seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL). Ručínský was drafted by the Edmonton Oilers in the first round as the 20th overall selection in the 1991 NHL Entry Draft on 22 June 1991.

Ručinský led the Montreal Canadiens in 1998–99 with 17 goals. It was the first time since the 1940–41 season, that the Canadiens did not have at least one twenty-goal scorer. He was the last player for the Quebec Nordiques still active in professional hockey prior to his retirement in 2015.

Ručinský was inducted into the Czech Ice Hockey Hall of Fame on 22 January 2019.

==Transactions==
* 22 June 1991 – Edmonton Oilers&#x27; first-round draft choice (20th overall - from the Los Angeles Kings) in the 1991 NHL Entry Draft.
* 10 March 1992 – Traded by the Edmonton Oilers to the Quebec Nordiques in exchange for Ron Tugnutt and Brad Zavisha.
* 21 June 1995 – Rights transferred to the Colorado Avalanche after Quebec relocated.
* 6 December 1995 – Traded by the Colorado Avalanche, along with Andrei Kovalenko and Jocelyn Thibault, to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for Patrick Roy and Mike Keane.
* 21 November 2001 – Traded by the Montreal Canadiens, along with Benoît Brunet, to the Dallas Stars in exchange for Donald Audette and Shaun Van Allen.
* 12 March 2002 – Traded by the Dallas Stars, along with Roman Lyashenko to the New York Rangers in exchange for Manny Malhotra and Barrett Heisten.
* 30 October 2002 – Signed as a free agent with the St. Louis Blues.
* 28 August 2003 – Signed as a free agent with the New York Rangers.
* 9 March 2004 – Traded by the New York Rangers to the Vancouver Canucks in exchange for R. J. Umberger and Martin Grenier.
* 3 August 2005 – Signed as a free agent with the New York Rangers.
* 2 August 2006 – Signed as a free agent with the St. Louis Blues.
* 23 July 2008 - Signed as a free agent with Sparta Prague of the Czech Extraliga.
* 16 July 2015 - Announced his retirement from professional hockey.

==Career statistics ==

===Regular season and playoffs===
===International===






==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1904899" start="0" end="15" title="Martin Ručinský" label="Martin Ručinský"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="44" end="49" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="70" end="80" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="117" end="139" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="175" end="190" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q304461" start="247" end="267" title="1991 NHL Entry Draft" label="1991 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="303" end="321" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="325" end="332" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618502" start="380" end="394" title="1940–41 NHL season" label="1940–41 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="492" end="508" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q139661" start="610" end="639" title="Czech Ice Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Czech Ice Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="767" end="784" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q304461" start="793" end="813" title="1991 NHL Entry Draft" label="1991 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="847" end="862" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="870" end="886" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q328994" start="903" end="914" title="Ron Tugnutt" label="Ron Tugnutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923449" start="919" end="931" title="Brad Zavisha" label="Brad Zavisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="976" end="994" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q502310" start="1084" end="1100" title="Andrei Kovalenko" label="Andrei Kovalenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359610" start="1105" end="1121" title="Jocelyn Thibault" label="Jocelyn Thibault"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="1130" end="1148" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="1165" end="1176" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923505" start="1181" end="1191" title="Mike Keane" label="Mike Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q679785" start="1259" end="1272" title="Benoît Brunet" label="Benoît Brunet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="1281" end="1293" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q728701" start="1310" end="1324" title="Donald Audette" label="Donald Audette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062580" start="1329" end="1344" title="Shaun Van Allen" label="Shaun Van Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364171" start="1403" end="1418" title="Roman Lyashenko" label="Roman Lyashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="1426" end="1442" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388544" start="1459" end="1473" title="Manny Malhotra" label="Manny Malhotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885569" start="1478" end="1493" title="Barrett Heisten" label="Barrett Heisten"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="1547" end="1562" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="1688" end="1705" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378285" start="1722" end="1736" title="R. J. Umberger" label="R. J. Umberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903907" start="1741" end="1755" title="Martin Grenier" label="Martin Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425170" start="1937" end="1950" title="HC Sparta Praha" label="Sparta Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q862240" start="1958" end="1973" title="Czech Extraliga" label="Czech Extraliga"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280068" wikidata="Q5602072" url="?curid=1280068" title="Greeking">
<text>Greeking is a style of displaying or rendering text or symbols, not always from the Greek alphabet. Greeking obscures portions of a work for the purpose of either emphasizing form over details or displaying placeholders for unavailable content. The name is a reference to the phrase &quot;Greek to me&quot;, meaning something that one cannot understand, so that it might as well be in a foreign language.

Greeked text is used in typography to evaluate a certain typeface&#x27;s appropriateness, overall style or type color. In visual media, as in typography, greeking involves inserting nonsense text or, commonly, Greek or Latin text in prototypes of visual media projects (such as in graphic and web design) to check the layout of the final version before the actual text is available, or to enhance layout assessment by eliminating the distraction of readable text. Text of this sort is known as &quot;greeked text&quot;, &quot;dummy text&quot;, or &quot;jabberwocky text&quot;. &quot;Lorem ipsum&quot; is a commonly used example, though this is derived from Latin, not Greek.

Because a viewer can be distracted by meaningful content, greeking unimportant text forces the viewer to focus on layout and design. Greeking is also used when a design is being developed but the content is unfinished. One example might be the layout of a magazine article which has photographs but no text; initially, a lorem ipsum text is used, and then the nonsense text is replaced with draft versions as they become available. This allows design and layout to be carried out in parallel with content revisions. 

In computing, Greeking can refer to the automatic rendering of text characters as unreadable symbols or lines in the layout preview function of word processing documents, either to speed up screen display or because the graphics display capabilities of the monitor are insufficient for rendering extremely small texts.

The term &quot;greeking&quot; was applied by various WYSIWYG editors of the 1980s, such as ApplixWare and Island Graphics. Greeking referred to the substitution of text with a placeholder gray bar upon moving out of focus.

==In the arts==

Greeking in theatre, television, and film production art-department work refers to the process of changing or hiding corporate trademarks that have not been &quot;cleared&quot; legally for use in the production.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5602072" start="0" end="8" title="Greeking" label="Greeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="84" end="98" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q612282" start="289" end="300" title="Greek to me" label="Greek to me"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="430" end="440" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="463" end="471" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543909" start="513" end="523" title="type color" label="type color"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="616" end="621" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="625" end="630" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="639" end="649" title="Prototyping" label="prototypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="687" end="694" title="Graphic design" label="graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190637" start="699" end="709" title="web design" label="web design"/>
<link wikidata="Q250371" start="959" end="970" title="jabberwocky" label="jabberwocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q152036" start="989" end="1000" title="Lorem ipsum" label="Lorem ipsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q152036" start="1403" end="1414" title="lorem ipsum" label="lorem ipsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="1744" end="1759" title="Word processor" label="word processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="1973" end="1980" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="2288" end="2297" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280078" wikidata="Q167216" url="?curid=1280078" title="Yuri Slezkine">
<text>Yuri Lvovich Slezkine (Russian: Ю́рий Льво́вич Слёзкин &quot;Yúriy L&#x27;vóvich Slyózkin&quot;; born February 7, 1956) is a Russian-born American historian and translator. He was a professor of Russian history, Sovietologist, and served as Director of the Institute of Slavic, East European, and Eurasian Studies at the University of California, Berkeley in 2004-2013. He is best known as the author of the books &quot;The Jewish Century&quot; (2004) and &quot;The House of Government: A Saga of The Russian Revolution&quot; (2017).

==Career==
Slezkine originally trained as an interpreter in Moscow State University. His first trip outside the Soviet Union was in 1978-1979, when he worked as a translator in Mozambique. He returned to Moscow to serve as a translator of Portuguese and moved to Lisbon in 1982 before entering graduate school in Austin, Texas, the following year. He earned a PhD from the University of Texas at Austin.

Slezkine is a W. Glenn Campbell and Rita Ricardo-Campbell National Fellow at Stanford University&#x27;s Hoover Institution and Jane K. Sather Professor of History at the University of California, Berkeley. He is also a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2008).

==Slezkine&#x27;s theory of ethnic identity==

Slezkine characterizes the Jews (alongside other groups such as the Armenians and Overseas Chinese) as a &quot;Mercurian&quot; people &quot;specializ[ing] exclusively in providing services to the surrounding food-producing societies,&quot; which he characterizes as &quot;Apollonians&quot;. This division is, according to him, recurring in pre-20th century societies. With the exception of the Romani, these &quot;Mercurian peoples&quot; have all enjoyed great socioeconomic success relative to the average among their hosts, and have all, without exception, attracted hostility and resentment. A recurring pattern of the relationship between Apollonians and Mercurian people is that the social representation of each group by the other is symmetrical, for instance Mercurians see Apollonians as brutes while Apollonians see Mercurians as effeminate. Mercurians develop a culture of &quot;purity&quot; and &quot;national myths&quot; to cultivate their separation from the Apollonians, which allows them to provide international services (intermediaries, diplomacy) or services that are taboo for the local Apollonian culture (linked to death, magic, sexuality or banking). Slezkine develops this thesis by arguing that the Jews, the most successful of these Mercurian peoples, have increasingly influenced the course and nature of Western societies, particularly during the early and middle periods of Soviet Communism, and that modernity can be seen as a transformation of Apollonians into Mercurians.

== Views on the Russo-Ukrainian War and Western Civilization ==
According to Slezkine, Russia is divorcing itself from the rest of Western civilization, a process reinforced by the Russo-Ukrainian War. He further argues that the West&#x27;s unwillingness to integrate Russia into a common European security infrastructure was a major factor in provoking the war.

In October 2022, he argued that the West maintains unity in part by characterizing Russia as &quot;evil,&quot; remarking &quot;where would the West be without it?&quot; He also alluded to the supposedly controversial ideas in Ukraine which do not sit well with the Western views: &quot;Ukrainian national ideology is in many ways the opposite of what we are taught in the United States or in Western Europe&quot;.

More broadly, he believes that Western civilization is divided between Anglo-American/Western European cosmopolitanism and Eastern European/Israeli ethnonationalism. He has described the Baltic states as “ethnocracies” and Israel as “a racist state”, which, for just or unjust reasons, implemented an apartheid system with first-, second- and third-class citizens. Slezkine himself has many relatives in Israel; his aunt’s kibbutz was attacked on October 7 2023, but she survived. 

He argues that censorship in the West is very significant. It originates from private and professional organizations and creates a “society of conformists”. Among the West’s “sacred cows”, are issues related to family, sexuality and race. 

==Works==
*&quot;The House of Government: A Saga of the Russian Revolution&quot;, Princeton University Press, 2017
*&quot;The Jewish Century&quot;, Princeton University Press, 2004 ()
*&quot;In the Shadow of the Revolution: Life Stories of Russian Women from 1917 to the Second World War,&quot; edited by Sheila Fitzpatrick and Yuri Slezkine, Princeton University Press, 2000
*&quot;Arctic Mirrors: Russia and the Small Peoples of the North,&quot; Cornell University Press, 1994
*&quot;The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State Promoted Ethnic Particularism,&quot; Slavic Review, Vol. 53, No. 2 (Summer 1994), 414-452
*&quot;Between Heaven and Hell: The Myth of Siberia in Russian Culture&quot;, 1993

== Awards ==

* 2002: National Jewish Book Award in the Eastern European Studies for &quot;The Jewish Century&quot;
* 2020 Valdai Discussion Club Award, awarded in the presence of Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sergey Lavrov.

==See also==
* Amy Chua, American writer on &quot;Market-dominant minorities&quot;
* Model minority

==References==
==External links==
*Slezkine&#x27;s website at Berkeley
*&quot;The Jewish Century&quot;, Chapter One: MERCURY&#x27;S SANDALS: THE JEWS AND OTHER NOMADS
*An interview with Yuri Slezkine discussing the theses of his book &quot;The Jewish Century&quot;
*The Chosen People: The Nation&#x27;s review of &quot;The Jewish Century&quot; by Daniel Lazare, November 30, 2005
* Yuri Slezkine: «I tend to do my own things and expect you to do yours» (an interview, April 4, 2013)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167216" start="0" end="21" title="Yuri Slezkine" label="Yuri Lvovich Slezkine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161414" start="195" end="210" title="Russian history" label="Russian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263075" start="212" end="225" title="Sovietologist" label="Sovietologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="321" end="355" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954673" start="462" end="519" title="The House of Government" label="The House of Government: A Saga of The Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="595" end="618" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="712" end="722" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="798" end="804" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="908" end="937" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1017" end="1036" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="1044" end="1062" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1110" end="1144" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="1173" end="1210" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1294" end="1297" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="1335" end="1342" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="1349" end="1365" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Overseas Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="1372" end="1393" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="&amp;quot;Mercurian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1539" end="1550" title="Apollo (mythology)" label="Apollonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="1661" end="1667" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="1681" end="1690" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2676" end="2685" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="2952" end="2971" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q122976243" start="3997" end="4011" title="2023 Hamas attack on Israel" label="October 7 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954673" start="4291" end="4348" title="The House of Government" label="The House of Government: A Saga of the Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539352" start="4856" end="4869" title="Slavic Review" label="Slavic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189737" start="5015" end="5041" title="National Jewish Book Award" label="National Jewish Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q58217" start="5210" end="5223" title="Sergey Lavrov" label="Sergey Lavrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q463882" start="5241" end="5249" title="Amy Chua" label="Amy Chua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036661" start="5276" end="5302" title="World on Fire (book)" label="Market-dominant minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315586" start="5311" end="5325" title="Model minority" label="Model minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="5612" end="5622" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280082" wikidata="Q5106871" url="?curid=1280082" title="Chris Hetherington">
<text>Chris Ray Hetherington (born November 27, 1972) is an American former professional football fullback in the National Football League (NFL) who last played for the San Francisco 49ers. He went to Yale University. He was signed as an undrafted free agent by the Cincinnati Bengals in 1996. He then played for the Indianapolis Colts from 1996 to 1998. He was then signed by the Carolina Panthers from 1999 to 2002. He then played for the St. Louis Rams in 2002. He then played for the Oakland Raiders in 2003 and 2004. He was then signed by the 49ers in 2005. 

Hetherington is one of several professional sports alumni of both Avon Old Farms school in Avon, Connecticut and Yale. At Avon, he was coached by Kevin Driscoll and was a three-sport standout (in baseball, ice hockey, and football). After graduating in 1991, he moved to Yale, where starred in football as starting quarterback and holds numerous passing records. He also played baseball at Yale, before graduating in 1995.

==References==
==External links==

*Tokyo Apache Appoint Chris Hetherington as President</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5106871" start="0" end="22" title="Chris Hetherington" label="Chris Ray Hetherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="83" end="91" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q526960" start="92" end="100" title="Fullback (American football)" label="fullback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="108" end="132" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="163" end="182" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="195" end="210" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="232" end="252" title="undrafted free agent" label="undrafted free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="260" end="278" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="311" end="329" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="375" end="392" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="435" end="449" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870124" start="482" end="497" title="Oakland Raiders" label="Oakland Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829225" start="625" end="639" title="Avon Old Farms" label="Avon Old Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q791265" start="650" end="667" title="Avon, Connecticut" label="Avon, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="755" end="763" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="765" end="775" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25392108" start="865" end="873" title="Starting lineup" label="starting"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="874" end="885" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280086" wikidata="Q1145895" url="?curid=1280086" title="Ion-propelled aircraft">
<text>An ion-propelled aircraft or ionocraft is an aircraft that uses electrohydrodynamics (EHD) to provide lift or thrust in the air without requiring combustion or moving parts. Current designs do not produce sufficient thrust for crewed flight or useful loads.

== History ==
=== Origins ===
The principle of ionic wind propulsion with corona-generated charged particles was discovered soon after the discovery of electricity with references dating to 1709 in a book titled &quot;Physico-Mechanical Experiments on Various Subjects&quot; by Francis Hauksbee.

=== VTOL &quot;lifter&quot; experiments ===
American experimenter Thomas Townsend Brown spent much of his life working on the principle, under the mistaken impression that it was an anti-gravity effect, which he named the Biefeld–Brown effect. Since his devices produced thrust in the direction of the field gradient, regardless of the direction of gravity, and did not work in a vacuum, other workers realized that the effect was due to EHD.

VTOL ion-propelled aircraft are sometimes called &quot;lifters&quot;. Early examples were able to lift about a gram of weight per watt, This was insufficient to lift the heavy high-voltage power supply necessary, which remained on the ground and supplied the craft via long, thin and flexible wires.

The use of EHD propulsion for lift was studied by American aircraft designer Major Alexander Prokofieff de Seversky in the 1950s and 1960s. He filed a patent for an &quot;ionocraft&quot; in 1959. He built and flew a model VTOL ionocraft capable of sideways manoeuvring by varying the voltages applied in different areas, although the heavy power supply remained external.

The 2008 Wingless Electromagnetic Air Vehicle (WEAV), a saucer-shaped EHD lifter with electrodes embedded throughout its surface, was studied by a team of researchers led by Subrata Roy at the University of Florida in the early part of the twenty-first century. The propulsion system employed many innovations, including the use of magnetic fields to enhance the ionisation efficiency. A model with an external supply achieved minimal lift-off and hover.

=== Onboard power ===
Twenty-first century power supplies are lighter and more efficient. The first ion-propelled aircraft to take off and fly using its own onboard power supply was a VTOL craft developed by Ethan Krauss of Electron Air in 2006. His first patent application was filed in 2014, and he was awarded a microgrant to support his project by Stardust Startups in 2017. The company currently owns US patent 10119527B2 and 11161631B2 in relation to this field. The craft developed enough thrust to rise rapidly or to fly horizontally for several minutes.

In November 2018 the first self-contained ion-propelled fixed-wing airplane, the MIT EAD Airframe Version 2 flew 60 meters. It was developed by a team of students led by Steven Barrett from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It had a 5-meter wingspan and weighed 2.45 kg. The craft was catapult-launched using an elastic band, with the EAD system sustaining the aircraft in flight at low level.

== Principles of operation ==
Ionic air propulsion is a technique for creating a flow of air through electrical energy, without any moving parts. Because of this it is sometimes described as a &quot;solid-state&quot; drive. It is based on the principle of electrohydrodynamics.

In its basic form, it consists of two parallel conductive electrodes, a leading emitter wire and a downstream collector. When such an arrangement is powered by high voltage (in the range of kilovolts per mm), the emitter ionizes molecules in the air that accelerate backwards to the collector, producing thrust in reaction. Along the way, these ions collide with electrically neutral air molecules and accelerate them in turn.

The effect is not directly dependent on electrical polarity, as the ions may be positively or negatively charged. Reversing the polarity of the electrodes does not alter the direction of motion, as it also reverses the polarity of the ions carrying charge. Thrust is produced in the same direction, either way. For positive corona, nitrogen ions are created initially, while for negative polarity, oxygen ions are the major primary ions. Both these types of ion immediately attract a variety of air molecules to create molecular cluster-ions of either sign, which act as charge carriers.

Current EHD thrusters are far less efficient than conventional engines. An MIT researcher noted that ion thrusters have the potential to be far more efficient than conventional jet engines.

Unlike pure ion thruster rockets, the electrohydrodynamic principle does not apply in the vacuum of space.

=== Electrohydrodynamics ===

The thrust generated by an EHD device is an example of the Biefeld–Brown effect and can be derived through a modified use of the Child–Langmuir equation.
A generalized one-dimensional treatment gives the equation:
formula_1
where
* &quot;F&quot; is the resulting force.
* &quot;I&quot; is the electric current.
* &quot;d&quot; is the air gap.
* &quot;k&quot; is the ion mobility of the working fluid, expressed in A⋅s2⋅kg−1 in SI units, but more commonly expressed with the unit m2⋅V−1⋅s−1. A typical value for air at surface pressure and temperature is ).

As applied to a gas such as air, the principle is also referred to as electroaerodynamics (EAD).

When the ionocraft is turned on, the corona wire becomes charged with high voltage, usually between 20 and 50 kV. When the corona wire reaches approximately 30 kV, it causes the air molecules nearby to become ionised by stripping their electrons from them. As this happens, the ions are repelled from the anode and attracted towards the collector, causing the majority of the ions to accelerate toward the collector. These ions travel at a constant average velocity termed the drift velocity. Such velocity depends on the mean free path between collisions, the strength of the external electric field, and the mass of ions and neutral air molecules.

The fact that the current is carried by a corona discharge (and not a tightly confined arc) means that the moving particles diffuse into an expanding ion cloud, and collide frequently with neutral air molecules. It is these collisions that impart momentum to the neutral air molecules, which, because they are neutral, do not migrate back to the second electrode. Instead they continue to travel in the same direction, creating a neutral wind. As these neutral molecules are ejected from the ionocraft, there are, in agreement with Newton&#x27;s Third Law of Motion, equal and opposite forces, so the ionocraft moves in the opposite direction with an equal force. The force exerted is comparable to a gentle breeze. The resulting thrust depends on other external factors including air pressure and temperature, gas composition, voltage, humidity, and air gap distance.

The air mass in the gap between the electrodes is impacted repeatedly by excited particles moving at high drift velocity. This creates electrical resistance, which must be overcome. The result of the neutral air caught in the process is to effectively cause an exchange in momentum and thus generate thrust. The heavier and denser the air, the higher the resulting thrust.

=== Aircraft configuration ===
As with conventional reaction thrust, EAD thrust may be directed either horizontally to power a fixed-wing airplane or vertically to support a powered lift craft, sometimes referred to as a &quot;lifter&quot;.

== Design ==

The thrust generating components of an ion propulsion system consist of three parts; a corona or emitter wire, an air gap and a collector wire or strip downstream from the emitter. A lightweight insulating frame supports the arrangement. The emitter and collector should be as close to each other as possible, i.e. with a narrow air gap, to achieve a saturated corona current condition that produces maximum thrust. However, if the emitter is too close to the collector it tends to arc across the gap.

Ion propulsion systems require many safety precautions due to the required high voltage.

=== Emitter ===
The emitter wire is typically connected to the positive terminal of the high voltage power supply. In general, it is made from a small gauge bare conductive wire. While copper wire can be used, it does not work as well as stainless steel. Similarly, thinner wire such as 44 or 50 gauge tends to outperform more common, larger sizes such as 30 gauge, as the stronger electric field around the smaller diameter wire results in lower ionisation onset voltage and a larger corona current as described by Peek&#x27;s law.

The emitter is sometimes referred to as the &quot;corona wire&quot; because of its tendency to emit a purple corona discharge glow while in use. This is simply a side effect of ionization.

=== Air gap ===
The air gap insulates the two electrodes and allows the ions generated at the emitter to accelerate and transfer momentum to neutral air molecules, before losing their charge at the collector. The width of the air gap is typically 1 mm / kV.&lt;ref name=&quot;K. Meesters/ W. Terpstra&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

=== Collector ===
The collector is shaped to provide a smooth equipotential surface underneath the corona wire. Variations of this include a wire mesh, parallel conductive tubes, or a foil skirt with a smooth, round edge. Sharp edges on the skirt degrade performance, as it generates ions of opposite polarity to those within the thrust mechanism.

== See also ==
* Atmosphere-breathing electric propulsion
* Biefeld–Brown effect
* Hall-effect thruster
* Ion thruster
* Ion wind
* Magnetoplasmadynamic thruster
* Plasma actuator

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* DR Buehler, &quot;Exploratory Research on the Phenomenon of the Movement of High Voltage Capacitors&quot;. Journal of Space Mixing, 2004
* FX Canning, C Melcher, E Winet, &quot;Asymmetrical Capacitors for Propulsion&quot;. 2004.
* GVi Stephenson &quot;The Biefeld Brown Effect and the Global Electric Circuit&quot;. AIP Conference Proceedings, 2005. 
== External links ==

* Electrostatic Antigravity on NASA&#x27;s &quot;Common Errors in propulsion&quot; page
* NASA: Asymmetrical Capacitors for Propulsion
* 
* &quot;Full analysis &amp; design solutions for EHD Thrusters at saturated corona current conditions&quot;, NASA, 2004, https://www.gsjournal.net/h/papers_download.php?id=1830</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1145895" start="3" end="25" title="Ion-propelled aircraft" label="ion-propelled aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145895" start="29" end="38" title="Ion-propelled aircraft" label="ionocraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="45" end="53" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326902" start="64" end="84" title="electrohydrodynamics" label="electrohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="102" end="106" title="lift (force)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="110" end="116" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="146" end="156" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927151" start="160" end="172" title="moving parts" label="moving parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q124403" start="306" end="316" title="ionic wind" label="ionic wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q165294" start="333" end="339" title="corona discharge" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="411" end="422" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378752" start="537" end="553" title="Francis Hauksbee" label="Francis Hauksbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245721" start="622" end="643" title="Thomas Townsend Brown" label="Thomas Townsend Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q575625" start="738" end="750" title="anti-gravity" label="anti-gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q857212" start="778" end="798" title="Biefeld–Brown effect" label="Biefeld–Brown effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="1130" end="1134" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q621879" start="1384" end="1416" title="Alexander Prokofieff de Seversky" label="Alexander Prokofieff de Seversky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025230" start="1683" end="1719" title="Wingless Electromagnetic Air Vehicle" label="Wingless Electromagnetic Air Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897499" start="1848" end="1859" title="Subrata Roy (scientist)" label="Subrata Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="1867" end="1888" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="2006" end="2020" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839567" start="2445" end="2455" title="microgrant" label="microgrant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2482" end="2499" title="Stardust Startups" label="Stardust Startups"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754873" start="2775" end="2801" title="MIT EAD Airframe Version 2" label="MIT EAD Airframe Version 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="2888" end="2925" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="3128" end="3133" title="ion (physics)" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583685" start="3134" end="3148" title="air propulsion" label="air propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q206799" start="3199" end="3216" title="electrical energy" label="electrical energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q53875" start="3415" end="3423" title="parallel (geometry)" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="3424" end="3434" title="electrical conduction" label="conductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="3435" end="3445" title="electrodes" label="electrodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="3542" end="3549" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="3598" end="3605" title="Ionization" label="ionizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="3681" end="3687" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="4137" end="4145" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q865807" start="4376" end="4390" title="charge carrier" label="charge carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q205702" start="4597" end="4609" title="ion thruster" label="ion thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326902" start="4623" end="4642" title="electrohydrodynamic" label="electrohydrodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q857212" start="4782" end="4802" title="Biefeld–Brown effect" label="Biefeld–Brown effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4852" end="4875" title="Child–Langmuir equation" label="Child–Langmuir equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139740" start="5449" end="5461" title="high voltage" label="high voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="5489" end="5491" title="kilovolt" label="kV"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="5588" end="5591" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="5615" end="5624" title="electrons" label="electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q909891" start="5856" end="5870" title="drift velocity" label="drift velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q756307" start="5901" end="5915" title="mean free path" label="mean free path"/>
<link wikidata="Q165294" start="6072" end="6088" title="corona discharge" label="corona discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="6117" end="6120" title="electric arc" label="arc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6562" end="6595" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion#Newton&amp;#x27;s third law" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s Third Law of Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="6936" end="6945" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="7401" end="7411" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="7412" end="7420" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236688" start="7448" end="7460" title="powered lift" label="powered lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076457" start="8012" end="8015" title="spark gap" label="arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="8285" end="8295" title="conductive" label="conductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="8296" end="8300" title="wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="8308" end="8314" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="8361" end="8376" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q467321" start="8419" end="8424" title="American Wire Gauge" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160160" start="8639" end="8654" title="Peek&amp;#x27;s law" label="Peek&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q165294" start="8766" end="8782" title="corona discharge" label="corona discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205185" start="9537" end="9577" title="Atmosphere-breathing electric propulsion" label="Atmosphere-breathing electric propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q857212" start="9580" end="9600" title="Biefeld–Brown effect" label="Biefeld–Brown effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193128" start="9603" end="9623" title="Hall-effect thruster" label="Hall-effect thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q205702" start="9626" end="9638" title="Ion thruster" label="Ion thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q124403" start="9641" end="9649" title="Ion wind" label="Ion wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q17190065" start="9652" end="9681" title="Magnetoplasmadynamic thruster" label="Magnetoplasmadynamic thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201761" start="9684" end="9699" title="Plasma actuator" label="Plasma actuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="10149" end="10153" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280090" wikidata="Q6610274" url="?curid=1280090" title="List of closed railway stations in Victoria">
<text>This is a list of former [[Train station|railway stations]] and railway lines in [[Victoria (Australia)|Victoria]], Australia. Many of these stations and lines have been abandoned or demolished. There is a strong desire by communities to have many of these re-opened to better link Regional Victoria to the state capital Melbourne. Public transport has become increasingly popular in the 21st century for convenience and affordability reasons. For closed railway stations in suburban Melbourne, see List of closed railway stations in Melbourne.

==Mildura line==
Originally withdrawn on 12 September 1993. Once served by &quot;The Vinelander&quot; service, the line branches from the Serviceton line at Ballarat.
*Tourello
*Dunolly
*St Arnaud
*Donald
*Birchip
*Ouyen
*Red Cliffs
*Irymple
*Mildura

==Leongatha line==

The passenger service was withdrawn on 24 July 1993, but the Dandenong to Cranbourne section was later electrified and became part of the Melbourne suburban rail network in 1995.
*Cranbourne East (Proposed - station does not exist)
*Clyde
*Tooradin
*Koo Wee Rup
*Lang Lang
*Nyora
*Loch
*Korumburra
*Leongatha

==Closed lines==
The following lines are either closed to regular passenger services, freight only, part of tourist and heritage railways, or closed and removed.

*South Western:
**Geelong-Ballarat railway line
**Fyansford railway line
**Cunningham Pier railway line
**Queenscliff railway line (Bellarine Peninsula Railway)
**Geelong Racecourse railway line
**Wensleydale railway line
**Forrest railway line
**Newtown-Colac railway line
**Crowes railway line
**Alvie railway line
**Timboon railway line
**Mortlake railway line
**Koroit-Hamilton railway line
**Port Fairy railway line (open as far as Warrnambool)
*Midland:
**Geelong-Ballarat railway line (freight only)
**Gheringhap-Maroona railway line (freight and &quot;The Overland&quot; only)
**Mildura railway line (freight only)
*Ballarat region:
**Waubra railway line
**Ballarat Cattle Yards railway line
**Buninyong railway line
**Skipton railway line
**Newtown-Colac railway line
*Ballarat – Serviceton:
**Avoca railway line (freight only)
**Navarre railway line
**Carpolac railway line
**Bolangum railway line
**Patchewollock railway line (freight only to Hopetoun)
**Yaapeet railway line (freight only)
**Yanac railway line
*Ballarat – Mildura:
**Avoca railway line (freight only)
**Castlemaine-Maryborough railway line (freight only to Moolort from Maryborough)
**Pinnaroo railway line (freight only)
**Millewa South railway line
**Morkalla railway line
**Ballarat to Daylesford railway line
*Ararat – Portland:
**Portland railway line (freight only)
**Grampians railway line
**Balmoral railway line
**Koroit-Hamilton railway line
**Coleraine railway line
**Casterton railway line
**Mount Gambier railway line (isolated by rail gauge)
*Northern:
*Melbourne – Bendigo:
**Lancefield railway line
**Daylesford railway line (Daylesford Spa Country Railway)
**Castlemaine-Maryborough railway line
**Maldon railway line (Victorian Goldfields Railway)
**Redesdale railway line
**Heathcote railway line
*West from Bendigo:
**Robinvale railway line (freight only)
**Wedderburn railway line
**Eaglehawk-Inglewood railway line
**Kulwin railway line (freight only)
**Stony Crossing railway line
**Yungera railway line
**Kerang-Koondrook Tramway
*East from Bendigo:
**Cohuna railway line
**Toolamba-Echuca railway line (freight only) 
**Deniliquin railway line (freight only) (Passenger services provided as far as Echuca)
**Balranald railway line (freight only to Moulamein in New South Wales)
*North Eastern:
*Melbourne – Wodonga:
**Heathcote railway line
**Mansfield railway line
**Tatong railway line
**Oaklands railway line, Victoria (freight only)
**Whitfield railway line
**Bright railway line
**Yackandandah railway line
**Peechelba East railway line
**Wahgunyah railway line
**Cudgewa railway line (freight only to Bandiana)
*Goulburn Valley:
**Rushworth railway line
**Toolamba-Echuca railway line (freight only)
**Katamatite railway line (freight only to Dookie)
**Picola railway line
**Cobram railway line
**Tocumwal railway line (freight only beyond Shepparton)
*Eastern:
*Melbourne – Orbost:
**Orbost railway line (open as far as Bairnsdale)
**Noojee railway line
**Walhalla railway line (Walhalla Goldfields Railway)
**Thorpdale railway line
**Yallourn railway line
**Mirboo North railway line
**Maryvale railway line
**Maffra railway line
**Briagolong railway line
**Sale Wharf railway line
**Bairnsdale Wharf railway line
*South Gippsland:
**Strzelecki railway line
**Wonthaggi railway line
**Outtrim railway line
**Barry Beach railway line
**Welshpool Jetty railway line
**Woodside railway line
**South Gippsland railway line (South Gippsland Railway)

==Closed stations==
===On operational lines===

====South West====
====West====
====North====
====North East====
====East====
====South East====
===On closed lines===


==See also==
*List of regional railway stations in Victoria
*List of closed Melbourne railway stations

==References==

==External links==
*Vicsig.net – statewide line guides
*Timeline featuring opening and closure dates of lines
*Victorian Railway Maps 1860 – 2000</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6610274" start="18" end="114" title="List of closed railway stations in Victoria" label="former [[Train station|railway stations]] and railway lines in [[Victoria (Australia)|Victoria]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="321" end="330" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610273" start="499" end="543" title="List of closed railway stations in Melbourne" label="List of closed railway stations in Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932449" start="627" end="641" title="The Vinelander" label="The Vinelander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455857" start="684" end="699" title="Serviceton railway line" label="Serviceton line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851487" start="703" end="711" title="Ballarat railway station" label="Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315638" start="724" end="731" title="Dunolly railway station" label="Dunolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592515" start="733" end="742" title="St Arnaud railway station" label="St Arnaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295341" start="744" end="750" title="Donald railway station" label="Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915752" start="752" end="759" title="Birchip railway station" label="Birchip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113164" start="761" end="766" title="Ouyen railway station" label="Ouyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303910" start="768" end="778" title="Red Cliffs railway station" label="Red Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28925791" start="780" end="787" title="Irymple railway station" label="Irymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935223" start="789" end="796" title="Mildura railway station" label="Mildura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242240" start="956" end="987" title="Railways in Melbourne" label="Melbourne suburban rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181932" start="998" end="1013" title="Cranbourne East railway station" label="Cranbourne East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137064" start="1051" end="1056" title="Clyde railway station, Victoria" label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824201" start="1058" end="1066" title="Tooradin railway station" label="Tooradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430497" start="1068" end="1079" title="Koo Wee Rup railway station" label="Koo Wee Rup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485604" start="1081" end="1090" title="Lang Lang railway station" label="Lang Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071239" start="1092" end="1097" title="Nyora railway station" label="Nyora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665043" start="1099" end="1103" title="Loch railway station" label="Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432758" start="1105" end="1115" title="Korumburra railway station" label="Korumburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935192" start="1117" end="1126" title="Leongatha railway station" label="Leongatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529873" start="1309" end="1338" title="Geelong-Ballarat railway line" label="Geelong-Ballarat railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927162" start="1341" end="1363" title="Fyansford railway line" label="Fyansford railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1366" end="1394" title="Cunningham Pier railway line" label="Cunningham Pier railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1397" end="1421" title="Queenscliff railway line" label="Queenscliff railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883500" start="1423" end="1450" title="Bellarine Peninsula Railway" label="Bellarine Peninsula Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1454" end="1485" title="Geelong Racecourse railway line" label="Geelong Racecourse railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982967" start="1488" end="1512" title="Wensleydale railway line (Australia)" label="Wensleydale railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165572" start="1515" end="1535" title="Forrest railway line" label="Forrest railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1538" end="1564" title="Newtown-Colac railway line" label="Newtown-Colac railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189232" start="1567" end="1586" title="Crowes railway line" label="Crowes railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783088" start="1589" end="1607" title="Alvie railway line" label="Alvie railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927496" start="1610" end="1630" title="Timboon railway line" label="Timboon railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927327" start="1633" end="1654" title="Mortlake railway line" label="Mortlake railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1657" end="1685" title="Koroit railway line" label="Koroit-Hamilton railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230624" start="1688" end="1711" title="Port Fairy railway line" label="Port Fairy railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q705867" start="1728" end="1739" title="Warrnambool, Victoria" label="Warrnambool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529873" start="1753" end="1782" title="Geelong-Ballarat railway line" label="Geelong-Ballarat railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="1784" end="1791" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1800" end="1831" title="Gheringhap-Maroona railway line" label="Gheringhap-Maroona railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="1833" end="1840" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q544933" start="1851" end="1863" title="The Overland" label="The Overland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851037" start="1878" end="1898" title="Mildura railway line" label="Mildura railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="1900" end="1907" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1934" end="1953" title="Waubra railway line" label="Waubra railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1956" end="1990" title="Ballarat Cattle Yards railway line" label="Ballarat Cattle Yards railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997704" start="1993" end="2015" title="Buninyong railway line" label="Buninyong railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535862" start="2018" end="2038" title="Skipton railway line" label="Skipton railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2041" end="2067" title="Newtown-Colac railway line" label="Newtown-Colac railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829115" start="2094" end="2112" title="Avoca railway line" label="Avoca railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="2114" end="2121" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982124" start="2130" end="2150" title="Navarre railway line" label="Navarre railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q105063099" start="2153" end="2174" title="Carpolac railway line" label="Carpolac railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q107599167" start="2177" end="2198" title="Bolangum railway line" label="Bolangum railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726102" start="2201" end="2227" title="Patchewollock railway line" label="Patchewollock railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="2229" end="2236" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144250" start="2245" end="2253" title="Hopetoun, Victoria" label="Hopetoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030495" start="2257" end="2277" title="Yaapeet railway line" label="Yaapeet railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="2279" end="2286" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535043" start="2295" end="2313" title="Yanac railway line" label="Yanac railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829115" start="2337" end="2355" title="Avoca railway line" label="Avoca railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="2357" end="2364" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907383" start="2373" end="2409" title="Moolort railway line" label="Castlemaine-Maryborough railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="2411" end="2418" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907382" start="2427" end="2434" title="Moolort, Victoria" label="Moolort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014561" start="2440" end="2451" title="Maryborough, Victoria" label="Maryborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196331" start="2455" end="2476" title="Pinnaroo railway line, Victoria" label="Pinnaroo railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="2478" end="2485" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q111165265" start="2494" end="2520" title="Millewa South railway line" label="Millewa South railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165645" start="2523" end="2544" title="Morkalla railway line" label="Morkalla railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851488" start="2547" end="2582" title="Ballarat to Daylesford railway line" label="Ballarat to Daylesford railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232084" start="2605" end="2626" title="Portland railway line" label="Portland railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="2628" end="2635" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2644" end="2666" title="Grampians railway line" label="Grampians railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q107584134" start="2669" end="2690" title="Balmoral railway line" label="Balmoral railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2693" end="2721" title="Koroit railway line" label="Koroit-Hamilton railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q107657396" start="2724" end="2746" title="Coleraine railway line" label="Coleraine railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798174" start="2749" end="2771" title="Casterton railway line" label="Casterton railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329525" start="2774" end="2800" title="Mount Gambier railway line" label="Mount Gambier railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q214519" start="2814" end="2824" title="rail gauge" label="rail gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483590" start="2861" end="2884" title="Lancefield railway line" label="Lancefield railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243176" start="2887" end="2910" title="Daylesford railway line" label="Daylesford railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243176" start="2912" end="2942" title="Daylesford Spa Country Railway" label="Daylesford Spa Country Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907383" start="2946" end="2982" title="Moolort railway line" label="Castlemaine-Maryborough railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927218" start="2985" end="3004" title="Maldon railway line" label="Maldon railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927218" start="3006" end="3034" title="Victorian Goldfields Railway" label="Victorian Goldfields Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796382" start="3038" end="3060" title="Redesdale railway line" label="Redesdale railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q63919278" start="3063" end="3085" title="Heathcote railway line" label="Heathcote railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353157" start="3108" end="3130" title="Robinvale railway line" label="Robinvale railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="3132" end="3139" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3148" end="3171" title="Wedderburn railway line" label="Wedderburn railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325330" start="3174" end="3206" title="Eaglehawk-Inglewood railway line" label="Eaglehawk-Inglewood railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443325" start="3209" end="3228" title="Kulwin railway line" label="Kulwin railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="3230" end="3237" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619547" start="3246" end="3273" title="Stony Crossing railway line" label="Stony Crossing railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653446" start="3276" end="3296" title="Yungera railway line" label="Yungera railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927257" start="3299" end="3323" title="Kerang-Koondrook Tramway" label="Kerang-Koondrook Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927086" start="3346" end="3365" title="Cohuna railway line" label="Cohuna railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824059" start="3368" end="3396" title="Toolamba-Echuca railway line" label="Toolamba-Echuca railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="3398" end="3405" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887104" start="3415" end="3438" title="Deniliquin railway line" label="Deniliquin railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="3440" end="3447" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332859" start="3493" end="3499" title="Echuca railway station" label="Echuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926932" start="3503" end="3525" title="Balranald railway line" label="Balranald railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="3527" end="3534" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051078" start="3543" end="3552" title="Moulamein" label="Moulamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="3556" end="3571" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q63919278" start="3613" end="3635" title="Heathcote railway line" label="Heathcote railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751713" start="3638" end="3660" title="Mansfield railway line" label="Mansfield railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535150" start="3663" end="3682" title="Tatong railway line" label="Tatong railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074090" start="3685" end="3716" title="Oaklands railway line, Victoria" label="Oaklands railway line, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="3718" end="3725" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935319" start="3734" end="3756" title="Whitfield railway line" label="Whitfield railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967506" start="3759" end="3778" title="Bright railway line" label="Bright railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046465" start="3781" end="3806" title="Yackandandah railway line" label="Yackandandah railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536180" start="3809" end="3836" title="Peechelba East railway line" label="Peechelba East railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959769" start="3839" end="3861" title="Wahgunyah railway line" label="Wahgunyah railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192530" start="3864" end="3884" title="Cudgewa railway line" label="Cudgewa railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="3886" end="3893" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854588" start="3902" end="3910" title="Bandiana railway station, Victoria" label="Bandiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380891" start="3932" end="3954" title="Rushworth railway line" label="Rushworth railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824059" start="3957" end="3985" title="Toolamba-Echuca railway line" label="Toolamba-Echuca railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="3987" end="3994" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619234" start="4003" end="4026" title="Katamatite railway line" label="Katamatite railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="4028" end="4035" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297014" start="4044" end="4050" title="Dookie, Victoria" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4054" end="4073" title="Picola railway line" label="Picola railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q94970161" start="4076" end="4095" title="Cobram railway line" label="Cobram railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494550" start="4098" end="4119" title="Goulburn Valley railway line" label="Tocumwal railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="4121" end="4128" title="freight train" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q707030" start="4141" end="4151" title="Shepparton" label="Shepparton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100126" start="4186" end="4205" title="Orbost railway line" label="Orbost railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q803960" start="4222" end="4232" title="Bairnsdale, Victoria" label="Bairnsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927360" start="4236" end="4255" title="Noojee railway line" label="Noojee railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961895" start="4258" end="4279" title="Walhalla railway line" label="Walhalla railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724095" start="4281" end="4308" title="Walhalla Goldfields Railway" label="Walhalla Goldfields Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796672" start="4312" end="4334" title="Thorpdale railway line" label="Thorpdale railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047500" start="4337" end="4358" title="Yallourn railway line" label="Yallourn railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872964" start="4361" end="4386" title="Mirboo North railway line" label="Mirboo North railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4389" end="4410" title="Maryvale railway line, Victoria" label="Maryvale railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729464" start="4413" end="4432" title="Maffra railway line" label="Maffra railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962898" start="4435" end="4458" title="Briagolong railway line" label="Briagolong railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4461" end="4484" title="Sale Wharf railway line" label="Sale Wharf railway line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4487" end="4516" title="Bairnsdale Wharf railway line" label="Bairnsdale Wharf railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625753" start="4537" end="4560" title="Strzelecki railway line" label="Strzelecki railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927549" start="4563" end="4585" title="Wonthaggi railway line" label="Wonthaggi railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927381" start="4588" end="4608" title="Outtrim railway line" label="Outtrim railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864002" start="4611" end="4635" title="Barry Beach railway line" label="Barry Beach railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982056" start="4638" end="4666" title="Welshpool Jetty railway line" label="Welshpool Jetty railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927548" start="4669" end="4690" title="Woodside railway line" label="Woodside railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567359" start="4693" end="4721" title="South Gippsland railway line" label="South Gippsland railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567358" start="4723" end="4746" title="South Gippsland Railway" label="South Gippsland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636243" start="4932" end="4977" title="List of regional railway stations in Victoria" label="List of regional railway stations in Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610273" start="4979" end="5020" title="List of closed Melbourne railway stations" label="List of closed Melbourne railway stations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280101" wikidata="Q17112808" url="?curid=1280101" title="Dunes (album)">
<text>Dunes is the second studio album by American rock band Gardens &amp; Villa. Produced by Tim Goldsworthy it was released on February 4, 2014 on Secretly Canadian.

The band recorded the album at Key Club in Benton Harbor, Michigan. The group spent a month in the space working on the record, only leaving five times throughout the process. The album title, Dunes, was inspired by one of these ventures out of the studio to Michigan&#x27;s sand and snow dunes.

With the album announcement, Gardens &amp; Villa released the first single from the album, called &quot;Bullet Train.&quot; The album received generally favorable reviews.

==Track listing==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="45" end="49" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12313517" start="55" end="74" title="Gardens &amp;amp; Villa" label="Gardens &amp;amp; Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803554" start="88" end="103" title="Tim Goldsworthy" label="Tim Goldsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759608" start="143" end="160" title="Secretly Canadian" label="Secretly Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q818338" start="206" end="219" title="Benton Harbor" label="Benton Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="221" end="229" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280118" wikidata="Q419730" url="?curid=1280118" title="Schuyler">
<text>Schuyler may refer to:
==Places==
===United States===
* Schuyler County, Illinois
* Schuyler County, Missouri
* Schuyler, Nebraska, a city
* Schuyler County, New York
* Schuyler, New York, a town
* Schuyler Island, Lake Champlain, New York
* Schuyler Creek, Seneca County, New York
* Schuyler, Virginia, a census-designated place
* Fort Schuyler, a 19th-century fortification in the Bronx, New York
* Old Fort Schuyler, a Revolutionary War fort that was located in what is now Utica, New York
* Fort Stanwix, at the location of present-day Rome, New York, captured from the British by American forces in 1776 and renamed Fort Schuyler

===Antarctica===
* Mount Schuyler, Graham Land

==People==

* Schuyler (name), a name of Dutch origin, including a list of people with the given name or surname

==Ships==
* , a cargo ship constructed near the end of World War II

==Songs==
* The Schuyler Sisters, the fifth song from Act 1 of the musical Hamilton

==See also==
* Schuler, a surname
* Schuyler Apartments, Spartanburg, South Carolina, United States, on the National Register of Historic Places
* Schuylerville, New York
* Schuyler Falls, New York
* Schuyler Lake, New York
* Skylar (disambiguation)
* Skyler</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q419730" start="0" end="8" title="Schuyler" label="Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q491026" start="56" end="81" title="Schuyler County, Illinois" label="Schuyler County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q497953" start="84" end="109" title="Schuyler County, Missouri" label="Schuyler County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q608394" start="112" end="130" title="Schuyler, Nebraska" label="Schuyler, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q71190" start="141" end="166" title="Schuyler County, New York" label="Schuyler County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709190" start="169" end="187" title="Schuyler, New York" label="Schuyler, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433077" start="198" end="213" title="Schuyler Island" label="Schuyler Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q30625074" start="242" end="256" title="Schuyler Creek" label="Schuyler Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489639" start="284" end="302" title="Schuyler, Virginia" label="Schuyler, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471994" start="332" end="345" title="Fort Schuyler" label="Fort Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q24553435" start="401" end="418" title="Old Fort Schuyler" label="Old Fort Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q566356" start="495" end="507" title="Fort Stanwix" label="Fort Stanwix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927498" start="655" end="669" title="Mount Schuyler" label="Mount Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433066" start="698" end="713" title="Schuyler (name)" label="Schuyler (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23763074" start="879" end="899" title="The Schuyler Sisters" label="The Schuyler Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21450455" start="967" end="974" title="Schuler" label="Schuler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157836" start="988" end="1007" title="Schuyler Apartments" label="Schuyler Apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458172" start="1099" end="1122" title="Schuylerville, New York" label="Schuylerville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917727" start="1125" end="1149" title="Schuyler Falls, New York" label="Schuyler Falls, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433078" start="1152" end="1175" title="Schuyler Lake, New York" label="Schuyler Lake, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537800" start="1178" end="1201" title="Skylar (disambiguation)" label="Skylar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58943620" start="1204" end="1210" title="Skyler" label="Skyler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280123" wikidata="Q3501527" url="?curid=1280123" title="Stéphan Lebeau">
<text>Stéphan Armand Lebeau (born February 28, 1968) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey centre who played seven seasons in the National Hockey League from 1988–89 to 1994–95. He won a Stanley Cup in 1993 with the Montreal Canadiens. His brother, Patrick, also played a short time in the NHL.

==Playing career==
Lebeau was a scoring sensation in junior with the Shawinigan Cataractes of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League, and in 1987–88 he led the QMJHL in goals scored with 94. He finished his junior career second all-time in QMJHL career goals with 281, behind Mike Bossy, and second all-time in career points with 580, behind only Shawinigan-teammate Patrice Lefebvre.

Lebeau continued his scoring prowess in the American Hockey League after being signed by the Montreal Canadiens in 1986. He played one season in the AHL with the Sherbrooke Canadiens and led the league with 70 goals and 134 points as a rookie, which garnered him three major awards, including the Dudley &quot;Red&quot; Garrett Memorial Award as the league&#x27;s top rookie. Lebeau&#x27;s 70 goals still stands as the AHL single season record. The next season, he moved up to the NHL full-time, and scored 15 goals and 35 points in his rookie season. Over the next three seasons Lebeau&#x27;s point total steadily improved, climaxing with 80 points in the 1992–93 season, the same year the Canadiens came away with the Stanley Cup.

However the next season he failed to produce at the same clip, and midway through was traded to the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim for goalie Ron Tugnutt. He would play in Anaheim until 1994–95, and then he moved on to play in Switzerland before retiring in 2001. He currently resides in Sherbrooke, Quebec and runs the hockey program at Bishop&#x27;s College School in Lennoxville.

==Awards==
*QMJHL Second All-Star Team (1987, 1988)
*AHL First All-Star Team (1989)
*Dudley &quot;Red Garrett Memorial Award (1989)
*John B. Sollenberger Trophy (Leading Scorer in the AHL) (1989)
*Les Cunningham Award (AHL MVP) (1989)

==Career statistics==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3501527" start="0" end="21" title="Stéphan Lebeau" label="Stéphan Armand Lebeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="81" end="91" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="92" end="98" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="131" end="153" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="159" end="166" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="170" end="177" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="188" end="199" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="203" end="207" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="217" end="235" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q318955" start="250" end="257" title="Patrick Lebeau" label="Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q733803" start="366" end="387" title="Shawinigan Cataractes" label="Shawinigan Cataractes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="395" end="428" title="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League" label="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="572" end="582" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q350958" start="663" end="679" title="Patrice Lefebvre" label="Patrice Lefebvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="726" end="748" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032434" start="844" end="864" title="Sherbrooke Canadiens" label="Sherbrooke Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263786" start="979" end="1024" title="Dudley &amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Garrett Memorial Award" label="Dudley &amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Garrett Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="1339" end="1353" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="1516" end="1539" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q328994" start="1551" end="1562" title="Ron Tugnutt" label="Ron Tugnutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="1595" end="1602" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1636" end="1647" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q139473" start="1697" end="1707" title="Sherbrooke" label="Sherbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1709" end="1715" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917409" start="1747" end="1775" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s College School" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q672089" start="1779" end="1790" title="Lennoxville" label="Lennoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="1805" end="1810" title="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League" label="QMJHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469156" start="1833" end="1837" title="1986–87 QMJHL season" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469157" start="1839" end="1843" title="1987–88 QMJHL season" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="1846" end="1849" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q518821" start="1871" end="1875" title="1988–89 AHL season" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q949456" start="1926" end="1953" title="John B. Sollenberger Trophy" label="John B. Sollenberger Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469432" start="1990" end="2010" title="Les Cunningham Award" label="Les Cunningham Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280129" wikidata="Q468508" url="?curid=1280129" title="List of first-level administrative divisions by area">
<text>This is a list of first-level administrative divisions by area (including surface water) in square kilometres.

==Country subdivisions==
=== and greater===
======
======
======
======
======
======
======
==Summary tables==


==See also==
*List of countries and dependencies by area
*List of political and geographic subdivisions by total area
*List of first-level administrative divisions by population
*Lists of country subdivisions by GDP
**List of the largest administrative divisions by GRDP
**List of first-level administrative country subdivisions by nominal GDP per capita

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q468508" start="10" end="62" title="List of first-level administrative divisions by area" label="list of first-level administrative divisions by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="240" end="282" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="List of countries and dependencies by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634109" start="284" end="343" title="List of political and geographic subdivisions by total area" label="List of political and geographic subdivisions by total area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679808" start="345" end="403" title="List of first-level administrative divisions by population" label="List of first-level administrative divisions by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614108" start="405" end="441" title="Lists of country subdivisions by GDP" label="Lists of country subdivisions by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254793" start="444" end="496" title="List of the largest administrative divisions by GRDP" label="List of the largest administrative divisions by GRDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620160" start="499" end="580" title="List of first-level administrative country subdivisions by nominal GDP per capita" label="List of first-level administrative country subdivisions by nominal GDP per capita"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280130" wikidata="Q4829225" url="?curid=1280130" title="Avon Old Farms">
<text>Avon Old Farms School is a boarding school for boys located in Avon, Connecticut, United States. Theodate Pope Riddle, one of America&#x27;s first female architects, founded the school in 1927.

==History==
The school&#x27;s conception dates to a few years before 1918 when Riddle purchased of land on which to build it. Together with the architect Charles A. Platt, she toured several boys&#x27; schools in New England, including Andover, Groton School, Hotchkiss School, Middlesex School, Pomfret School, St. Mark&#x27;s School, and St. Paul&#x27;s School, but as she wrote to a friend, &quot;They all illustrate exceedingly well the things I wish to avoid.&quot; In 1918 she created the Pope-Brooks Foundation, to manage both her house, Hill-Stead and its artworks, and the as-yet unformed new school. The school&#x27;s earliest buildings, which she designed, were constructed from 1923 to 1926 by over 500 workers from America and the Cotswolds. For her designs Riddle was elected a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects, and awarded the Robinson Memorial Medal of the Architectural Club of New Haven.

John Wallace Riddle set about designing the Avon buildings in a manner resembling the houses and spatial dimensions of an old English village. She had previously designed Westover School for Girls. A handbook published in 1925 said that Avon, then in planning, sought to cultivate &quot;the sturdiness of character found in the old New England stock of Colonial times.&quot; Each student was to work for an hour or two daily for the school community or on the school farm. Carpentry and forestry were other forms of work that Riddle found valuable. She thought of students as citizens in a &quot;small commonwealth.&quot;

The school&#x27;s earliest days were marked by vigorous disagreements between Riddle and the school&#x27;s board and members. She dismissed the board in 1926 when it refused to grant her absolute control and refused her dictum that &quot;there will be no gymnasium and no indoor inter-school athletics.&quot; The school was then run directly by the Pope-Brooks foundation. Its first Provost (headmaster), John Mitchell Froelicher, served from 1927 to 1929, when he, too, was dismissed. After several abortive attempts to find a replacement, Percy Gamble Kammerer was named Provost in August 1930. He served until January 1940, when he was forced to resign. That summer, W. Brooke Stabler was named as his replacement. He, again, had disagreements with Riddle, who was unbending in her authority. He resigned in March 1944. At this event, the entire faculty resigned en masse.

Starting in June 1944, during World War II, the campus was adapted to serve as the Old Farms Convalescent Hospital for blind veterans. Riddle died in 1946, and the hospital wound down in 1947. In 1948, the Avon Old Farms School resumed operation under Provost Donald W. Pierpoint.

==Athletics==
Avon Old Farms is a member of the Founders League.

Avon ice hockey teams have won nine Division I New England Championships (five between 2004 and 2010). In the 2015–16 season, the Winged Beavers won the Founders League and landed third in the USHR standings. On December 21, 2009, Avon played Taft School in the first hockey game played at Fenway Park.

In 2015, the Avon lacrosse team won the Western New England and the Founders League. The 2015 team was also rated as the number one team in New England and one of the best programs in the &quot;Elite 25&quot; by &quot;USA Today&quot;.

==Notable alumni==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4829225" start="0" end="21" title="Avon Old Farms" label="Avon Old Farms School"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="27" end="42" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q791265" start="63" end="80" title="Avon, Connecticut" label="Avon, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q535985" start="97" end="117" title="Theodate Pope Riddle" label="Theodate Pope Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958363" start="349" end="365" title="Charles A. Platt" label="Charles A. Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="431" end="438" title="Phillips Academy" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q872541" start="440" end="453" title="Groton School" label="Groton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630782" start="455" end="471" title="Hotchkiss School" label="Hotchkiss School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841942" start="473" end="489" title="Middlesex School" label="Middlesex School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227302" start="491" end="505" title="Pomfret School" label="Pomfret School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589975" start="507" end="529" title="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s School (Massachusetts)" label="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q906930" start="535" end="557" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School (Concord, New Hampshire)" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618645" start="740" end="750" title="Hill–Stead Museum" label="Hill-Stead"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="939" end="948" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="1001" end="1033" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989536" start="1287" end="1302" title="Westover School" label="Westover School"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2646" end="2658" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993716" start="2946" end="2961" title="Founders League" label="Founders League"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="2969" end="2979" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675047" start="3207" end="3218" title="Taft School" label="Taft School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="3254" end="3265" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993716" start="3336" end="3351" title="Founders League" label="Founders League"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="3486" end="3495" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280138" wikidata="Q3854067" url="?curid=1280138" title="The Story of Mel">
<text>The Story of Mel is an archetypical piece of computer programming folklore. Its subject, Melvin Kaye, is an exemplary &quot;Real Programmer&quot; whose subtle techniques fascinate his colleagues.

== Story ==
Ed Nather&#x27;s &quot;The Story of Mel&quot; details the extraordinary programming prowess of a former colleague of his, &quot;Mel&quot;, at Royal McBee Computer Corporation. Although originally written in prose, Nather&#x27;s story was modified by someone into a &quot;free verse&quot; form which has become widespread.

Little is known about Mel Kaye, beyond the fact that he was credited with doing the &quot;bulk of the programming&quot; on the 1959 ACT-1 compiler for the Royal McBee LGP-30 computer. In Nather&#x27;s story, Kaye is portrayed as being prone to avoiding optimizing assemblers in favor of crafting code to take advantage of hardware quirks, for example taking advantage of the rotation of the LGP-30&#x27;s drum memory to avoid writing delay loops into the code.

The story, as written by Nather, involved Kaye&#x27;s work on rewriting a blackjack program from the LGP-30 to a newer Royal McBee system, the RPC-4000; company sales executives had requested to modify the program so that they could flip a front panel switch and cause the program to lose (and the user to win). Kaye reluctantly acceded to the request, but to his own delight, he got the test wrong, and the switch would instead cause the program to win every time (and the user to lose).

Subsequent to Kaye&#x27;s departure, Nather was asked to fix the bug. While examining the code, he was puzzled to discover that it contained what appeared to be an infinite loop, yet control did not remain inside the loop. Eventually he realized that Kaye was using self-modifying code to process elements of an array, and had coded the loop in such a way as to take advantage of an Integer overflow. Adding 1 to the address field of an instruction that referred to address &quot;x&quot; normally just changed the address to &quot;x&quot;+1. But when &quot;x&quot; was already the highest possible address, not only did the address wrap around to 0, but a 1 was carried into the bits from which the opcode would be read—in this case changing the opcode to &quot;jump to&quot; so that the full instruction became &quot;jump to address 0&quot;. This impressed Nather so much that, out of respect, he gave up the task and reported that he could not find the bug.

Nather recounted this story from memory, more than 20 years later. Some technical details are known to be incorrect, including the location of an &quot;Index&quot; flag bit in the instruction word; Kaye&#x27;s use of it presumably gave Nather the vital clue that a coding trick was being used. Nevertheless there are plausible hacks which Kaye might have implemented on the actual RPC-4000 and which are largely in line with Nather&#x27;s account.

The early computers of IAS machine design had no index register. Using self-modifying code was necessary for array operations. The LGP-30 instruction    did &quot;replace the contents of the address portion of the word in memory location 2000 with the contents of the address portion of the word in the accumulator&quot; to ease writing self-modifying code.

== History ==

The essay was originally published in the Usenet news group &quot;net.followup&quot; on May 21, 1983, by utastro!nather (the UUCP email address of Ed Nather at the time).

The Royal McBee computers were developed and manufactured by Librascope, and the documentation written for the blackjack program was written by Mel Kaye of Librascope Inc. The August 1956 edition of &quot;The Librazette&quot;, the Librascope newsletter, contains a story about training on the LGP-30, and mentions that some Librascope application engineers were transferred to the Royal McBee payroll. Among the engineers named is Mel Kaye.

There is a photograph on the front page of that issue showing that first class of neophyte LGP-30 programmers and the instructors, including Mel Kaye.

==See also ==
* Real Programmers Don&#x27;t Use Pascal

==References==
==Further reading==
* (NB. A copy of the original prose version.)
* (A completely original copy of Ed Nather&#x27;s Usenet post, with headers)
* (NB. Punctuation added/corrected for readability. Contains link to program tape of blackjack for LGP-30)
* (Mel Kaye&#x27;s signature] on a coding sheet for the LGP-30.)
* (NB. Presumably the subject of the original story.)
* (NB. Detailed analysis of the story, explaining the technical details.)
** Contains even more technical details
* (A research on the origins of the story, its characters, Mel Kaye&#x27;s biography, and hacker folklore in general)
* (Mel Kaye&#x27;s Biography: A research into Mel Kaye&#x27;s identity, family, origins and work)
*A redditor found a computer of the type that Mel used in his grandparents basement.
* (Analysis of the technical accuracy of the story and possible implementations of the hack on the RPC-4000 computer.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3854067" start="0" end="16" title="The Story of Mel" label="The Story of Mel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="45" end="65" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854067" start="89" end="100" title="The Story of Mel" label="Melvin Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647044" start="124" end="139" title="Real Programmer" label="Real Programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335217" start="209" end="218" title="Ed Nather" label="Ed Nather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374941" start="351" end="383" title="Royal McBee" label="Royal McBee Computer Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458339" start="699" end="705" title="LGP-30" label="LGP-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156793" start="785" end="806" title="Optimization (computer science)" label="optimizing assemblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458339" start="923" end="929" title="LGP-30" label="LGP-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="937" end="948" title="drum memory" label="drum memory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="966" end="976" title="delay loop" label="delay loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q228044" start="1068" end="1077" title="blackjack" label="blackjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458339" start="1137" end="1145" title="RPC-4000" label="RPC-4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q817862" start="1382" end="1386" title="Conditional (computer programming)" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q862372" start="1648" end="1661" title="infinite loop" label="infinite loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165944" start="1750" end="1769" title="self-modifying code" label="self-modifying code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423448" start="1867" end="1883" title="Integer overflow" label="Integer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="2163" end="2166" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q766483" start="2183" end="2189" title="opcode" label="opcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535967" start="2917" end="2928" title="IAS machine" label="IAS machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="3310" end="3316" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="3317" end="3327" title="news group" label="news group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="3393" end="3397" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042856" start="3501" end="3511" title="Librascope" label="Librascope"/>
<link wikidata="Q228044" start="3551" end="3560" title="blackjack" label="blackjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647044" start="4050" end="4088" title="Real Programmers Don&amp;#x27;t Use Pascal" label="Real Programmers Don&amp;#x27;t Use Pascal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280141" wikidata="Q3078105" url="?curid=1280141" title="Fort Whyte">
<text>Fort Whyte is a provincial electoral division in the Canadian province of Manitoba. It was created in 1999, after the provincial electoral boundaries commission determined that southwestern Winnipeg had experienced enough population growth to deserve an extra seat. Fort Whyte was created from territory formerly belonging to the divisions of Tuxedo, Fort Garry and St. Norbert.

The current MLA for Fort Whyte is Obby Khan, a Progressive Conservative. Khan succeeded fellow Progressive Conservative and former Premier of Manitoba Brian Pallister following his resignation in 2021.

== Constituency profile ==

=== Geography ===
Following Manitoba&#x27;s 2018 electoral redistribution, Fort Whyte is bordered to the east by Fort Garry, to the south by Waverley, to the west by Roblin, and to the north by River Heights and Tuxedo.

=== Demographics ===
The constituency&#x27;s population in 2018 was 21,780. The average family income in 2018 was $117,535. The unemployment rate is 4.9%, and 19.2% of the population is above 65 years of age. Almost 42% of the population have university degrees. Health and social services account for 13.5% of Fort Whyte&#x27;s industry, with a further 10.4% in Retail Trade.

Fort Whyte is an ethnically diverse constituency, with an immigrant population of 25.6%. 6.7% of the riding&#x27;s residents are East Indian, 5.6% are Chinese.

== Political history ==
The constituency has been held by the Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba (PCs) for its entire existence, and has always been comfortably safe for that party. The riding&#x27;s first Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA), John Loewen, won it handily in 1999 even as the Tories were soundly defeated by the New Democratic Party of Manitoba in that year&#x27;s provincial election, after having been in government for over eleven years. On September 23, 2005, Loewen announced that he was leaving provincial politics to seek the Liberal Party of Canada&#x27;s nomination for Charleswood—St. James—Assiniboia in the federal election anticipated. He formally resigned from the legislature on September 26.

On December 13, 2005, a by-election was held to fill Loewen&#x27;s seat. The winner was another Tory, Hugh McFadyen. A few months later, McFadyen became leader of the provincial PCs. McFadyen was easily re-elected in the 2007 provincial election, but was one of only four PC MLAs returned from Winnipeg. After the PCs were again defeated in 2011, McFadyen announced he would retire from politics as soon as a successor was chosen. 

Former provincial MLA and federal MP Brian Pallister was elected his successor, and easily won Fort Whyte in the ensuing by-election. Pallister served as Premier of Manitoba while MLA for Fort Whyte from 2016, leading the party to a second electoral mandate in 2019, until 2021, when he resigned first as premier and later as an MLA. 

A by-election to replace his vacancy was held on March 22, 2022. Obby Khan, a fellow Progressive Conservative, won the seat, defeating Liberal candidate Willard Reaves. Khan successfully won reelection in 2023.

==List of provincial representatives==
==Election results==







|Progressive Conservative
|Brian Pallister
|align=&quot;right&quot;|3,626
|align=&quot;right&quot;|55.22
|align=&quot;right&quot;|-7.22
|align=&quot;right&quot;|$32,215.06


|Independent
|Darrell Ackman
|align=&quot;right&quot;|19
|align=&quot;right&quot;|0.29
|align=&quot;right&quot;|
|align=&quot;right&quot;|211.37





==Previous boundaries==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3078105" start="0" end="10" title="Fort Whyte" label="Fort Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="53" end="70" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="74" end="82" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="190" end="198" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542476" start="343" end="349" title="Tuxedo (electoral district)" label="Tuxedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471196" start="351" end="361" title="Fort Garry (electoral district)" label="Fort Garry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463068" start="366" end="377" title="St. Norbert (electoral district)" label="St. Norbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074653" start="414" end="423" title="Obby Khan" label="Obby Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366633" start="427" end="451" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401758" start="511" end="530" title="Premier of Manitoba" label="Premier of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924976" start="531" end="546" title="Brian Pallister" label="Brian Pallister"/>
<link wikidata="Q70147072" start="752" end="760" title="Waverley (electoral district)" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353216" start="777" end="783" title="Roblin (electoral district)" label="Roblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433487" start="805" end="818" title="River Heights (electoral district)" label="River Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="1339" end="1350" title="Indian people" label="East Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1361" end="1368" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366633" start="1433" end="1475" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245127" start="1627" end="1638" title="John Loewen" label="John Loewen"/>
<link wikidata="Q774542" start="1711" end="1743" title="New Democratic Party of Manitoba" label="New Democratic Party of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586319" start="1747" end="1783" title="1999 Manitoba general election" label="that year&amp;#x27;s provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="1932" end="1955" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960785" start="1978" end="2010" title="Charleswood—St. James—Assiniboia—Headingley" label="Charleswood—St. James—Assiniboia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723544" start="2018" end="2034" title="2006 Canadian federal election" label="federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q666929" start="2210" end="2223" title="Hugh McFadyen" label="Hugh McFadyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586321" start="2329" end="2353" title="2007 Manitoba general election" label="2007 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586322" start="2449" end="2453" title="2011 Manitoba general election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924976" start="2578" end="2593" title="Brian Pallister" label="Brian Pallister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401758" start="2695" end="2714" title="Premier of Manitoba" label="Premier of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637668" start="2745" end="2749" title="2016 Manitoba general election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233493" start="2802" end="2806" title="2019 Manitoba general election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074653" start="2942" end="2951" title="Obby Khan" label="Obby Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366499" start="3012" end="3019" title="Manitoba Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003476" start="3030" end="3044" title="Willard Reaves" label="Willard Reaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845265" start="3082" end="3086" title="2023 Manitoba general election" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366633" start="3157" end="3181" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924976" start="3183" end="3198" title="Brian Pallister" label="Brian Pallister"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="3331" end="3342" title="Independent (politician)" label="Independent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280144" wikidata="Q3187746" url="?curid=1280144" title="Juan Nieves">
<text>Juan Manuel Nieves Cruz (born January 5, 1965) is a Puerto Rican professional baseball pitcher and coach who is currently the assistant pitching coach for the Detroit Tigers of Major League Baseball (MLB). He played for the Milwaukee Brewers of Major League Baseball (MLB) from 1986 to 1988. He has coached in MLB for the Chicago White Sox, Boston Red Sox, and Miami Marlins.

== Playing career ==
Nieves was signed by the Milwaukee Brewers, with a $115,000 signing bonus, after he had a 19–1 win–loss record with a 1.05 earned run average (ERA) during his senior season at the Avon Old Farms school in Connecticut.

On April 15, 1987, Nieves threw a no-hitter against the Baltimore Orioles, becoming the second-youngest player in Major League history to do so. He threw the only no-hitter for the Brewers until 2021. Nieves&#x27; no-hitter became the first ever thrown by a Puerto Rican in Major League Baseball. Nieves was mostly a starter, but on September 5, 1988, he did earn his only career save against the White Sox. He threw one perfect inning, closing out a 5–2 Brewers victory and saving the game for starter Don August.

After playing for the Brewers from 1986 to 1988, he suffered a career-ending arm injury.

==Coaching career==
Nieves worked as a minor league pitching instructor for the New York Yankees (1992–1996) and the White Sox (1999–2007) before joining the Chicago White Sox Major League staff as the bullpen coach serving for the next five seasons. He was mentored by Don Cooper, first when Cooper was the White Sox&#x27; roving coordinator in their minor league hierarchy, and later when Cooper became the pitching coach of the Sox. They became really close, adapting similar pitching styles, and Nieves was named as &quot;Cooper&#x27;s right-hand man&quot;. He was named Boston&#x27;s pitching coach on November 7, 2012. He brought over Cooper&#x27;s style of pitching to the Red Sox organization. Nieves led the Red Sox to the second lowest earned run average in the American League as the team went on to win the World Series. After the Red Sox earned the second highest team ERA (4.86) to start the 2015 season, Nieves was dismissed by the team on May 7, 2015.

Nieves spent the next three seasons as pitching coach for the Miami Marlins, being dismissed after the 2018 season.

On November 6, 2020, the Detroit Tigers named Nieves as the team&#x27;s assistant pitching coach for the 2021 season. Nieves had spent the previous two seasons as the pitching coach for the Toledo Mud Hens, the Tigers Triple-A affiliate.

==See also==
* List of Major League Baseball no-hitters

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3187746" start="0" end="23" title="Juan Nieves" label="Juan Manuel Nieves Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="78" end="86" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="87" end="94" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="99" end="104" title="coach (baseball)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="159" end="173" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="177" end="198" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="224" end="241" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="245" end="266" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="322" end="339" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="341" end="355" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="361" end="374" title="Miami Marlins" label="Miami Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="423" end="440" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512989" start="458" end="471" title="signing bonus" label="signing bonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="493" end="508" title="win–loss record (pitching)" label="win–loss record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="521" end="539" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829225" start="578" end="592" title="Avon Old Farms" label="Avon Old Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="603" end="614" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="651" end="660" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="673" end="690" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292178" start="1120" end="1130" title="Don August" label="Don August"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="1303" end="1319" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="1381" end="1398" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="1399" end="1411" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League"/>
<link wikidata="Q579478" start="1425" end="1438" title="bullpen" label="bullpen coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420751" start="1493" end="1503" title="Don Cooper" label="Don Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="2254" end="2267" title="Miami Marlins" label="Miami Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082443" start="2295" end="2306" title="2018 Miami Marlins season" label="2018 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="2334" end="2348" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038383" start="2414" end="2425" title="2021 Detroit Tigers season" label="2021 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q787652" start="2499" end="2514" title="Toledo Mud Hens" label="Toledo Mud Hens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136238" start="2563" end="2603" title="List of Major League Baseball no-hitters" label="List of Major League Baseball no-hitters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280151" wikidata="Q582276" url="?curid=1280151" title="Brian Bellows">
<text>Brian Edward Bellows (born September 1, 1964) is a former Canadian professional ice hockey player. He played nearly 1,200 games in the National Hockey League (NHL) with the Minnesota North Stars, Montreal Canadiens, Tampa Bay Lightning, Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and the Washington Capitals. He was a member of the 1993 Stanley Cup-winning Montreal Canadiens.

==Playing career==
Bellows played junior hockey in the Ontario Hockey League with the Kitchener Rangers. During this time, he was featured in &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;, which described him as the hottest prospect since Wayne Gretzky. In his two seasons with Kitchener, he captained the team to two consecutive Ontario Hockey League championships and two Memorial Cup finals, winning the trophy on their second attempt, 7-4 vs the Sherbrooke Beavers.

Bellows was drafted second overall by the Minnesota North Stars, who had acquired the draft pick in a trade with Detroit with the purpose of having a shot at Bellows. North Stars GM Lou Nanne sent Don Murdoch, Greg Smith, and a first-round pick (Murray Craven) to the Wings in exchange for what later turned out to be the second overall draft pick. Bellows was often compared to Gretzky, which led to a tough rookie season. The pressure of such comparisons caused criticism when he did not live up to them. Bellows improved greatly in the second half of the season and finished with 35 goals. In the playoffs that year, Bellows scored 9 points (5 goals, 4 assists) in 9 games.

Bellows played 10 seasons with the North Stars and was popular in Minnesota for his charity work, as well as his goal-scoring. He had a North Star record 342 goals in 753 games, peaking with 55 goals in 1989–90. In 1990–91, Bellows scored 29 points in the post-season to become the North Stars&#x27; career playoff point leader and took the North Stars to the Stanley Cup finals where they fell to the Pittsburgh Penguins.

When team captain Craig Hartsburg was injured partway through the 1983–84 season, Bellows was named interim captain for the remainder of the season. At 19 years and 4 months, Bellows became captain at an earlier age than Connor McDavid, Gabriel Landeskog and Sidney Crosby. However, because Bellows was an interim captain, McDavid is still considered the youngest captain in history.

On August 31, 1992, Bellows was traded to the Montreal Canadiens for Russ Courtnall. The trade angered Bellows at first, but he relished the chance to play for the Canadiens. In the 1992-93 NHL season his 88 points were the second highest season total of his career, and his 15 playoff points helped the Canadiens win the Stanley Cup in 1993.

As his career was winding down, Bellows played for the Tampa Bay Lightning, Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and the Washington Capitals. In the 1997–98 season the Capitals made it to the Stanley Cup Finals, but lost to the Detroit Red Wings. En route to the Eastern Conference championship, Bellows scored the series-clinching overtime goal in the first round in Game 6 against the Boston Bruins. The 1998–99 season was his last. On January 2, 1999, Bellows scored his 1,000th career regular season point, becoming the 54th NHL player to reach that plateau.

Bellows was named to the 1990 second All-Star team and played in three NHL All-Star Games (1984, 1988 and 1992). He retired with 485 goals, 537 assists and 1,022 points. He was named the top forward at the 1989 World Ice Hockey Championships, as Canada won the silver medal.

==Personal life==
Bellows lives in Edina, Minnesota, and works in Minneapolis as a broker at investment bank Piper Jaffray.

Bellows&#x27;s son Kieffer Bellows in 2016 was drafted in the first round, 19th overall, by the New York Islanders.

==Awards and achievements==
* Stanley Cup champion – 1993
* 3× NHL All-Star Game selection: 1984, 1988 and 1992
* Ice Hockey World Championships scoring leader – 1989
* NHL second All-Star team – 1990

==Career statistics==

===Regular season and playoffs===
===International===
==See also==

* List of NHL players with 1,000 points
* List of NHL players with 1,000 games played

==References==
==External links==
* Profile at hockeydraftcentral.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q582276" start="0" end="20" title="Brian Bellows" label="Brian Edward Bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="80" end="90" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="135" end="157" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="173" end="194" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="196" end="214" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="216" end="235" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="237" end="260" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="269" end="288" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588796" start="313" end="317" title="1993 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="318" end="329" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q902860" start="414" end="435" title="Ontario Hockey League" label="Ontario Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q965480" start="445" end="462" title="Kitchener Rangers" label="Kitchener Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="507" end="525" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="583" end="596" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="857" end="878" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q375136" start="997" end="1006" title="Lou Nanne" label="Lou Nanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q569039" start="1012" end="1023" title="Don Murdoch" label="Don Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606270" start="1025" end="1035" title="Greg Smith (ice hockey)" label="Greg Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953834" start="1061" end="1074" title="Murray Craven" label="Murray Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="1696" end="1703" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="1708" end="1715" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="1895" end="1914" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q367783" start="1935" end="1950" title="Craig Hartsburg" label="Craig Hartsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="1983" end="1997" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="2138" end="2152" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q715421" start="2154" end="2171" title="Gabriel Landeskog" label="Gabriel Landeskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q311280" start="2176" end="2189" title="Sidney Crosby" label="Sidney Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="2348" end="2366" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q681013" start="2371" end="2385" title="Russ Courtnall" label="Russ Courtnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="2484" end="2502" title="1992-93 NHL season" label="1992-93 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="2624" end="2635" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="2701" end="2720" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="2722" end="2745" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="2754" end="2773" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="2782" end="2796" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="2861" end="2878" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="3020" end="3033" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="3039" end="3053" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q29144" start="3268" end="3285" title="NHL All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119695" start="3403" end="3438" title="1989 World Ice Hockey Championships" label="1989 World Ice Hockey Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q957763" start="3508" end="3524" title="Edina, Minnesota" label="Edina, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="3539" end="3550" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389022" start="3582" end="3595" title="Piper Jaffray" label="Piper Jaffray"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095333" start="3617" end="3632" title="Kieffer Bellows" label="Kieffer Bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="3694" end="3712" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="3745" end="3756" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588796" start="3768" end="3772" title="1993 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q29144" start="3778" end="3795" title="National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q226916" start="3807" end="3811" title="36th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q228701" start="3813" end="3817" title="39th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q233789" start="3822" end="3826" title="43rd National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q190163" start="3829" end="3859" title="Ice Hockey World Championships" label="Ice Hockey World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119695" start="3877" end="3881" title="1989 Ice Hockey World Championships" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="3884" end="3908" title="NHL All-Star team" label="NHL second All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="3911" end="3915" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q668581" start="4010" end="4047" title="List of NHL players with 1,000 points" label="List of NHL players with 1,000 points"/>
<link wikidata="Q721120" start="4050" end="4093" title="List of NHL players with 1,000 games played" label="List of NHL players with 1,000 games played"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280153" wikidata="Q982558" url="?curid=1280153" title="John Salley">
<text>John Thomas Salley ( ; born May 16, 1964) is an American former professional basketball player. He was the first player in NBA history to win championships with three franchises (since joined by Robert Horry, Danny Green, and LeBron James), as well as the first player in the NBA to win a championship in three different decades (since joined by Tim Duncan).

After being drafted in the first round out of Georgia Tech in the 1986 NBA draft, the -tall Salley played both power forward and center for the Detroit Pistons, Miami Heat, Toronto Raptors, Chicago Bulls, Panathinaikos, and Los Angeles Lakers. He was a long-time host of the former Fox Sports Net show &quot;The Best Damn Sports Show Period&quot;. He is a vegan activist, chef, and wellness entrepreneur.

==Early life==
John Thomas Salley was born on May 16, 1964, in Brooklyn, New York. Salley played on the basketball team at Canarsie High School in Brooklyn.

==College career==
Salley is a 1988 graduate of Georgia Tech&#x27;s College of Management. He helped the Yellow Jackets win the 1985 ACC Championship, they also advanced to the Elite Eight of the NCAA Tournament. He left in 1986 as Tech&#x27;s all-time leader in blocked shots. Salley holds Georgia Tech&#x27;s personal fouls record, and has had his jersey number 22 retired, a very rare honor in college basketball. Salley was seen as potential top 3 pick during his senior year .

==Professional career==

===Detroit Pistons (1986–1992)===
Salley had a draft workout for the Boston Celtics for the 2nd overall pick against Len Bias in front off Red Auerbach . The Chicago Bulls promised Salley if he was there at nine they would take him but took Brad Sellers. Salley was drafted by the Detroit Pistons with the 11th overall pick in the first round of the 1986 NBA draft out of Georgia Tech. After joining the Pistons, he became close friends with Adrian Dantley, who taught him proper nutrition, how to exercise, and how to conduct himself off the court. Salley, for his part, called Dantley &quot;The Teacher&quot;. Salley would become good friends with comedian Eddie Murphy and made several appearances at comedy clubs in the off-season. In 1989 and 1990, he played on two Pistons NBA championship teams. He is among the Pistons&#x27; all-time leaders in blocked shots.

Under the coaching of Chuck Daly, Salley was part of the Pistons era that featured three consecutive NBA finals appearances. The team&#x27;s highly physical, defense-oriented, and dirty style of play earned them the nickname of the NBA&#x27;s &quot;Bad Boys&quot;, with Salley playing alongside Dennis Rodman, Bill Laimbeer, James Edwards, Joe Dumars, Isiah Thomas, Rick Mahorn and Dantley. After losing the 1988 NBA Finals in seven games to the Lakers, the Pistons turned it around to sweep the Lakers in four games in 1989. Salley and the Pistons repeated in 1990, defeating the Portland Trail Blazers in five games. The Pistons&#x27; run came to an end when the Michael Jordan-led Chicago Bulls swept them in four games in the 1991 Eastern Conference finals; following game four, while most of the Pistons players chose to return to the locker room rather than congratulate the new Eastern Conference champions, Salley was one of the few who stayed on the court as the game ended to congratulate the Bulls.

===Miami Heat (1992–1995)===
Salley was traded to the Miami Heat in 1992. In the 1995 NBA expansion draft he was selected by the inaugural Toronto Raptors team after being made available by the Heat.

===Toronto Raptors (1995–1996)===
In February 1996, he negotiated a buyout of his contract and was waived thus ending his stint with the Raptors during which he averaged 19.3 minutes and 6 points per game.

===Chicago Bulls (1996)===
Free of his Raptors contract, in early March 1996, Salley signed a 10-day contract with the Chicago Bulls, joining the roster with Michael Jordan, Scottie Pippen, Toni Kukoč, and former Pistons teammates Dennis Rodman and James Edwards. Following another 10-day contract right after the first one ended, the Bulls signed Salley as a free agent and he spent the rest of the season with the team. The 1995–96 Bulls achieved a record-breaking 72-win season, the best-ever regular-season record at the time, later surpassed by the 2015–16 Golden State Warriors at 73–9. Salley would win his third NBA championship in June, playing sparingly in the 1996 NBA Finals.

===Panathinaikos (1996)===
In September 1996, thirty-two-year-old Salley came out of what turned out to be only a three-month retirement and went to play in Greece, where he joined the reigning EuroLeague champions Panathinaikos of the Greek Basket League on a one-year US$1 million contract. Before accepting the Božidar Maljković-coached Panathinaikos&#x27; offer, Salley had reportedly consulted with recent Bulls teammate Toni Kukoč who knew Maljković well having spent four trophy-laden seasons anchoring his late 1980s KK Split teams.

Salley made his Panathinaikos debut on September 25, 1996, in EuroLeague away at FC Barcelona, a 77–58 loss during which he scored 5 points before fouling out in only 12 minutes of action. Right away, Salley got on the bad side of coach Maljković who refused to modify his disciplinarian approach in order to accommodate a veteran player with a notable NBA career behind him. Though Salley&#x27;s performances somewhat improved over the following three EuroLeague outings—10 points in a home loss versus ASVEL, 9 points and 11 rebounds in a blowout home win versus KK Split, and 21 points and 8 rebounds in a win away at minnows Bayer Leverkusen—as he seemingly showed signs of adjustment to FIBA basketball rules and European referees by managing to stay out of foul trouble, he continued to butt heads with coach Maljković. After flying back to Athens with the team the morning after the Leverkusen game, Salley refused to go to practice and as a result, got dropped by Maljković for their Greek League game the following day. The player then flew back to the United States for meetings with TV executives over a new talk show he had been planning to host for Disney, returning to Athens an hour before the club&#x27;s Greek Cup game versus P.A.O.K. on October 22, 1996—a trip that included Salley renting a private Lear jet in Paris for US$20,000 out of his own pocket in order to make it back to Athens in time for the game after having his connecting flight delayed and then even renting a helicopter once he landed at Athens&#x27; Ellinikon Airport to take him right to Panathinaikos&#x27; OACA Hall in the city&#x27;s Marousi neighbourhood. However, Maljković still refused to include him in the lineup. In response, Salley decided to leave Panathinaikos unilaterally two days later on October 24, 1996, after only a month at the club.

Salley appeared in seven games for Panathinaikos and ended up getting paid about €300,000.

===Los Angeles Lakers (1999–2000)===
In 1999, Salley joined a Lakers team led by superstars Shaquille O&#x27;Neal and Kobe Bryant and also reunited with his former Bulls coach, Phil Jackson. He saw little action for the Lakers en route to their first of three consecutive NBA championships, primarily serving as O&#x27;Neal&#x27;s backup. In 2000, he retired again following the first Lakers championship season after proudly proclaiming that he had won &quot;four championship rings, with three different teams, in three different decades and two different millenniums&quot;. He would be the last Laker to wear #16 before Pau Gasol, whom it was retired in honor of. 14 years later, Tim Duncan of the San Antonio Spurs became the second player to achieve titles in three different decades (sans the requirement of different teams) by leading his Spurs to five championships between 1999 and 2014.

==Post-basketball activities==
===Film===
In 1995, John Salley had a role in &quot;Bad Boys&quot; as a thick-glassed computer hacking nerd prisoner named Fletcher, who gets out of jail because he helps crack files for the Miami Police Department. In 1996, Salley appeared as a veteran basketball player alongside Whoopi Goldberg in the film &quot;Eddie&quot;, about a fan who takes over as coach of the New York Knicks.

In 2003, Salley reprised his role of Fletcher in &quot;Bad Boys II&quot; and appeared in the Showtime TV film &quot;Coast to Coast&quot; alongside actress Selma Blair.

He also appeared in the movie &quot;Confessions of a Shopaholic&quot; in 2009 as a member of the shopaholic help group (playing a retired NBA player) and had a bit role as a pimp in the blaxploitation spoof &quot;Black Dynamite&quot;.

Salley appeared in the Disney Channel original movie, &quot;The Ultimate Christmas Present&quot;, as a tall elf.

In 2018, Salley appeared in the Netflix original movie, &quot;Nappily Ever After&quot;, starring Sanaa Lathan.

In 2022, Salley appears in &quot;Sneakerella&quot; as a famous sneaker maker and former basketball star.

In 2024, Salley returned to his role of Fletcher in &quot;Bad Boys: Ride or Die&quot;.

===Television===

In season 2, episode 5 of Malcolm &amp; Eddie he plays Lt. Stanley Proctor.

In the fall of 1998, Salley hosted the game show &quot;I Can&#x27;t Believe You Said That&quot;, which aired on the Fox Family Channel. During that time, he also guest-starred as a panelist on &quot;Hollywood Squares&quot; and &quot;Match Game&quot;.

In 2000, he appeared as himself in an episode of &quot;Sabrina the Teenage Witch&quot;. Appearing in the episode titled &quot;Welcome Back Duke”. In the credits his character&#x27;s name was just NBA player.

In 2001, he appeared as himself on a special TV Hosts episode of &quot;Weakest Link&quot; where he was the first contestant voted off.

In 2005, he appeared in the television series &quot;Noah&#x27;s Arc&quot; as Victor.

He was one of the hosts of &quot;The Best Damn Sports Show Period&quot; on Fox Sports Network. Salley hosted &quot;The John Salley Block Party&quot;, a radio morning show on Los Angeles station 100.3 The Beat from 2005 – 2006.

For a short time, Salley provided analysis for NBC&#x27;s &quot;NBA Showtime&quot;.

Salley has also hosted VH1&#x27;s &quot;Basketball Wives&quot; (2010–2012) and &quot;Basketball Wives LA&quot; (2011, 2012, 2014, 2015) Reunion Specials.

Starting from 2019, Salley reprised his role of Fletcher in the &quot;Bad Boys&quot; spinoff TV series &quot;LA&#x27;s Finest&quot;.

===Guest appearances===
In 2001, he made an appearance in the Luther Vandross music video, &quot;Take You Out&quot;. He also appeared on a celebrity episode of &quot;Weakest Link&quot; that same year and was voted off in the first round.

In 2004, he was part of the panel of celebrity judges in the TBS Superstation show &quot;He&#x27;s a Lady&quot;.

In 2006, Salley was named the Commissioner of the American Basketball Association.

In 2007, Salley appeared in the ABC reality television series &quot;Fast Cars and Superstars: The Gillette Young Guns Celebrity Race&quot;, featuring a dozen celebrities in a stock car racing competition. In the first round of competition, Salley matched up against professional wrestler John Cena and tennis star Serena Williams. Salley also became the host of the BET show &quot;Ballers&quot;.

Salley joined the cast of the reality competition show &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity…Get Me out of Here!&quot;, which premiered on June 1, 2009. He came in third place behind winner Lou Diamond Phillips and runner-up Torrie Wilson.

Salley hosted a podcast on Adam Carolla&#x27;s ACE Broadcasting Network with sportswriter Kevin Hench entitled &quot;Spider and the Henchman&quot;. The show was canceled on March 18, 2011.

In 2012, he appeared as a celebrity judge on &quot;RuPaul&#x27;s Drag Race&quot; (season 4, episode 2).

On an episode of Bravo&#x27;s &quot;Millionaire Matchmaker&quot; (&quot;The NFL Kicker and the Workaholic&quot;, aired March 12, 2013), he acted as a consultant to Patti Stanger to help one of her clients (an ex-NFL player) become less of a &quot;playa&quot; and find a woman to settle down with.

== Vegan activism and wellness career ==
Salley is a vegan activist and has appeared on PETA&#x27;s testimonial videos, as well as in promoting alternatives to practices of massive factory farming.

Salley is also noted for speaking at Michigan&#x27;s Vegfest since 2009 and appearing on VegMichigan&#x27;s billboard campaign. He also appeared before the U.S. Congress to advocate for vegetarian options to be served in public schools in Nov ’09 and May ’10 as part of the Child Nutrition Act discussions.

On May 4, 2010, it was announced that Salley had joined the Simply Raw team. The group of individuals who produced the documentary &quot;Raw for 30&quot; had approached Salley with their video about reversing diabetes, and &quot;it instantly got his attention&quot; since his father had the disease.

Salley teamed up with Farm Sanctuary in 2010 to host their New York City &quot;Walk for Farm Animals&quot; on Sunday, October 24, 2010.

In June 2012 Salley became the official spokesperson for a natural supplements line called VirMax that is developed by Natural Product Solutions, LLC.

In December 2015, Salley encouraged US First Lady Michelle Obama to go vegan &quot;for the planet&quot; – setting a lifestyle example of reducing environmental impacts from greenhouse gas release.

&quot;Vegan eating is not just a slam dunk for human health; it&#x27;s also the most effective way to combat climate change.&quot; ~ John Salley

Salley is an entrepreneur in the cannabis industry, launching his own cannabis brand Deuces22 and taking an ownership stake in the cannabis testing company GreenSpace Labs. Salley is also an advisory board member with cannabis social networking platform BudTrader.

Salley is an ambassador for Operation Smile.

== Personal life ==

Salley married Natasha Duffy in 1993. They have two children together, and Salley also has a daughter from a previous relationship. Salley is a member of Omega Psi Phi initiated through Nu Omega Chapter in Detroit. He is also a 33° Scottish Rite Freemason in Los Angeles.

== NBA career statistics ==
=== Regular season ===
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
| 82 || 2 || 17.8 || .562 || .000 || .614 || 3.6 || 0.7 || 0.5 || 1.5 || 5.3
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
| 82 || 16 || 24.4 || .566 || – || .709 || 4.9 || 1.4 || 0.6 || 1.7 || 8.5
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;|†
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
| 67 || 21 || 21.8 || .498 || .000 || .692 || 5.0 || 1.1 || 0.6 || 1.1 || 7.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;| †
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
| 82 || 12 || 23.3 || .512 || .250 || .713 || 5.4 || 0.8 || 0.6 || 1.9 || 7.2
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
| 74 || 1 || 22.3 || .475 || .000 || .727 || 4.4 || 0.9 || 0.7 || 1.5 || 7.4
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
| 72 || 38 || 24.6 || .512 || .000 || .715 || 4.1 || 1.6 || 0.7 || 1.5 || 9.5
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Miami
| 51 || 34 || 27.9 || .502 || – || .799 || 6.1 || 1.6 || 0.6 || 1.4 || 8.3
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Miami
| 76 || 45 || 25.1 || .477 || .667 || .729 || 5.4 || 1.8 || 0.7 || 1.0 || 7.7
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Miami
| 75 || 50 || 26.1 || .499 || – || .739 || 4.5 || 1.6 || 0.6 || 1.1 || 7.3
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Toronto
| 25 || 6 || 19.3 || .486 || – || .723 || 3.9 || 1.6 || 0.4 || 0.5 || 6.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;|†
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Chicago
| 17 || 0 || 11.2 || .343 || – || .600 || 2.5 || 0.9 || 0.5 || 0.9 || 2.1
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;|†
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|L.A. Lakers
| 45 || 3 || 6.7 || .362 || – || .750 || 1.4 || 0.6 || 0.2 || 0.3 || 1.6
|- class=&quot;sortbottom&quot;
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=&quot;2&quot;| Career
| 748 || 228 || 22.1 || .506 || .214 || .714 || 4.5 || 1.2 || 0.6 || 1.3 || 7.0
=== Playoffs ===
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1987
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
|15||0||20.7||.500||–||.643||4.8||0.7||0.2||1.1||6.2
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1988
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
|23||0||27.1||.538||.000||.710||6.7||0.9||0.7||1.6||7.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;|1989†
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
|17||0||23.1||.586||–||.667||4.6||0.5||0.5||1.5||8.9
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;|1990†
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
|20||0||27.4||.475||–||.755||5.9||1.0||0.5||1.7||9.5
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1991
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
|15||0||20.5||.543||–||.600||4.1||0.7||0.4||1.3||7.5
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1992
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Detroit
|5||1||29.8||.455||.000||.821||6.0||2.8||0.6||2.8||12.6
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1994
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Miami
|5||5||40.2||.386||–||.688||8.0||1.6||0.4||1.0||11.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;|1996†
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Chicago
|16||0||5.3||.545||–||.286||0.7||0.4||0.1||0.1||0.9
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;|2000†
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|L.A. Lakers
|18||0||4.3||.385||–||.700||1.2||0.2||0.1||0.3||0.9
|- class=&quot;sortbottom&quot;
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=&quot;2&quot;| Career
| 134 || 6 || 20.1 || .505 || .000 || .690 || 4.4 || 0.8 || 0.4 || 1.2 || 6.4
==See also==
* List of NBA players with most championships

==References==
==External links==
*John Salley NBA stats @ basketball-reference.com
*FOX Sports: The Scoop On John Salley</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982558" start="0" end="18" title="John Salley" label="John Thomas Salley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="77" end="87" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="123" end="126" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q364394" start="195" end="207" title="Robert Horry" label="Robert Horry"/>
<link wikidata="Q555436" start="209" end="220" title="Danny Green (basketball)" label="Danny Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="226" end="238" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q193020" start="346" end="356" title="Tim Duncan" label="Tim Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547839" start="406" end="418" title="Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets basketball" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810519" start="426" end="440" title="1986 NBA draft" label="1986 NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q462471" start="471" end="484" title="Power forward (basketball)" label="power forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q222052" start="489" end="495" title="center (basketball)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="504" end="519" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="521" end="531" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132880" start="533" end="548" title="Toronto Raptors" label="Toronto Raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="550" end="563" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q739287" start="565" end="578" title="Panathinaikos BC" label="Panathinaikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="584" end="602" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q46578" start="642" end="656" title="Fox Sports Net" label="Fox Sports Net"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716699" start="668" end="700" title="The Best Damn Sports Show Period" label="The Best Damn Sports Show Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="829" end="837" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="839" end="847" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031185" start="889" end="909" title="Canarsie High School" label="Canarsie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="972" end="984" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431110" start="992" end="1013" title="Georgia Institute of Technology College of Management" label="College of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="1501" end="1515" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q964585" start="1549" end="1557" title="Len Bias" label="Len Bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q336581" start="1571" end="1583" title="Red Auerbach" label="Red Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621428" start="1673" end="1685" title="Brad Sellers" label="Brad Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="1713" end="1728" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810519" start="1782" end="1796" title="1986 NBA draft" label="1986 NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="1804" end="1816" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q372859" start="1874" end="1888" title="Adrian Dantley" label="Adrian Dantley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="2091" end="2103" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176263" start="2323" end="2333" title="Chuck Daly" label="Chuck Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q201608" start="2596" end="2609" title="Dennis Rodman" label="Dennis Rodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q705206" start="2611" end="2624" title="Bill Laimbeer" label="Bill Laimbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q547977" start="2626" end="2639" title="James Edwards (basketball)" label="James Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q348598" start="2641" end="2651" title="Joe Dumars" label="Joe Dumars"/>
<link wikidata="Q298512" start="2653" end="2665" title="Isiah Thomas" label="Isiah Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062631" start="2667" end="2678" title="Rick Mahorn" label="Rick Mahorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584557" start="2709" end="2724" title="1988 NBA Finals" label="1988 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585299" start="2821" end="2825" title="1989 NBA Finals" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586134" start="2862" end="2866" title="1990 NBA Finals" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q167253" start="2882" end="2904" title="Portland Trail Blazers" label="Portland Trail Blazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="2966" end="2980" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="2985" end="2998" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3031" end="3061" title="1991 NBA Playoffs#Eastern Conference" label="1991 Eastern Conference finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="3366" end="3376" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621976" start="3393" end="3417" title="1995 NBA expansion draft" label="1995 NBA expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995059" start="3635" end="3657" title="1995–96 Toronto Raptors season" label="stint with the Raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="3839" end="3852" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="3878" end="3892" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193637" start="3894" end="3908" title="Scottie Pippen" label="Scottie Pippen"/>
<link wikidata="Q245222" start="3910" end="3920" title="Toni Kukoč" label="Toni Kukoč"/>
<link wikidata="Q201608" start="3951" end="3964" title="Dennis Rodman" label="Dennis Rodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q547977" start="3969" end="3982" title="James Edwards (basketball)" label="James Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667623" start="4146" end="4159" title="1995–96 Chicago Bulls season" label="1995–96 Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q20020768" start="4274" end="4303" title="2015-16 Golden State Warriors season" label="2015–16 Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591549" start="4391" end="4406" title="1996 NBA Finals" label="1996 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="4566" end="4572" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862092" start="4594" end="4623" title="1996 FIBA European League Final Four" label="reigning EuroLeague champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q739287" start="4624" end="4637" title="Panathinaikos BC" label="Panathinaikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q29274" start="4645" end="4664" title="Greek Basket League" label="Greek Basket League"/>
<link wikidata="Q629248" start="4723" end="4740" title="Božidar Maljković" label="Božidar Maljković"/>
<link wikidata="Q245222" start="4835" end="4845" title="Toni Kukoč" label="Toni Kukoč"/>
<link wikidata="Q264461" start="4934" end="4942" title="KK Split" label="KK Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059934" start="5013" end="5023" title="1996–97 FIBA EuroLeague" label="EuroLeague"/>
<link wikidata="Q54893" start="5032" end="5044" title="FC Barcelona Bàsquet" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089" start="5455" end="5460" title="ASVEL Basket" label="ASVEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q264461" start="5516" end="5524" title="KK Split" label="KK Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q707832" start="5580" end="5596" title="Bayer Giants Leverkusen" label="Bayer Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="6113" end="6119" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q259387" start="6172" end="6181" title="Greek Basketball Cup" label="Greek Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343768" start="6194" end="6202" title="P.A.O.K. BC" label="P.A.O.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q1336983" start="6269" end="6277" title="Learjet" label="Lear jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="6446" end="6456" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430898" start="6488" end="6505" title="Ellinikon International Airport" label="Ellinikon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32976" start="6547" end="6556" title="O.A.C.A. Olympic Indoor Hall" label="OACA Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q992348" start="6576" end="6583" title="Marousi" label="Marousi"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="6979" end="7000" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25369" start="7005" end="7016" title="Kobe Bryant" label="Kobe Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q316246" start="7064" end="7076" title="Phil Jackson" label="Phil Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193052" start="7510" end="7519" title="Pau Gasol" label="Pau Gasol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193020" start="7570" end="7580" title="Tim Duncan" label="Tim Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="7588" end="7605" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321776" start="7769" end="7773" title="1998-99 NBA season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144228" start="7778" end="7782" title="2013-14 NBA season" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q460379" start="7868" end="7876" title="Bad Boys (1995 film)" label="Bad Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354836" start="8007" end="8030" title="Miami Police Department" label="Miami Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="8098" end="8113" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q502876" start="8132" end="8137" title="Eddie (film)" label="Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="8188" end="8203" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q539269" start="8261" end="8272" title="Bad Boys II" label="Bad Boys II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="8299" end="8307" title="Showtime (TV channel)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="8308" end="8315" title="television movie" label="TV film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104388" start="8322" end="8336" title="Coast to Coast (TV film)" label="Coast to Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q264748" start="8361" end="8372" title="Selma Blair" label="Selma Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q852963" start="8411" end="8438" title="Confessions of a Shopaholic (film)" label="Confessions of a Shopaholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905363" start="8588" end="8602" title="Black Dynamite" label="Black Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="8634" end="8648" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171651" start="8671" end="8701" title="The Ultimate Christmas Present" label="The Ultimate Christmas Present"/>
<link wikidata="Q174396" start="8719" end="8722" title="elf" label="elf"/>
<link wikidata="Q44638200" start="8787" end="8805" title="Nappily Ever After" label="Nappily Ever After"/>
<link wikidata="Q241783" start="8822" end="8834" title="Sanaa Lathan" label="Sanaa Lathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102036276" start="8870" end="8881" title="Sneakerella" label="Sneakerella"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9001" end="9022" title="Bad Boys: Ride or Die" label="Bad Boys: Ride or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742150" start="9075" end="9094" title="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie" label="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="9242" end="9260" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="Fox Family Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572270" start="9325" end="9342" title="Hollywood Squares" label="Hollywood Squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786214" start="9359" end="9369" title="Match Game" label="Match Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q383104" start="9433" end="9458" title="Sabrina the Teenage Witch (1996 TV series)" label="Sabrina the Teenage Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977972" start="9658" end="9670" title="Weakest Link (American game show)" label="Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148176" start="9775" end="9790" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Arc (TV series)" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716699" start="9842" end="9874" title="The Best Damn Sports Show Period" label="The Best Damn Sports Show Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q46578" start="9884" end="9902" title="Fox Sports Network" label="Fox Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q428497" start="10003" end="10017" title="KKLQ (FM)" label="100.3 The Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955397" start="10101" end="10113" title="NBA Showtime" label="NBA Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867658" start="10162" end="10178" title="Basketball Wives" label="Basketball Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867659" start="10207" end="10226" title="Basketball Wives LA" label="Basketball Wives LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616350" start="10386" end="10402" title="LA&amp;#x27;s Finest" label="LA&amp;#x27;s Finest"/>
<link wikidata="Q311306" start="10473" end="10488" title="Luther Vandross" label="Luther Vandross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977972" start="10577" end="10589" title="Weakest Link (U.S. game show)" label="Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="10711" end="10727" title="TBS Superstation" label="TBS Superstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688625" start="10739" end="10755" title="He&amp;#x27;s a Lady" label="He&amp;#x27;s a Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q836246" start="10767" end="10771" title="2006 in sports" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q463481" start="10814" end="10845" title="American Basketball Association (2000-)" label="American Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="10884" end="10902" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10916" end="10980" title="Fast Cars and Superstars: The Gillette Young Guns Celebrity Race" label="Fast Cars and Superstars: The Gillette Young Guns Celebrity Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758324" start="11023" end="11032" title="stock car" label="stock car"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="11114" end="11135" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="11136" end="11145" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="11150" end="11156" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11459" start="11162" end="11177" title="Serena Williams" label="Serena Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113852" start="11306" end="11346" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity…Get Me out of Here!" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity…Get Me out of Here!"/>
<link wikidata="Q319725" start="11424" end="11444" title="Lou Diamond Phillips" label="Lou Diamond Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q231173" start="11459" end="11472" title="Torrie Wilson" label="Torrie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119" start="11502" end="11514" title="Adam Carolla" label="Adam Carolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650624" start="11522" end="11546" title="ACE Broadcasting Network" label="ACE Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396483" start="11565" end="11576" title="Kevin Hench" label="Kevin Hench"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11592" end="11615" title="ACE Broadcasting Network#Spider and the Henchman" label="Spider and the Henchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q169844" start="11716" end="11739" title="RuPaul&amp;#x27;s Drag Race" label="RuPaul&amp;#x27;s Drag Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859832" start="11806" end="11828" title="Millionaire Matchmaker" label="Millionaire Matchmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="12121" end="12126" title="vegan" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="12156" end="12160" title="PETA" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12635" end="12645" title="Simply Raw" label="Simply Raw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12712" end="12722" title="Raw for 30" label="Raw for 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435521" start="12898" end="12912" title="Farm Sanctuary" label="Farm Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="12935" end="12948" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="13215" end="13229" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="13338" end="13352" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="13465" end="13486" title="climate change mitigation" label="combat climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693206" start="13542" end="13559" title="cannabis industry" label="cannabis industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="13579" end="13587" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13803" end="13818" title="Operation Smile#Ambassadors" label="Operation Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351976" start="13996" end="14009" title="Omega Psi Phi" label="Omega Psi Phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="14074" end="14097" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Rite Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706193" start="14242" end="14249" title="1986–87 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706194" start="14403" end="14410" title="1987–88 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q684393" start="14581" end="14588" title="1988–89 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q375789" start="14763" end="14770" title="1989–90 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q604805" start="14925" end="14932" title="1990–91 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706195" start="15086" end="15093" title="1991–92 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856018" start="15248" end="15253" title="1992–93 Miami Heat season" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856019" start="15405" end="15410" title="1993–94 Miami Heat season" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q957781" start="15565" end="15570" title="1994–95 Miami Heat season" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995059" start="15722" end="15729" title="1995–96 Toronto Raptors season" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667623" start="15899" end="15906" title="1995–96 Chicago Bulls season" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837303" start="16076" end="16087" title="1999–2000 Los Angeles Lakers season" label="L.A. Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564555" start="16395" end="16399" title="1987 NBA Playoffs" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706193" start="16436" end="16443" title="1986–87 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564521" start="16533" end="16537" title="1988 NBA Playoffs" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706194" start="16574" end="16581" title="1987–88 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565095" start="16694" end="16698" title="1989 NBA Playoffs" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q684393" start="16736" end="16743" title="1988–89 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555387" start="16853" end="16857" title="1990 NBA Playoffs" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q375789" start="16895" end="16902" title="1989–90 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724216" start="16992" end="16996" title="1991 NBA Playoffs" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q604805" start="17033" end="17040" title="1990–91 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564201" start="17130" end="17134" title="1992 NBA Playoffs" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706195" start="17171" end="17178" title="1991–92 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564153" start="17271" end="17275" title="1994 NBA Playoffs" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856019" start="17312" end="17317" title="1993–94 Miami Heat season" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556693" start="17427" end="17431" title="1996 NBA Playoffs" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667623" start="17469" end="17476" title="1995–96 Chicago Bulls season" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553767" start="17585" end="17589" title="2000 NBA Playoffs" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837303" start="17627" end="17638" title="1999–2000 Los Angeles Lakers season" label="L.A. Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607351" start="17885" end="17928" title="List of NBA players with most championships" label="List of NBA players with most championships"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280166" wikidata="Q5536403" url="?curid=1280166" title="George Argyros">
<text>George Leon Argyros (born February 4, 1937) is an American former diplomat who served as the United States Ambassador to Spain. He is also a real estate investor and philanthropist. Argyros was the owner of Major League Baseball&#x27;s Seattle Mariners from 1981 to 1989. He is the founder and CEO of property firm Arnel &amp; Affiliates.

==Early and personal life==
George Argyros was born on February 4, 1937, in Detroit, Michigan, but raised in Pasadena, California. Argyros is a second-generation American citizen; his grandparents emigrated from Greece. Argyros graduated from Chapman University in 1959 with a major in Business and Economics. He later served on Chapman University&#x27;s board of trustees, including chairman of the board from 1976 to 2001. The Chapman University, Argyros School of Business and Economics is named in his honor.

Argyros and his wife, Julia, have three grown children and seven grandchildren. His son George Argyros Jr. (b. 2/5/1965 - d. 8/28/2020) died of a heart attack at the age of 55

==Business==
Argyros made his fortune in real estate investments. He originally started his business career running a grocery store and moved on to buying and selling real estate to gas stations. He also was involved in buying and selling property in Southern California. From 1981 to 1989, he was the owner of the Seattle Mariners baseball team.

Argyros has done business through the real estate company Arnel &amp; Affiliates (DBA &quot;Arnel Property Management Company&quot;). Arnel &amp; Affiliates does business primarily in Southern California. Argyros has a net worth around $2 billion and owns around 5,500 apartments in Orange County and nearly 2 million square feet of commercial real estate in Southern California.

In 1981, Argyros and fellow Orange County developer William Lyon bought Newport Beach-based airline AirCal, controlling it until its sale to American Airlines in 1987.

==Politics==
Argyros served as a member of the Advisory Committee for Trade Policy and Negotiations for the U.S. Trade Ambassador. He resigned from that position in 1990, when President Bush appointed him to the board of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FreddieMac). He completed his term on the FreddieMac Board in March 1993.

In 2001 Argyros was appointed Ambassador to Spain and Andorra. He was sworn in on November 21, 2001. Many viewed the appointment as a political reward for his fund raising efforts for the Republican Party.

==Baseball==
In 1981, Argyros bought the Seattle Mariners for $13 million. He proclaimed upon getting the team that &quot;patience is for losers&quot;. In his tenure, the team never had a winning season or finish higher than 4th place in the American League West, with his lack of action to spending money being cited as the reason for the team never rising out of the cellar. A trade of pitcher Mark Langston had him described by one press reporter as the &quot;miserly, mean-spirited owner of the Seattle Mariners&quot;. In 1986, now with a new tone of saying that patience is for winners, Argyros managed to come to an end of a two-year standoff with the Seattle community over the lease agreement for the Kingdome. It led to an addition of an escape clause that would let the Mariners try to break the lease if they do not average 1.4 million in attendance in the next two years or annually sell 10,000 season tickets (they had sold 3,950 in 1985). This clause would be cited in a battle of ownership sale of the team six years later. In the 1987 MLB Draft, it was Argyros that had to be convinced to draft Ken Griffey Jr with the first pick, as he wanted California native Mike Harkey. Gradually, general management convinced him to go with Griffey, who ended up becoming the first Mariner star.

Argyros sold the team to Jeff Smulyan in August of 1989, with the team now valued at $76.1 million. He cited the demands of his business in the Southland and the difficult commute between California and Washington as a reason to sell. Argyros had openly tried to purchase the San Diego Padres in 1987 and to sell the Mariners to local buyers, but a final deal was never consummated with Padres owner Joan Kroc.

==Philanthropy==
In October 2013, George and Julia Argyros announced two $1 million donations benefiting the arts in Julia&#x27;s hometown of Adrian, Michigan. One was to help kick off a $3.5 million capital campaign for the Croswell Opera House and another was to benefit a fine arts education endowment through the Adrian Schools Educational Foundation.

The family foundation pledged $7.5 million in January 2018 for the purposes of renovating the Los Angeles Coliseum. Argyros also donated money towards the construction of the Performing Arts Center, named after him, at the American School of Madrid.

Argyros is on the board of directors of the Richard Nixon Foundation, which operates the Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum in Yorba Linda, California; he is also a longtime trustee of his alma mater Chapman University. He is a trustee of California Institute of Technology, and also a board-member for the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C.

In September 2023, the Argyros Family announced a $10 Million Dollars donation to Chapman University&#x27;s George L. Argyros School of Business and Economics.

==See also==
*List of billionaires

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5536403" start="0" end="19" title="George Argyros" label="George Leon Argyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837668" start="93" end="126" title="United States Ambassador to Spain" label="United States Ambassador to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="141" end="152" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="207" end="228" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="236" end="252" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="416" end="433" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="449" end="469" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805085" start="583" end="601" title="Chapman University" label="Chapman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805085" start="769" end="829" title="Chapman University, Argyros School of Business and Economics" label="Chapman University, Argyros School of Business and Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="1072" end="1083" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205495" start="1213" end="1224" title="gas station" label="gas station"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="1282" end="1301" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="1346" end="1362" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="1461" end="1464" title="Trade name" label="DBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933764" start="1598" end="1607" title="net worth" label="net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394962" start="1812" end="1824" title="William Lyon (general)" label="William Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="1832" end="1845" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q968566" start="1860" end="1866" title="AirCal" label="AirCal"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="1901" end="1918" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="2105" end="2119" title="George H. W. Bush" label="President Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q935969" start="2154" end="2192" title="Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation" label="Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837668" start="2299" end="2330" title="United States Ambassador to Spain" label="Ambassador to Spain and Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2457" end="2473" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="2517" end="2533" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294145" start="2872" end="2885" title="Mark Langston" label="Mark Langston"/>
<link wikidata="Q990430" start="3185" end="3193" title="Kingdome" label="Kingdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186051" start="3522" end="3536" title="1987 MLB Draft" label="1987 MLB Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q536900" start="3587" end="3601" title="Ken Griffey Jr" label="Ken Griffey Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847136" start="3654" end="3665" title="Mike Harkey" label="Mike Harkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175019" start="3803" end="3815" title="Jeff Smulyan" label="Jeff Smulyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="4054" end="4070" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205197" start="4178" end="4187" title="Joan Kroc" label="Joan Kroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q372304" start="4332" end="4348" title="Adrian, Michigan" label="Adrian, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188924" start="4415" end="4435" title="Croswell Opera House" label="Croswell Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="4641" end="4661" title="Los Angeles Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328071" start="4842" end="4866" title="Richard Nixon Foundation" label="Richard Nixon Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754354" start="4887" end="4932" title="Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum" label="Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q493518" start="4936" end="4959" title="Yorba Linda, California" label="Yorba Linda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805085" start="5009" end="5027" title="Chapman University" label="Chapman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="5048" end="5082" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="5116" end="5162" title="Center for Strategic and International Studies" label="Center for Strategic and International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q493078" start="5359" end="5379" title="List of billionaires" label="List of billionaires"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280168" wikidata="Q559107" url="?curid=1280168" title="Nanjing Lukou International Airport">
<text>Nanjing Lukou International Airport is an international airport serving Nanjing, the capital of East China’s Jiangsu province, and a major airport serving the Yangtze River Delta area. As of 2020, it is the 12th busiest civil airport in China, dropping one place from 2019 after being overtaken by Zhengzhou Xinzheng International Airport. It is located in the suburban Jiangning District, over south of the city center, and is connected to Nanjing and neighboring towns by expressways. Phase I of the Ninggao Intercity Line and Line S1 of the Nanjing Metro link the airport with Nanjing South railway station.

Nanjing is the hub for China Eastern Airlines&#x27; Jiangsu Company, Shenzhen Airlines&#x27; Jiangsu branch and Juneyao Air&#x27;s Jiangsu branch. China Southern Airlines as well operates a considerable number of flights there. Despite not operating as much flights as some other airlines, Beijing Capital Airlines and Air Travel also set up bases in Nanjing. Nanjing is the main base for China Postal Airlines, with pure cargo service to all major cities in China, handling express mail and cargo transportation for China Post. In 2020, the airport handled 19,906,576 passengers and 389,362.4 tons of freight after experiencing a 34.9% drop in passenger traffic due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

==History==
In 2006, China Post started building its express logistics center at Nanjing Lukou to handle its express mail services. Initial construction was completed by 2009, with additional facilities and functions added continuously. The final project, as planned, would be the largest in Asia and the third-largest in the world of its kind.

In 2009, the airport handled 10 million passengers. On 26 March 2010, Singapore Airlines officially ceases its operation between Singapore Changi and Nanjing. In 2013, that number surpassed 15 million, which was 3 million above the terminal&#x27;s designed operational capacity. In preparation for the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics, hosted by Nanjing, Terminal 2 was completed after more than three years of construction. Also completed were a new parallel runway with taxiways, a new tower, new aircraft parking positions, and new cargo handling facilities. On 12 July 2014, all flights were relocated to Terminal 2, and Terminal 1 was closed for renovation.

The new facilities removed the bottleneck caused by the limited capability of the old terminal and runway. In November 2014, with the launching of the Phase 2 expansion and optimization of neighboring air traffic patterns, authorities approved an increase of peak-hour flight volume from 28 flights per hour to 38 flights per hour.

With the added capacity, Nanjing Airport has seen rapid increase in both aircraft movement and total passengers. In 2015, the number of total passengers exceeded 19 million (until 28 December), that is 2.87 million on top of 2014, a 17.7% increase compared to the same period of the previous year. The airport continues to see substantial increase into 2016, which saw 29,210 aircraft movements and 3.39 million passengers handled in January and February, a 16.9% and a 21.2% increase respectively, comparing to the same period 2015.

On 27 October 2019, Malaysia Airlines ceased its operation between Kuala Lumpur and Nanjing despite great passenger traffic performance in an effort to readjust its operation model overseas.

==Composition==

The airport consists of two terminals, two 3600-meter runways (paralleled by three taxiways and connected by two taxiways), two control towers, a cargo center, a transportation center, and an apron. Adjacent to, but not belonging to, the airport is the China Post express logistics center and the base for China Postal Airlines.

The older section of the airport consists of:
*Terminal 1 (floor space 160,000m2, 80 check-in counters and 33 security lanes.
*one northern runway (length 3600 m, width 60 m, 4E rating)
*one runway (length 3600 m, width 45 m)
*a cargo center (34,000m2)
*an apron (447,000m2)
*a control tower (height 87 m)
Terminal 1 was closed on 14 July 2014 for renovation, it reopened on 29 July 2020 and serves all domestic flights except China Eastern Airlines and Shenzhen Airlines flights which depart exclusively from Terminal 2.

The Phase 2 expansion includes:
*Terminal 2 (263,000m2 floor space, 35 boarding bridges, annual capacity 18 million passengers)
*a new 4F-rating southern runway and two parallel taxiways
*two taxiways connecting the northern and southern runways
*20 aircraft parking positions
*a second control tower (height 107 m)
*an 11,000m2 carpark
*a transportation center, which seats a subway station, a coach station, a Pullman Hotel, and shopping and dining facilities
The two terminals are also connected by the transportation center structure.

==Airlines and destinations==
===Passenger===

===Cargo===
==Ground transportation==

===Airport shuttle===

====City to airport====
* From Nanjing South Railway Station: 6:00–21:00, every 20 minutes, duration 40 minutes
* From Nanjing Railway Station East Square (with a stop at 221 Middle Longpan Road): 5:40–21:00, every 20 minutes, duration 80 minutes

====Airport to city====
* Line 1: 30 minutes after the first landing to the last landing of the day (stops: Yuhua Square, Qinhong Bridge, Xihuamen, Nanjing railway station); max. interval 30 minutes
* Line 2: 9:30–22:30 (stops: Cuipingshan Hotel, Nanjing South railway station, Zhonghuamen Subway Station), max. interval 30 minutes

===Expressway===
The airport is accessed by Konggang Road, which connects to the Airport Expressway. The Airport Expressway is part of S55 Ningxuan (Nanjing-Xuancheng) Expressway.

===Rail===
The Lukou Airport Station on Line S1 of the Nanjing Metro links the airport with Nanjing South Railway Station. Operation hours are from 6:00 to 22:40 (in both directions), at 9&#x27;57&quot; intervals in peak hours and 13&#x27;16&quot; intervals in low hours. The entire journey takes approximately 35 minutes and costs 7 RMB. At Nanjing South railway station, passengers can transfer to high-speed trains to other cities, coach services to nearby towns, Nanjing Metro Line 1, Nanjing Metro Line 3, Nanjing Metro Line S3 and bus services.

===Taxi===
Taxis are easily accessible outside the arrivals hall. Fare between the airport and city area ranges from ¥80 to ¥120.

==See also==
*Nanjing Dajiaochang Airport
*Nanjing Liuhe Airport
*List of airports in China
*List of the busiest airports in the People&#x27;s Republic of China

==References==
==External links==

*Nanjing Lukou International Airport (official website)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q559107" start="0" end="35" title="Nanjing Lukou International Airport" label="Nanjing Lukou International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="42" end="63" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="72" end="79" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062525" start="96" end="106" title="East China" label="East China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="109" end="116" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195076" start="159" end="178" title="Yangtze River Delta" label="Yangtze River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034869" start="298" end="338" title="Zhengzhou Xinzheng International Airport" label="Zhengzhou Xinzheng International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331311" start="370" end="388" title="Jiangning District" label="Jiangning District"/>
<link wikidata="Q10946118" start="502" end="524" title="Ninggao Intercity Rail Line" label="Ninggao Intercity Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q429366" start="544" end="557" title="Nanjing Metro" label="Nanjing Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925968" start="580" end="609" title="Nanjing South railway station" label="Nanjing South railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="635" end="657" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q974899" start="681" end="698" title="Shenzhen Airlines" label="Shenzhen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713277" start="724" end="735" title="Juneyao Air" label="Juneyao Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q291090" start="759" end="782" title="China Southern Airlines" label="China Southern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q302642" start="902" end="926" title="Beijing Capital Airlines" label="Beijing Capital Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23769262" start="931" end="941" title="Air Travel (airline)" label="Air Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073481" start="1001" end="1022" title="China Postal Airlines" label="China Postal Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066476" start="1129" end="1139" title="China Post" label="China Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="1300" end="1317" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066476" start="1341" end="1351" title="China Post" label="China Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="1736" end="1754" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="1795" end="1811" title="Changi Airport" label="Singapore Changi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244809" start="1968" end="1994" title="2014 Summer Youth Olympics" label="2014 Summer Youth Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q308952" start="3212" end="3229" title="Malaysia Airlines" label="Malaysia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q500253" start="3259" end="3271" title="Kuala Lumpur International Airport" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066476" start="3654" end="3664" title="China Post" label="China Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073481" start="3707" end="3728" title="China Postal Airlines" label="China Postal Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="4158" end="4180" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q974899" start="4185" end="4202" title="Shenzhen Airlines" label="Shenzhen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925968" start="4934" end="4963" title="Nanjing South Railway Station" label="Nanjing South Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q986313" start="5022" end="5045" title="Nanjing Railway Station" label="Nanjing Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q986313" start="5299" end="5322" title="Nanjing railway station" label="Nanjing railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925968" start="5398" end="5427" title="Nanjing South railway station" label="Nanjing South railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="5633" end="5640" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q360942" start="5641" end="5650" title="Xuancheng" label="Xuancheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502459" start="5680" end="5701" title="Lukou Airport Station" label="Lukou Airport Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q10946118" start="5705" end="5712" title="Line S1, Nanjing Metro" label="Line S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q429366" start="5720" end="5733" title="Nanjing Metro" label="Nanjing Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925968" start="5757" end="5786" title="Nanjing South Railway Station" label="Nanjing South Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="5999" end="6002" title="RMB" label="RMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925968" start="6007" end="6036" title="Nanjing South railway station" label="Nanjing South railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127241" start="6132" end="6152" title="Line 1 (Nanjing Metro)" label="Nanjing Metro Line 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10906683" start="6154" end="6174" title="Line 3 (Nanjing Metro)" label="Nanjing Metro Line 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q10945835" start="6176" end="6197" title="Line S3 (Nanjing Metro)" label="Nanjing Metro Line S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963650" start="6362" end="6389" title="Nanjing Dajiaochang Airport" label="Nanjing Dajiaochang Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963667" start="6391" end="6412" title="Nanjing Liuhe Airport" label="Nanjing Liuhe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331352" start="6414" end="6439" title="List of airports in China" label="List of airports in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144821" start="6441" end="6508" title="List of the busiest airports in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="List of the busiest airports in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280171" wikidata="Q1086745" url="?curid=1280171" title="Chris Higgins (ice hockey)">
<text>Christopher Chris Robert Higgins (born June 2, 1983) is an American professional ice hockey coach and former player who is the skills and development coach for the Vancouver Canucks of the National Hockey League (NHL). While playing college hockey, he was selected 14th overall by the Montreal Canadiens in the first round of the 2002 NHL entry draft. He finished a two-year career with the Yale Bulldogs, earning ECAC Hockey Player of the Year honors as a sophomore, before turning professional for the 2003–04 season. After two seasons with the Canadiens&#x27; minor league affiliate, the Hamilton Bulldogs of the American Hockey League (AHL), he joined the NHL in 2005–06. He recorded three consecutive 20-goal seasons to begin his NHL career before being traded to the New York Rangers in June 2009. After brief stints with the Rangers, Calgary Flames and Florida Panthers, he joined the Vancouver Canucks in February 2011. Internationally, Higgins has competed for the United States in two World Junior Championships (2002 and 2003) and one World Championship (2009).

==Playing career==

===Amateur career (1998–2003)===
Higgins played four years of high school hockey for Avon Old Farms, a preparatory school in Avon, Connecticut, graduating in 2001. He then opted to play in the National Collegiate Athletics Association (NCAA) with the Yale Bulldogs. Higgins also considered offers from Boston College and Harvard University. In 2001–02, Higgins began a two-year stint with the Yale Bulldogs of the ECAC Hockey Conference. After recording a team-leading 31 points (14 goals and 17 assists) over 27 games as a freshman, he was named the ECAC Rookie of the Year. He additionally received ECAC All-Rookie and Second All-Star Team honors.

In the off-season, Higgins was selected 14th overall by the Montreal Canadiens in the 2002 NHL entry draft. He became the first ECAC Hockey player to be selected in the first round of the NHL entry draft since Normand Lacombe in 1983 (the Buffalo Sabres selected him 10th overall). Returning to Yale for one more season, he improved to 41 points over 28 games, leading his team in scoring for the second consecutive year. Higgins earned ECAC Player of the Year (co-recipient with Cornell Big Red goaltender David LeNeveu) and First All-Star Team honors; he was also recognized regionally on the NCAA East All-American Team.

===Montreal Canadiens (2003–2009)===
Following his sophomore year, he signed a three-year, entry-level contract with the Canadiens on May 22, 2003. Higgins made his NHL debut on October 11, 2003, registering three minutes of ice time in a 4–0 win against the Toronto Maple Leafs. Struggling to play his way onto the Canadiens&#x27; lineup, he was often made a healthy scratch (non-dressing player) in October before being assigned to the team&#x27;s minor league affiliate, the Hamilton Bulldogs of the American Hockey League (AHL), by the end of the month. He recorded 48 points over 67 AHL games in 2003–04, ranking fifth in team scoring. Due to the 2004–05 NHL lockout, Higgins automatically remained in Hamilton and improved to 51 points, ranking third among Bulldogs scorers.

The following season, as NHL play resumed, Higgins made the Canadiens&#x27; roster out of training camp. He scored his first career NHL goal on October 6, 2005, against New York Rangers goalie Kevin Weekes during an away game at Madison Square Garden. The Canadiens won the contest 4–3 in overtime. He finished the season with 23 goals, ranking seventh among league rookies, and 15 assists for a total of 38 points.

A month into the 2006–07 season, Higgins suffered a sprained left ankle during a game against the New Jersey Devils. At the time of the injury, on November 4, 2006, he was leading the Canadiens with eight goals. Sidelined for 6 weeks, Higgins was limited to 61 games, though still managed to match his previous season&#x27;s points total with 22 goals and 16 assists. Set to become a restricted free agent in the off-season, Montreal re-signed Higgins to a two-year, US$3.4 million deal on June 25, 2007. Prior to the start of the 2007–08 season, Higgins was named an alternate captain for the Canadiens. He went on to have a career season with personal bests of 27 goals, 25 assists and 52 points. On November 11, 2008, Higgins recorded his first NHL hat-trick in a 4–0 win over the Ottawa Senators. However, his points total decreased in his fourth NHL campaign with 23 points over 57 games.

===Rangers, Flames and Panthers (2009–2011)===

Coming off what was the lowest statistical season of his career, he was traded by the Canadiens, along with Ryan McDonagh, Pavel Valentenko and Doug Janik, to the New York Rangers in exchange for Scott Gomez, Tom Pyatt and Michael Busto on June 30, 2009. A restricted free agent at the time of the trade, he agreed to a one-year, US$2.25 contract with the Rangers six days later. He scored his first goal with the Rangers on November 3, 2009, against the Vancouver Canucks, his team&#x27;s lone marker in a 4–1 loss. His offensive struggles continued in New York (he recorded 15 points in 55 games) and he was subsequently traded to the Calgary Flames on February 2, 2010. Higgins was dealt, along with Aleš Kotalík, in exchange for Olli Jokinen and Brandon Prust. He scored his first goal with the Flames on March 9, an empty netter, in a 4–1 win against the Detroit Red Wings. Two days later, he suffered a foot injury that sidelined him for the remaining 14 games of the regular season. Splitting the season between New York and Calgary, he had eight goals and 17 points over 67 games.

Becoming an unrestricted free agent in the off-season, Higgins signed a one-year, US$1.6 million deal with the Florida Panthers on July 2, 2010. He had considered re-signing with Calgary, but cited new Florida Panthers General Manager Dale Tallon&#x27;s experience as a strong factor for joining Florida (Tallon was largely responsible for assembling the Chicago Blackhawks team that won the Stanley Cup the previous season). In December 2010, he was sidelined four games with a staphylococcal infection in his foot, an injury that was misdiagnosed first as &quot;skate bite,&quot; then a spider bite. Higgins later missed an additional seven games the following month with a hamstring injury.

===Vancouver Canucks (2011–2016)===
With the Panthers out of playoff contention late in the season, the team began trading away numerous veterans and core players. At the NHL trade deadline, on February 28, 2011, Higgins was dealt to the Vancouver Canucks in exchange for defensive prospect Evan Oberg and a third-round draft pick in 2013. The Canucks had reportedly been interested in a different Panthers player, but with a minute left until the trade deadline, Panthers Assistant General Manager Mike Santos called the Canucks back and offered Higgins. In 48 games with the Panthers, he had recorded 11 goals and 23 points. Injured with a hand injury at the time of the trade, he did not debut with the Canucks until March 10. He scored his first two goals as a Canuck on March 27 in a 4–1 win against the Columbus Blue Jackets. He completed the season with 13 goals and 28 points in 62 games between Florida and Vancouver. While Higgins played the majority of the regular season with the Canucks as a bottom-six forward, by the playoffs, he was playing on the second line with Ryan Kesler and Mason Raymond. Entering the post-season as the Presidents&#x27; Trophy champions, the Canucks held the first seed in the West. After eliminating the Chicago Blackhawks, Nashville Predators and San Jose Sharks in the first three rounds, the Canucks advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals. Facing the Boston Bruins, the series went to a seventh game, which the Canucks lost 4–0. Following the Canucks&#x27; game seven defeat, it was revealed that several Canucks players had been playing with injuries, including Higgins. His injury occurred in game five of the second round against the Predators, when he blocked a Kevin Klein shot with his skate, breaking his left foot. Over 25 playoff games, Higgins recorded four goals and eight points. Three of his goals were game-winners, tying him with Geoff Courtnall (1994) for the most in a single playoff season by a Canucks player.
During the off-season, Higgins re-signed with Vancouver to a two-year, $3.8 million contract on July 1, 2011. The deal was agreed upon prior to his scheduled unrestricted free agency. During the season, Higgins struggled with two bouts of staph infection, one in December 2011 and the other in February 2012. He missed a combined 11 games as a result of swelling and suffering from severe side effects to the associated medication. Though he missed time, Higgins also played through the adverse reactions for several games following both bouts with the infection. Through the first half of the season, he often played on the second line with Kesler and newcomer David Booth; the trio were dubbed the &quot;American Express Line,&quot; as they were all born in the United States. Towards the end of the season, he was consistently placed on the team&#x27;s third line, a defensive shutdown unit with fellow two-way forwards Jannik Hansen and deadline-acquisition Samuel Påhlsson. Used in both roles over the campaign, Higgins was often recognized as the team&#x27;s most consistent and hardest-working forward. On the last day of the regular season, he was accordingly awarded the Fred J. Hume Award, voted by fans as the team&#x27;s &quot;unsung hero.&quot; Appearing in 71 games, Higgins recorded 43 points (18 goals and 25 assists), his highest total in four years and fifth among team forwards.

On April 2, 2013, Higgins signed a four-year, $10 million extension with the Canucks.

During the 2015–16 season, on January 12, 2016, Higgins was put on waivers after unsuccessful attempts to trade the winger. He cleared waivers the next day and was sent down to the Utica Comets, the AHL affiliate of the Canucks. On March 19, 2016, Higgins was recalled by the Vancouver Canucks after multiple injuries occurred on both the Canucks and Comets rosters. He would finish the season with the Canucks.

In the off-season, on June 27, 2016, Higgins&#x27;s tenure in Vancouver ended when he was placed on waivers by the Canucks for the intention of buying out the remaining year of his contract. On August 30, 2016, unable to secure an NHL contract, Higgins signed a PTO to attend training camp with former club, the Calgary Flames. On October 10, Higgins was released from his tryout.

==International play==
Higgins played in back-to-back World Junior Championships during his college career. First appearing in 2002, he recorded four goals and two assists over seven games. He helped the United States qualify for the quarterfinal, where they were eliminated by Russia 6–1. The following year, Higgins matched his points total with three goals and three assists. After losing their semifinal to Canada 3–2, the United States lost by the same score to Finland in the bronze medal game.

Higgins made his first international appearance for the American men&#x27;s team at the 2009 IIHF World Championship. He scored his only goal of the tournament in a 4–3 overtime loss to Switzerland in the qualifying round. After losing their semifinal game to Russia, the United States lost the bronze medal to Sweden by a 4–2 score.

==Coaching career==
On September 11, 2019, it was announced that Higgins had returned to the Vancouver Canucks organization to serve as an assistant director of player development. On December 23, 2020, the Canucks announced they had reassigned Higgins to serve as the team&#x27;s Skills and Development Coach.

==Playing style==
Listed at tall and , Higgins plays mostly in the style of a power forward. He is known as a two-way player with good skating, capable of contributing offensively while remaining defensively responsible. He has alternated between playing the wing and center positions. Early in his career, he was compared to Dallas Stars forward Brenden Morrow.

==Personal life==
Higgins grew up in Smithtown, New York, the second eldest among five siblings. His father, Robert, is a New York City firefighter and his younger brother is a New York City police officer.

As a youth, Higgins played in the 1996 Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament with the Connecticut Yankees minor ice hockey team, and then in the 1997 tournament with the New York Islanders minor team. As a minor, he played on teams with his future Canadiens teammate Mike Komisarek and his future Flames teammate Eric Nystrom, both of whom he remains close friends with. He was a student of Lithuanian hockey coach Aleksey Nikiforov at hockey camps in his teenage years. Though he grew up on Long Island, Higgins was a Montreal Canadiens fan as a child, following after his father; his favorite players on the team were goaltender Patrick Roy and captain Kirk Muller.

Higgins left home to join the high school hockey program of Avon Old Farms in Connecticut. Following his high school graduation, Higgins was enrolled in Yale University for two years, majoring in political science while playing on the school&#x27;s hockey team.

Higgins has one daughter.

==Career statistics==
===Regular season and playoffs===
===International===
==Awards and honors==
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1086745" start="0" end="32" title="Chris Higgins (ice hockey)" label="Christopher Chris Robert Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="81" end="91" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="164" end="181" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="189" end="211" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146601" start="233" end="247" title="college hockey" label="college hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="285" end="303" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846" start="330" end="350" title="2002 NHL entry draft" label="2002 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047356" start="391" end="404" title="Yale Bulldogs men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Yale Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274040" start="414" end="425" title="ECAC Hockey" label="ECAC Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674374" start="504" end="518" title="2003–04 AHL season" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q748294" start="591" end="608" title="Hamilton Bulldogs (AHL)" label="Hamilton Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="616" end="638" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="667" end="674" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="773" end="789" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="841" end="855" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="860" end="876" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760180" start="974" end="987" title="USA Hockey" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754117" start="995" end="1021" title="World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="World Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317063" start="1023" end="1027" title="2002 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317077" start="1032" end="1036" title="2003 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q190163" start="1046" end="1064" title="IIHF World Championship" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361801" start="1066" end="1070" title="2009 IIHF World Championship" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829225" start="1179" end="1193" title="Avon Old Farms" label="Avon Old Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="1197" end="1215" title="University-preparatory school" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q791265" start="1219" end="1236" title="Avon, Connecticut" label="Avon, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="1287" end="1328" title="National Collegiate Athletics Association" label="National Collegiate Athletics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047356" start="1345" end="1358" title="Yale Bulldogs men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Yale Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947827" start="1396" end="1410" title="Boston College Eagles men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676342" start="1415" end="1433" title="Harvard Crimson men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274040" start="1508" end="1519" title="ECAC Hockey" label="ECAC Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="1805" end="1823" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846" start="1831" end="1851" title="2002 NHL entry draft" label="2002 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343861" start="1955" end="1970" title="Normand Lacombe" label="Normand Lacombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q568707" start="1974" end="1978" title="1983 NHL entry draft" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="1984" end="1998" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171503" start="2225" end="2240" title="Cornell Big Red men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Cornell Big Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175122" start="2252" end="2265" title="David LeNeveu" label="David LeNeveu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="2629" end="2648" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q748294" start="2848" end="2865" title="Hamilton Bulldogs (AHL)" label="Hamilton Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="2873" end="2895" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674374" start="2971" end="2978" title="2003–04 AHL season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="3022" end="3041" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="2004–05 NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="3156" end="3172" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="3321" end="3337" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740280" start="3345" end="3357" title="Kevin Weekes" label="Kevin Weekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="3381" end="3402" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778778" start="3441" end="3449" title="overtime (ice hockey)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="3586" end="3600" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306275" start="3621" end="3640" title="ankle sprain" label="sprained left ankle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="3667" end="3684" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316299" start="3953" end="3974" title="restricted free agent" label="restricted free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="4036" end="4039" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="4100" end="4114" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="4137" end="4154" title="alternate captain (ice hockey)" label="alternate captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="4321" end="4330" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="4353" end="4368" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094838" start="4620" end="4633" title="Ryan McDonagh" label="Ryan McDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339289" start="4635" end="4651" title="Pavel Valentenko" label="Pavel Valentenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q428241" start="4656" end="4666" title="Doug Janik" label="Doug Janik"/>
<link wikidata="Q739332" start="4708" end="4719" title="Scott Gomez" label="Scott Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q978090" start="4721" end="4730" title="Tom Pyatt" label="Tom Pyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308073" start="4735" end="4748" title="Michael Busto" label="Michael Busto"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="4967" end="4984" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="5149" end="5163" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003900" start="5215" end="5227" title="Aleš Kotalík" label="Aleš Kotalík"/>
<link wikidata="Q706944" start="5245" end="5257" title="Olli Jokinen" label="Olli Jokinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898166" start="5262" end="5275" title="Brandon Prust" label="Brandon Prust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339453" start="5333" end="5345" title="empty net goal" label="empty netter"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="5372" end="5389" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="5614" end="5637" title="unrestricted free agent" label="unrestricted free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="5713" end="5729" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q110556" start="5837" end="5848" title="Dale Tallon" label="Dale Tallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="5957" end="5975" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="5994" end="6005" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q34879" start="6081" end="6105" title="staphylococcal infection" label="staphylococcal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549274" start="6191" end="6202" title="spider bite" label="spider bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q196002" start="6278" end="6287" title="hamstring" label="hamstring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246603" start="6468" end="6486" title="NHL trade deadline" label="NHL trade deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061327" start="6588" end="6598" title="Evan Oberg" label="Evan Oberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960925" start="6631" end="6635" title="2013 NHL entry draft" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="7106" end="7127" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q640268" start="7378" end="7389" title="Ryan Kesler" label="Ryan Kesler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254665" start="7394" end="7407" title="Mason Raymond" label="Mason Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="7441" end="7464" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="7563" end="7582" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="7587" end="7602" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q686507" start="7658" end="7676" title="2011 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="7689" end="7702" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q353770" start="8004" end="8015" title="Kevin Klein" label="Kevin Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q720935" start="8183" end="8198" title="Geoff Courtnall" label="Geoff Courtnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589741" start="8200" end="8204" title="1994 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173781" start="8929" end="8940" title="David Booth (ice hockey)" label="David Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q722111" start="9190" end="9203" title="Jannik Hansen" label="Jannik Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001168" start="9229" end="9244" title="Samuel Påhlsson" label="Samuel Påhlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495560" start="9447" end="9465" title="Fred J. Hume Award" label="Fred J. Hume Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="9764" end="9771" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q680364" start="9820" end="9827" title="Waivers (NHL)" label="waivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13459971" start="9934" end="9946" title="Utica Comets" label="Utica Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754117" start="10602" end="10628" title="World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="World Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317063" start="10675" end="10679" title="2002 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654269" start="10752" end="10765" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national junior ice hockey team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669932" start="10826" end="10832" title="Russia men&amp;#x27;s national junior ice hockey team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317077" start="10842" end="10856" title="2003 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687105" start="10959" end="10965" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national junior ice hockey team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418038" start="11015" end="11022" title="Finland men&amp;#x27;s national junior ice hockey team" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q913651" start="11106" end="11130" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="American men&amp;#x27;s team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361801" start="11138" end="11166" title="2009 IIHF World Championship" label="2009 IIHF World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q688758" start="11236" end="11247" title="Switzerland men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q845895" start="11310" end="11316" title="Russia men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913643" start="11361" end="11367" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078" start="11775" end="11788" title="power forward (ice hockey)" label="power forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827965" start="11956" end="11960" title="winger (ice hockey)" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="11965" end="11971" title="center (ice hockey)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="12023" end="12035" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q573587" start="12044" end="12058" title="Brenden Morrow" label="Brenden Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594054" start="12098" end="12117" title="Smithtown, New York" label="Smithtown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="12183" end="12208" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="12238" end="12266" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City police officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535360" start="12308" end="12354" title="Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament" label="Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869192" start="12384" end="12400" title="minor ice hockey" label="minor ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259202" start="12545" end="12559" title="Mike Komisarek" label="Mike Komisarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351536" start="12591" end="12603" title="Eric Nystrom" label="Eric Nystrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="12669" end="12679" title="Lithuanian people" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715987" start="12693" end="12710" title="Aleksey Nikiforov" label="Aleksey Nikiforov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="12770" end="12781" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="12909" end="12920" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q935070" start="12933" end="12944" title="Kirk Muller" label="Kirk Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="13025" end="13036" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="13100" end="13115" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="13143" end="13160" title="political science" label="political science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280182" wikidata="Q7607172" url="?curid=1280182" title="Stellar">
<text>Stellar means anything related to one or more stars (&quot;stella&quot;). The term may also refer to:
==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* &quot;Stellar&quot; (magazine), an Irish lifestyle and fashion magazine
* Stellar Loussier, a character from &quot;Mobile Suit Gundam SEED Destiny&quot;
* Dr. Stellar, a Big Bang Comics superhero
* &quot;Stellar 7&quot;, a game for the Apple II computer system
* &quot;Stellar&quot; (film), a Canadian film

===Music===
* Stellar (group), a South Korean girl group
* Stellar (New Zealand band), a New Zealand-based rock band
* Stellar (musical artist), an American singer, songwriter, and producer
* &quot;Stellar&quot; (song), a 2000 song by Incubus
* Stellar Awards, awards for the gospel music industry

==Brands and enterprises==
* Stellar (payment network), a system for sending money through the internet
* Stellar Group (construction company), a construction company in Florida, United States
* Hasselblad Stellar, a compact digital camera
* Hyundai Stellar, an automobile model
* O2 XDA Stellar, an HTC mobile phone

==Other uses==
* Stellar Airpark, an airport near Chandler, Arizona, United States
* Stellar Charter School, a school in Redding, California, United States
* Eliot Stellar (1919–1993), American psychologist

==See also==
* List of stellar properties, links to astrophysics pages with the word stellar
* 
* Star or 
* Stella (disambiguation)
* Stellar II (disambiguation)
* Stellaris (disambiguation)
* Starla (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7607172" start="0" end="7" title="Stellar" label="Stellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="46" end="50" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607173" start="139" end="169" title="Stellar (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Stellar&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q986199" start="213" end="229" title="Stellar Loussier" label="Stellar Loussier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905016" start="294" end="305" title="Dr. Stellar" label="Dr. Stellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607175" start="343" end="352" title="Stellar 7" label="Stellar 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q113493881" start="402" end="428" title="Stellar (film)" label="&amp;quot;Stellar&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603717" start="461" end="476" title="Stellar (group)" label="Stellar (group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607174" start="506" end="532" title="Stellar (New Zealand band)" label="Stellar (New Zealand band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214257" start="566" end="590" title="Stellar (musical artist)" label="Stellar (musical artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045025" start="639" end="665" title="Stellar (song)" label="&amp;quot;Stellar&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255316" start="692" end="706" title="Stellar Awards" label="Stellar Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q17870327" start="775" end="800" title="Stellar (payment network)" label="Stellar (payment network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607185" start="852" end="888" title="Stellar Group (construction company)" label="Stellar Group (construction company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12375202" start="941" end="959" title="Hasselblad Stellar" label="Hasselblad Stellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q483495" start="988" end="1003" title="Hyundai Stellar" label="Hyundai Stellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q707103" start="1027" end="1041" title="O2 XDA Stellar" label="O2 XDA Stellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607176" start="1081" end="1096" title="Stellar Airpark" label="Stellar Airpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607178" start="1149" end="1171" title="Stellar Charter School" label="Stellar Charter School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995499" start="1222" end="1235" title="Eliot Stellar" label="Eliot Stellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355809" start="1287" end="1313" title="List of stellar properties" label="List of stellar properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="1370" end="1374" title="Star" label="Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q366690" start="1381" end="1404" title="Stella (disambiguation)" label="Stella (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19929461" start="1407" end="1434" title="Stellar II (disambiguation)" label="Stellar II (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22349390" start="1437" end="1463" title="Stellaris (disambiguation)" label="Stellaris (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130549145" start="1466" end="1489" title="Starla (disambiguation)" label="Starla (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280187" wikidata="Q2713264" url="?curid=1280187" title="Daily Herald (United Kingdom)">
<text>The Daily Herald was a British daily newspaper, published daily in London from 1912 to 1964 (although it was weekly during the First World War). It was published in the interest of the labour movement and supported the Labour Party. It underwent several changes of management before ceasing publication in 1964, when it was relaunched as &quot;The Sun&quot;, in its pre-Murdoch form.

== Origins ==
In December 1910, the printers&#x27; union, the London Society of Compositors (LSC), became engaged in an industrial struggle to establish a 48-hour workweek and started a daily strike bulletin called &quot;The World&quot;. Will Dyson, an Australian artist in London, contributed a cartoon. From 25 January 1911, it was renamed the &quot;Daily Herald&quot; and was published until the end of the strike in April 1911. At its peak, it had daily sales of 25,000.

Ben Tillett, the dockers&#x27; leader, and other radical trade unionists were inspired to raise funds for a permanent labour movement daily, to compete with the newspapers that championed the two main political parties, the Liberals and Conservatives, but independent of the official Labour Party and the Trades Union Congress, which were planning a daily of their own (launched as the &quot;Daily Citizen&quot; in October 1912).

The initial organising group included Tillett, T. E. Naylor of the LSC, George Lansbury, socialist politician, Robert Williams of the Transport Workers, W. N. Ewer and Francis Meynell. Retaining the strike sheet name, they formed a &quot;Daily Herald&quot; company. Readers and supporters formed local branches of the Daily Herald League, through which they had their say in the running of the paper.

== Syndicalist period, 1912–1913 ==
The first issue appeared on 15 April 1912, edited by William H. Seed. A key feature was Dyson&#x27;s cartoons, which made a contribution to the paper&#x27;s political tone. Its politics were broadly syndicalist: it gave unconditional support to strikers and argued for a socialist revolution based on workers&#x27; self-organisation in trade unions. It also gave strong support to suffragettes and to anti-colonial struggles, especially in Ireland. Early issues dealt with the loss of the RMS &quot;Titanic&quot;, emphasising the disproportionate loss of life among crew members and poor third-class passengers, and demonstrating the distinct perspective of the new paper.

Staff writers included W. P. Ryan, Langdon Everard and George Slocombe. The editor of the Women&#x27;s Page was Margaret Travers-Symons, and Katharine Susannah Prichard wrote for it. Vance Palmer&#x27;s poems were used on the front page. G. K. Chesterton was a frequent contributor. His brother Cecil and Hilaire Belloc were occasional contributors. After Seed was removed as editor, Rowland Kenney, the brother of Annie Kenney; C. Sheridan Jones; and finally Charles Lapworth held the position.

In June 1913, the &quot;Daily Herald&quot; company was forced into liquidation. Lansbury and Charles Lapworth formed a new company, the Limit Printing and Publishing Company. (When the Liberal leader Lloyd George was asked a question about the &quot;Herald&quot;, he declared, &quot;That paper is the limit.&quot;)

The shortfall in production costs was guaranteed by wealthy friends of Lansbury, and Francis Meynell joined the board as their representative. From December 1912 until August 1914, one of the main financial supporters was H. D. Harben, also a founder of the &quot;New Statesman&quot;. From this point, the members of the Daily Herald League had no formal influence on the paper.
In late 1913, Lapworth was asked by the other two board members to resign as editor. Lansbury and the paper&#x27;s financial backers were disturbed by Lapworth and other writers&#x27; attacks on individuals, both in the establishment and the labour movement. &quot;Hatred of conditions by all means, but not of persons&quot; was how Lapworth quoted Lansbury. The aftermath was aired in the letter pages of &quot;The New Age&quot; between December 1913 and April 1914.

== The &quot;Herald&quot; under Lansbury, 1914–1922 ==
The new paper struggled financially but somehow survived, with Lansbury playing an ever-increasing role in keeping it afloat.

Under Lansbury, the &quot;Herald&quot; took an eclectic but relentlessly militant political position and achieved sales of 50,000–150,000 a day. But war in August 1914—or rather the subsequent split on the left whether to support or oppose the war—radically reduced its constituency. Lansbury and his colleagues, core of the anti-war left, decided to go weekly. The paper played a key role in the campaign against the war for the next four years. It was in the forefront of the movement against conscription and supported conscientious objectors; and it welcomed the Russian Revolutions of February and October 1917. There were notable journalistic scoops, most famously its story in November 1917 on &quot;How they starve at the Ritz&quot;, an exposé of conspicuous consumption by the rich at a time of national hardship. The story was extensively reprinted in leaflets and some historians believe that it pushed the government into introducing compulsory rationing.

The &quot;Herald&quot; resumed daily publication in 1919, and again played a role propagandising for strikes and against armed intervention in Russia amid the social turmoil of 1919–21. When the radical wave subsided, the &quot;Herald&quot; found itself broke and unable to continue as an independent left daily. Lansbury handed over the paper to the Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party in 1922. The newspaper had begun to publish the Bobby Bear cartoon strip in 1919.

In August 1920, Lev Kamenev, a leading member of the Bolshevik regime visiting London as part of the negotiations that led to the March 1921 Anglo-Soviet Trade Agreement, sent a telegram addressed to Lenin in Moscow that was intercepted and deciphered by British intelligence. The telegram stated that Kamenev had paid £40,000.00 to the &quot;Daily Herald&quot;, and a further payment of £10,000 would be made shortly.

Historical copies of the &quot;Daily Herald&quot; are available to search and view in digitised form at the British Newspaper Archive.

== The third &quot;Daily Herald&quot;, 1922–1929 ==
The &quot;Herald&quot; was the official organ of the Trade Union Congress from 1922, during which point the fledgling Labour Party brought in Hamilton Fyfe, who recruited prestigious journalists such as Douglas Cole (better known as G.D.H. Cole) and Evelyn Sharp, who were supportive of socialism. He left in 1926 over disputes regarding what to publish, at which point Frederick Salusbury was appointed acting editor-in-chief. Prior to Fyfe&#x27;s resignation, Salusbury had served as a columnist at the &quot;Daily Express,&quot; where he helped create the Express&#x27; famous Beachcomber gossip column with Dominic Wyndham Lewis. During his brief time as acting editor, Salusbury began to attract middle- and upper-class readership, although the publication was primarily marketed to tradesmen.

Between 1923 and 1964, the newspaper awarded the Order of Industrial Heroism, popularly known as the &quot;Workers&#x27; VC,&quot; to honour examples of heroism carried out by ordinary workers.

== The fourth &quot;Daily Herald&quot;, 1930–1964 ==
The TUC sold a 51 per cent share of the &quot;Herald&quot; to Odhams Press, publisher of &quot;The People&quot;, a Sunday paper, in 1930. Odhams (then run by Lord Southwood) was interested in using its presses during the week; the TUC wanted Odhams&#x27; expertise in promoting newspapers. A promotion campaign ensued, and in 1933, the &quot;Herald&quot; became the world&#x27;s best-selling daily newspaper, with certified net sales of 2 million. This accomplishment set off a war with more conservative London papers, such as the &quot;Daily Express&quot;.

The &quot;Daily Herald&quot; strongly condemned the Nazi-Soviet Pact and the Soviet invasion of Finland. In an editorial about the latter, the paper stated:Now finally Stalin&#x27;s Russia sacrifices all claims to the respect of the working class movement...The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is dead. Stalin&#x27;s new imperialist Russia takes its place.The &quot;Herald&quot;&#x27;s sales were static or in decline during the post-war period, but a survey in 1958 suggested that it had the highest level of appreciation of any newspaper among its almost exclusively working class readership. Amongst the oldest and poorest people living in Britain, 59% of them were male, the highest proportion of any newspaper being published at the time. According to Roy Greenslade, the editorial staff were firmly entrenched between those advocating populism or politics with no &quot;synthesis&quot; between the positions possible.

The International Publishing Corporation acquired Odhams shares around 1961 when they took over that company and the minority stake owned by the TUC in 1964. In 1955, the title&#x27;s share of total newspaper circulation and advertising sales were both 10.8%, but this had declined to 8.1% and 3.5%, respectively, by 1964.

Following a study commissioned from market researcher Mark Abrams, whose conclusions suggested reasons why the &quot;Herald&quot; was in decline, it was reborn as &quot;The Sun&quot; in 1964 under editor Sydney Jacobson. Roy Greenslade, though, has suggested that the &quot;Daily Herald&quot; was, in fact, losing readers to its own stable mate, the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;, rather than because of social changes. By 1969, the original &quot;Sun&quot; had fewer readers than the &quot;Herald&quot; at the end of its existence. The newspaper was sold to Rupert Murdoch&#x27;s News Limited (the holding group for all of his interests at the time), and its format and (eventually) its politics were significantly altered.

The photographic archive of the &quot;Daily Herald&quot;, including the work of photographers such as James Jarché, is at the National Science and Media Museum in Bradford. In 2022, nearly 50,000 images from the Daily Herald Archive were digitised and published online in partnership with Google Arts &amp; Culture.

==Editors==
:1912: William H. Seed
:1912: Rowland Kenney
:1913: Charles Lapworth
:1913: George Lansbury
:1922: W. P. Ryan
:1922: Hamilton Fyfe
:1926: William Mellor
:1931: W. H. Stevenson
:1936: Francis Williams
:1940: Percy Cudlipp
:1953: Sydney Elliott
:1957: Douglas Machray
:1960: John Beaven
:1962: Sydney Jacobson

Source: D. Butler and A. Sloman, &quot;British Political Facts, 1900–1975&quot;, London: Macmillan, 1975, p. 378

==References==
==Sources==
*Stanley Reynolds &quot;Poor Men&#x27;s Guardians: A Record of the Struggles for a Democratic Newspaper Press, 1763–1973&quot; () Pages 173 to 178.
*Unpublished notes, written in 1960 by Robin Page Arnot, held by the Working Class Movement Library.
*The New Age – Letters to the Editor, particularly 18 December 1913, 8 January, 26 February and 5 March 1914.
*James Curran &quot;The British Press: a Manifesto&quot;, Macmillan, London, 1978

==External links==
*Daily Herald Archive
*Spartacus Educational page on the Daily Herald
*The New Age</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5775437" start="23" end="46" title="History of British newspapers" label="British daily newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="127" end="142" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="185" end="200" title="labour movement" label="labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="219" end="231" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="344" end="351" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="370" end="377" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670877" start="447" end="476" title="London Society of Compositors" label="London Society of Compositors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002794" start="623" end="633" title="Will Dyson" label="Will Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="638" end="647" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595574" start="861" end="872" title="Ben Tillett" label="Ben Tillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537445" start="878" end="891" title="Stevedore" label="dockers&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="1085" end="1093" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1098" end="1111" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="1145" end="1157" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="1166" end="1187" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999171" start="1339" end="1351" title="Thomas Naylor (UK politician)" label="T. E. Naylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q247589" start="1364" end="1379" title="George Lansbury" label="George Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351132" start="1403" end="1418" title="Robert Williams (trade unionist)" label="Robert Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979015" start="1426" end="1443" title="National Transport Workers&amp;#x27; Federation" label="Transport Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016169" start="1445" end="1455" title="William Norman Ewer" label="W. N. Ewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481927" start="1460" end="1475" title="Francis Meynell" label="Francis Meynell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353993" start="1929" end="1940" title="syndicalist" label="syndicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="2111" end="2122" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="2170" end="2177" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="2229" end="2236" title="Titanic" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q454686" start="2545" end="2572" title="Katharine Susannah Prichard" label="Katharine Susannah Prichard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19118257" start="2587" end="2599" title="Vance Palmer" label="Vance Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="2642" end="2658" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943680" start="2699" end="2704" title="Cecil Chesterton" label="Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q333106" start="2709" end="2723" title="Hilaire Belloc" label="Hilaire Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q97867314" start="2788" end="2802" title="Rowland Kenney" label="Rowland Kenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618091" start="2819" end="2831" title="Annie Kenney" label="Annie Kenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080085" start="2864" end="2880" title="Charles Lapworth (journalist)" label="Charles Lapworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="3101" end="3113" title="David Lloyd George" label="Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q21979686" start="3439" end="3451" title="H. D. Harben" label="H. D. Harben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="3481" end="3494" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753491" start="4008" end="4019" title="The New Age" label="The New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4396" end="4399" title="World War I" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="4814" end="4832" title="Russian Revolution (1917)" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="4837" end="4845" title="February Revolution" label="February"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="4850" end="4862" title="October Revolution" label="October 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360134" start="5002" end="5025" title="conspicuous consumption" label="conspicuous consumption"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5204" end="5213" title="Rationing in the United Kingdom#First World War 1914–1918" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5359" end="5365" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="5567" end="5588" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="5597" end="5609" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934753" start="5658" end="5668" title="Bobby Bear" label="Bobby Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q165854" start="5709" end="5720" title="Lev Kamenev" label="Lev Kamenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="5746" end="5755" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763685" start="5834" end="5862" title="Anglo-Soviet Trade Agreement" label="Anglo-Soviet Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="5893" end="5898" title="Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512154" start="6221" end="6246" title="British Newspaper Archive" label="British Newspaper Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="6354" end="6374" title="Trade Union Congress" label="Trade Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="6419" end="6431" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644949" start="6443" end="6456" title="Hamilton Fyfe" label="Hamilton Fyfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044933" start="6504" end="6516" title="G. D. H. Cole" label="Douglas Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416438" start="6551" end="6563" title="Evelyn Sharp, Baroness Sharp" label="Evelyn Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497133" start="6671" end="6690" title="Frederic Salusbury" label="Frederick Salusbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="6812" end="6825" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059480" start="6881" end="6892" title="Beachcomber (pen name)" label="Beachcomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203504" start="6912" end="6933" title="D. B. Wyndham Lewis" label="Dominic Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100504" start="7150" end="7177" title="Order of Industrial Heroism" label="Order of Industrial Heroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880860" start="7411" end="7423" title="Odhams Press" label="Odhams Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253247" start="7444" end="7454" title="The Sunday People" label="The People"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309776" start="7507" end="7521" title="Julius Elias, 1st Viscount Southwood" label="Lord Southwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="7841" end="7853" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="7887" end="7900" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="7961" end="7977" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Nazi-Soviet Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="7986" end="8012" title="Winter War" label="Soviet invasion of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="8482" end="8495" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372859" start="8670" end="8684" title="Roy Greenslade" label="Roy Greenslade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146794" start="8842" end="8878" title="TI Media" label="International Publishing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118388" start="9216" end="9227" title="Mark Abrams" label="Mark Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="9331" end="9338" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659995" start="9366" end="9381" title="Sydney Jacobson" label="Sydney Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="9518" end="9530" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="9716" end="9730" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339152" start="9738" end="9750" title="News Limited" label="News Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136813" start="9985" end="9997" title="James Jarché" label="James Jarché"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054692" start="10009" end="10042" title="National Science and Media Museum" label="National Science and Media Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="10046" end="10054" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q369089" start="10172" end="10197" title="Google Arts &amp;amp; Culture" label="Google Arts &amp;amp; Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080085" start="10264" end="10280" title="Charles Lapworth (journalist)" label="Charles Lapworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q247589" start="10288" end="10303" title="George Lansbury" label="George Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016639" start="10311" end="10321" title="W. P. Ryan" label="W. P. Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644949" start="10329" end="10342" title="Hamilton Fyfe" label="Hamilton Fyfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015552" start="10350" end="10364" title="William Mellor (journalist)" label="William Mellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342992" start="10395" end="10411" title="Francis Williams (journalist)" label="Francis Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167294" start="10419" end="10432" title="Percy Cudlipp" label="Percy Cudlipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659911" start="10440" end="10454" title="Sydney Elliott" label="Sydney Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488992" start="10462" end="10477" title="Douglas Machray" label="Douglas Machray"/>
<link wikidata="Q336140" start="10485" end="10496" title="John Beaven" label="John Beaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659995" start="10504" end="10519" title="Sydney Jacobson" label="Sydney Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034902" start="10879" end="10909" title="Working Class Movement Library" label="Working Class Movement Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280194" wikidata="Q3293581" url="?curid=1280194" title="Mario Tremblay">
<text>Joseph Daniel Mario Tremblay (born September 2, 1956) is a former professional ice hockey player and coach in the National Hockey League (NHL). As a player, he was a five-time Stanley Cup winner with the Montreal Canadiens.

He was honoured by his hometown of Alma, which named its local arena &quot;Le Centre Mario-Tremblay&quot;. Since 1981, Tremblay has owned the sports bar in his hometown called &quot;Bar-Restaurant chez Mario Tremblay&quot;.

==Playing career==
Tremblay, nicknamed &quot;Le bleuet bionique&quot; (The Bionic Blueberry), played his junior hockey with the Montreal Bleu Blanc Rouge and played with the Montreal Canadiens for his entire NHL playing career (1974–1986), winning five Stanley Cup championships with the team as a player in 1976, 1977, 1978, 1979, and 1986. In 852 regular season games in the NHL, he scored 258 goals and added 326 assists for 584 points, with 1043 penalty minutes. He scored the winning goal in game six of the 1978 Stanley Cup finals, giving the cup to the Canadiens. He was the winner of the Molson Cup for the 1982-83 season. Tremblay is 10th on the Montreal Canadiens all-time list for plus-minus at 184. Tremblay remains the youngest goal scorer in franchise history, having achieved his inaugural tally at age 18 years, 75 days on November 16, 1974, against the New York Rangers at the Forum.

In his first few seasons with the Canadiens, he was part of a very dynamic forward line alongside center Doug Risebrough (who was also a rookie in 1974-75) and LW Yvon Lambert. Their job was to contain their opponents&#x27; main scoring line and to create room for the team&#x27;s highly skilled players by agitating and pestering their opponents&#x27; best players. When the three began playing together a few weeks into the 1974-75 season, they lit a fire under a team that had started the year slowly, winning just 3 of its first 10 games. All three were regular visitors to the penalty box during those years. The line was together for all four Stanley Cup wins from 1976 to 1979. In later years, Tremblay was given more goal-scoring responsibilities and was a regular on the power play. He scored 30 or more goals in four different seasons, the first time in 1978-79, his fifth season in the league.

He announced his retirement in September 1986, after suffering a serious shoulder injury the previous season that caused him to miss the 1986 Stanley Cup playoffs.

==Coaching career==
===Montreal Canadiens===
Tremblay was hired six games into the 1995–96 season as head coach of the Canadiens although he had no previous coaching experience. Tremblay had a long-running dispute with star goaltender Patrick Roy, which started from their days as teammates, and not long after Tremblay became coach this eventually led to Roy&#x27;s departure from Montreal. The two had almost come to blows in a Long Island coffee shop before Tremblay was announced as coach, and Roy snickered when Tremblay arrived in the dressing room for the first time. They almost fought a second time after Tremblay fired a shot at Roy&#x27;s throat during practice.

Tremblay kept Roy in net during a December 2, 1995, game versus the Detroit Red Wings, in which the Wings scored nine goals on Roy, who was jeered by the Montreal fans. Roy stormed off the ice and told team president Ronald Corey that he would never play for the Canadiens again. Four days later, Roy was traded to Colorado with captain Mike Keane for Jocelyn Thibault, Martin Ručinský, and Andrei Kovalenko. Roy went on to lead the Avalanche to two Stanley Cups before retiring. The rivalry would continue into the coaching ranks, as Roy would later (on October 15, 2013) tie Tremblay&#x27;s record for longest winning streak (six games) to begin an NHL coaching career.

Nearly a year after Roy left the Canadiens, Tremblay also had a heated verbal exchange with Habs enforcer Donald Brashear during a team practice before a game against the Avalanche in Denver. Brashear was later traded to the Vancouver Canucks.

As a head coach for Montreal, Tremblay coached 159 games, with 71 wins, 63 losses, and 25 ties across two years with the team.

===Minnesota Wild and New Jersey Devils===
In 2001, Tremblay became an assistant coach for the Minnesota Wild under head coach Jacques Lemaire. He remained there for seven seasons, through 2008–09. In 2009, he followed Lemaire to the New Jersey Devils where he remained an assistant coach under Lemaire. Lemaire retired in 2010 after one season in New Jersey and Tremblay was not retained as assistant coach. He then joined the Quebec sport network RDS as a hockey analyst for the Montreal Canadiens games.

== Personal life ==
Tremblay married Collette Germain in 1977 and the couple had two daughters. Germain died of cancer in 2015.

Tremblay is the uncle of the professional hockey player, Pascal Trépanier.

== Career statistics ==
==Coaching record==
==References==
Molson Cup winner : http://ourhistory.canadiens.com/player/Mario-Tremblay

== External links ==
*http://www.hockeydraftcentral.com/1974/74012.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3293581" start="0" end="28" title="Mario Tremblay" label="Joseph Daniel Mario Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="79" end="89" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="114" end="136" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="176" end="187" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="204" end="222" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q164456" start="578" end="603" title="Montreal Bleu Blanc Rouge" label="Montreal Bleu Blanc Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="624" end="642" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q644171" start="678" end="682" title="1974–75 NHL season" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="683" end="687" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="703" end="714" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577305" start="758" end="762" title="1976 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577810" start="764" end="768" title="1977 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578315" start="770" end="774" title="1978 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578870" start="776" end="780" title="1979 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583228" start="786" end="790" title="1986 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920467" start="1046" end="1056" title="Molson Cup" label="Molson Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856381" start="1142" end="1152" title="Plus-minus (ice hockey)" label="plus-minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238500" start="1427" end="1439" title="Line (ice hockey)" label="forward line"/>
<link wikidata="Q459346" start="1457" end="1472" title="Doug Risebrough" label="Doug Risebrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574124" start="1515" end="1527" title="Yvon Lambert" label="Yvon Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q303050" start="1934" end="1945" title="penalty box" label="penalty box"/>
<link wikidata="Q657579" start="2132" end="2142" title="Power play (sporting term)" label="power play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583229" start="2395" end="2420" title="1986 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1986 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="2658" end="2669" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="3166" end="3183" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441506" start="3315" end="3327" title="Ronald Corey" label="Ronald Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q923505" start="3435" end="3445" title="Mike Keane" label="Mike Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359610" start="3450" end="3466" title="Jocelyn Thibault" label="Jocelyn Thibault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904899" start="3468" end="3483" title="Martin Ručinský" label="Martin Ručinský"/>
<link wikidata="Q502310" start="3489" end="3505" title="Andrei Kovalenko" label="Andrei Kovalenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q283795" start="3877" end="3892" title="Donald Brashear" label="Donald Brashear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="3955" end="3961" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="3996" end="4013" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q681705" start="4271" end="4286" title="Jacques Lemaire" label="Jacques Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055342" start="4838" end="4854" title="Pascal Trépanier" label="Pascal Trépanier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280195" wikidata="Q5139662" url="?curid=1280195" title="Cockroach (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[cockroach]] is an insect of the order Blattodea. 

Cockroach may also refer to:

==Books==
* &quot;Cockroach&quot; (novel), a 2008 novel by Rawi Hage
* &quot;The Cockroach&quot; (novella), a 2019 novella by Ian McEwan
* &quot;Cockroaches&quot; (novel), the second novel in the Harry Hole series by Jo Nesbø

==Film and television==
* , a 2010 film by Luke Eve
* &quot;Cockroaches&quot; (&quot;CSI&quot; episode), an episode of &quot;CSI: Crime Scene Investigation&quot;
* Walter Bradley, aka Cockroach, a character in &quot;The Cosby Show&quot;

==Music==
* &quot;Cockroach&quot; (album), a 2001 album by Danger Danger
* &quot;Cockroaches&quot; (EP), a 1987 EP by Voivod
* The Cockroaches, an Australian band in the 1980s

==Other==
* Cockroach Labs, software company that sells CockroachDB
* Cockroach, nickname for a pro-democracy protester during the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests

==See also==
* &quot;Kockroach&quot;, a 2007 novel by William Lashner under the name &quot;Tyler Knox&quot;
* Raghav Juyal (born 1991), Indian dancer and actor, known as &quot;Crockroaxz&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5139662" start="2" end="15" title="Cockroach (disambiguation)" label="[[cockroach]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139662" start="55" end="64" title="Cockroach (disambiguation)" label="Cockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139660" start="97" end="126" title="Cockroach (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Cockroach&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110720765" start="156" end="191" title="The Cockroach (novella)" label="&amp;quot;The Cockroach&amp;quot; (novella)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721878" start="224" end="255" title="Cockroaches (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Cockroaches&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667095" start="366" end="415" title="Cockroaches (CSI episode)" label="&amp;quot;Cockroaches&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;CSI&amp;quot; episode)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="496" end="505" title="List of The Cosby Show characters#Recurring characters" label="Cockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159568" start="562" end="591" title="Cockroach (album)" label="&amp;quot;Cockroach&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q845926" start="625" end="653" title="Cockroaches (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Cockroaches&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726574" start="677" end="692" title="The Cockroaches" label="The Cockroaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q98731903" start="783" end="794" title="CockroachDB" label="CockroachDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q64509602" start="858" end="884" title="2019–20 Hong Kong protests" label="2019–20 Hong Kong protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902693" start="907" end="916" title="Kockroach" label="Kockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209728" start="996" end="1008" title="Raghav Juyal" label="Raghav Juyal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280208" wikidata="Q2517509" url="?curid=1280208" title="Rawa Voivodeship">
<text>Rawa Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Kingdom of Poland since 15th century until the partitions of Poland in 1795. It was part of the Greater Poland Province. Together with the Plock and Masovian Voivodeships it formed the former Duchy of Masovia.

The voivodeship had its capital in the town of Rawa Mazowiecka, and its origins date back to the second half of the 15th century. In 1462, after the deaths of local Piast dynasty dukes, Mazovian lands of Rawa and Gostynin were incorporated into the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland. In 1476, the Land of Sochaczew returned to Poland as well. Borders of Rawa Voivodeship remained unchanged for more than 300 years, until the second partition of Poland in 1793, when it was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia. 
Rawa Voivodeship had four senators in the Senate of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. These were the Voivode of Rawa, the Castellan of Rawa, and the castellans of Sochaczew and Gostynin. Local starostas resided in Rawa, Sochaczew and Gostynin.

Zygmunt Gloger in his monumental book Historical Geography of the Lands of Old Poland provides this description of Rawa Voivodeship:

“In the 15th century, the Duchy of Mazovia, ruled by local branch of the Piast dynasty, was divided into three parts, one of which was the Duchy of Rawa (...) On January 1, 1462, Siemowit VI died at the age of eighteen. A few weeks later, his teenage brother Wladyslaw II also died. Siemowit VI was the Duke of Plock and Rawa, and after his death, King Kazimierz Jagiellonczyk decided to incorporate the Duchy of Rawa, making it the first part of Mazovia that returned to Poland (...)

Rawa Voivodeship had the area of 92 sq. miles. It was divided into three lands: those of Rawa, Sochaczew and Gostynin. Each land was divided into two counties. The lands were of roughly the same size, and in the mid-16th century, whole voivodeship had 100 Roman Catholic parishes and 15 towns (...) Sejmiks took place at Rawa, Sochaczew and Gąbin, during which two deputies to the Sejm, and two deputies to the Greater Poland Tribunal were elected (...) Rawa Voivodeship shared its coat of arms with Plock Voivodeship”.

==Municipal government==
Voivodeship Governor (Wojewoda) seat: 
* Rawa Mazowiecka
==Administrative division==
* Rawa Land (ziemia rawska, Rawa), 
** Rawa County
** Biała Rawska County,
* Gostynin Land (ziemia gostynińska, Gostynin), 
** Gostynin County 
** Gąbin County,
* Sochaczew Land (ziema sochaczewska, Sochaczew), 
** Sochaczew County 
** Mszczonów County.

==Cities and towns==
===Biała County===
*Biała
*Mogielnica
*Nowe Miasto

===Gąbin County===

*Gąbin
*Iłów
*Kiernozia
*Osmolin
*Pacyna
===Gostynin County===
*Gostynin
*Kutno
*Trębki

===Mszczonów County===
*Grodzisk
*Mszczonów

===Rawa County===

*Budziszewice
*Głowno
*Jeżów
*Rawa
*Skierniewice
===Sochaczew County===

*Bolimów
*Kampinos
*Łowicz
*Sochaczew
*Wiskitki
==Voivodes==
*Mikołaj z Kutna 1465-1467
*Jan Grot z Nowego Miasta 1468-1489
*Andrzej Szczubioł 1489-1493
*Jakub Buczacki 1493-1496
*Andrzej Kucieński 1496-1504
*Piotr Prędota z Trzciany 1504-1518
*Jakub Gostomski 1518-1519
*Andrzej Kucieński 1519-1529 
*Stanisław Kucieński 1529-1542 
*Andrzej Sierpski 1542-?
*Anzelm Gostomski 1572-1588
*Stanisław Gostomski 1588-?
*Wojciech Wilkanowski ?
*Piotr Myszkowski 1597-1601
*Zygmunt Grudziński 1601-1618
*Stanisław Radziejowski 1618-1627
*Filip Wołucki 1627-1642
*Krzysztof Marcin Sułowski 1642-1644
*Andrzej Grudziński 1644-1650
*Łukasz Opaliński 1653-1654 
*Aleksander Koryciński 1659-?
*Jan Wojciech Lipski 1676
*Hieronim Olszowski 1676 
*Aleksander Załuski 1676-1692
*Aleksander Józef Załuski 1693-1720
*Andrzej Głębocki 1720-1735 
*Stanisław Wincenty Jabłonowski 1735-1754 
*Stanisław Świdziński 1754-1757
*Kazimierz Granowski 1757-1774
*Bazyli Walicki 1774-1789

==References==
== Sources ==
* Rawa Voivodeship, description by Zygmunt Gloger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2517509" start="0" end="16" title="Rawa Voivodeship" label="Rawa Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="86" end="103" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="133" end="153" title="partitions of Poland" label="partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="182" end="205" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405685" start="225" end="230" title="Płock Voivodeship (1495–1793)" label="Plock"/>
<link wikidata="Q54169" start="235" end="255" title="Masovian Voivodeship" label="Masovian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361927" start="278" end="294" title="Duchy of Masovia" label="Duchy of Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q149059" start="344" end="359" title="Rawa Mazowiecka" label="Rawa Mazowiecka"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="462" end="475" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q983735" start="510" end="518" title="Gostynin" label="Gostynin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="546" end="576" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q250485" start="599" end="608" title="Sochaczew" label="Sochaczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="719" end="745" title="Partitions of Poland" label="second partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="782" end="800" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570643" start="845" end="851" title="Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="859" end="889" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="906" end="913" title="Voivode" label="Voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505781" start="927" end="936" title="Castellan" label="Castellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231714" start="998" end="1006" title="starosta" label="starosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q245332" start="1050" end="1064" title="Zygmunt Gloger" label="Zygmunt Gloger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361927" start="1210" end="1226" title="Duchy of Mazovia" label="Duchy of Mazovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="1257" end="1270" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="1537" end="1560" title="Kazimierz Jagiellonczyk" label="Kazimierz Jagiellonczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="1969" end="1975" title="Sejmik" label="Sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q990808" start="2011" end="2016" title="Gąbin" label="Gąbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="2051" end="2055" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="2238" end="2246" title="Wojewoda" label="Wojewoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q149059" start="2257" end="2272" title="Rawa Mazowiecka" label="Rawa Mazowiecka"/>
<link wikidata="Q148956" start="2355" end="2367" title="Biała Rawska" label="Biała Rawska"/>
<link wikidata="Q983735" start="2413" end="2421" title="Gostynin" label="Gostynin"/>
<link wikidata="Q990808" start="2448" end="2453" title="Gąbin" label="Gąbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q250485" start="2500" end="2509" title="Sochaczew" label="Sochaczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q477955" start="2537" end="2546" title="Mszczonów" label="Mszczonów"/>
<link wikidata="Q148956" start="2597" end="2602" title="Biała Rawska" label="Biała"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160056" start="2604" end="2614" title="Mogielnica" label="Mogielnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019505" start="2616" end="2627" title="Nowe Miasto nad Pilicą" label="Nowe Miasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q990808" start="2650" end="2655" title="Gąbin" label="Gąbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955466" start="2657" end="2661" title="Iłów" label="Iłów"/>
<link wikidata="Q769820" start="2663" end="2672" title="Kiernozia" label="Kiernozia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107200" start="2674" end="2681" title="Osmolin, Masovian Voivodeship" label="Osmolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009652" start="2683" end="2689" title="Pacyna" label="Pacyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q983735" start="2713" end="2721" title="Gostynin" label="Gostynin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202160" start="2723" end="2728" title="Kutno" label="Kutno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849218" start="2730" end="2736" title="Trębki" label="Trębki"/>
<link wikidata="Q924078" start="2762" end="2770" title="Grodzisk Mazowiecki" label="Grodzisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q477955" start="2772" end="2781" title="Mszczonów" label="Mszczonów"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985322" start="2803" end="2815" title="Budziszewice, Łódź Voivodeship" label="Budziszewice"/>
<link wikidata="Q867358" start="2817" end="2823" title="Głowno" label="Głowno"/>
<link wikidata="Q724474" start="2825" end="2830" title="Jeżów, Brzeziny County" label="Jeżów"/>
<link wikidata="Q149059" start="2832" end="2836" title="Rawa Mazowiecka" label="Rawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734" start="2838" end="2850" title="Skierniewice" label="Skierniewice"/>
<link wikidata="Q627392" start="2876" end="2883" title="Bolimów" label="Bolimów"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353188" start="2885" end="2893" title="Kampinos" label="Kampinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q109992" start="2895" end="2901" title="Łowicz" label="Łowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q250485" start="2903" end="2912" title="Sochaczew" label="Sochaczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q655956" start="2914" end="2922" title="Wiskitki" label="Wiskitki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2937" end="2952" title="Mikołaj z Kutna" label="Mikołaj z Kutna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2964" end="2988" title="Jan Grot z Nowego Miasta" label="Jan Grot z Nowego Miasta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3000" end="3017" title="Andrzej Szczubioł" label="Andrzej Szczubioł"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3029" end="3043" title="Jakub Buczacki" label="Jakub Buczacki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3055" end="3072" title="Andrzej Kucieński" label="Andrzej Kucieński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3084" end="3108" title="Piotr Prędota z Trzciany" label="Piotr Prędota z Trzciany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3120" end="3135" title="Jakub Gostomski" label="Jakub Gostomski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3147" end="3164" title="Andrzej Kucieński" label="Andrzej Kucieński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3177" end="3196" title="Stanisław Kucieński" label="Stanisław Kucieński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3209" end="3225" title="Andrzej Sierpski" label="Andrzej Sierpski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3234" end="3250" title="Anzelm Gostomski" label="Anzelm Gostomski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3262" end="3281" title="Stanisław Gostomski" label="Stanisław Gostomski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3290" end="3310" title="Wojciech Wilkanowski" label="Wojciech Wilkanowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3314" end="3330" title="Piotr Myszkowski (died 1601)" label="Piotr Myszkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075797" start="3342" end="3360" title="Zygmunt Grudziński (1560–1618)" label="Zygmunt Grudziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q15603508" start="3372" end="3394" title="Stanisław Radziejowski" label="Stanisław Radziejowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3406" end="3419" title="Filip Wołucki" label="Filip Wołucki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3431" end="3456" title="Krzysztof Marcin Sułowski" label="Krzysztof Marcin Sułowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3468" end="3486" title="Andrzej Grudziński" label="Andrzej Grudziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080958" start="3498" end="3514" title="Łukasz Opaliński (1581-1654)" label="Łukasz Opaliński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3527" end="3548" title="Aleksander Koryciński" label="Aleksander Koryciński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3557" end="3576" title="Jan Wojciech Lipski" label="Jan Wojciech Lipski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3583" end="3601" title="Hieronim Olszowski" label="Hieronim Olszowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3609" end="3627" title="Aleksander Załuski" label="Aleksander Załuski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3639" end="3663" title="Aleksander Józef Załuski" label="Aleksander Józef Załuski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3675" end="3691" title="Andrzej Głębocki" label="Andrzej Głębocki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3704" end="3734" title="Stanisław Wincenty Jabłonowski" label="Stanisław Wincenty Jabłonowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3747" end="3767" title="Stanisław Świdziński" label="Stanisław Świdziński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3779" end="3798" title="Kazimierz Granowski" label="Kazimierz Granowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3810" end="3824" title="Bazyli Walicki" label="Bazyli Walicki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280211" wikidata="Q3463068" url="?curid=1280211" title="St. Norbert (electoral district)">
<text>St. Norbert is a former provincial electoral division in the Canadian province of Manitoba.

==Historical riding==
The original riding of St. Norbert was established at the time of the province&#x27;s creation in 1870. For the 1870 provincial election, it was divided into two separate ridings: St. Norbert North and St. Norbert South. Subsequently, it was reduced to a single riding.

St. Norbert was a francophone-majority riding. It was eliminated in 1879, at a time when francophone representation in the province was being reduced.

===St. Norbert North===
===St. Norbert South===
===St. Norbert===
==Most recent riding==
It was recreated by redistribution in 1979, and was contested at the 1981 Manitoba general election. It was abolished at the redistribution of 2018 and ceased to exist under its old name effective at the 2019 Manitoba general election. The riding was located in the southernmost tip of the City of Winnipeg.

St. Norbert was bordered to the east by Seine River, to the south and west by the rural ridings of Dawson Trail and Morris (respectively), and to the north by Riel, Fort Garry (later Fort Richmond) and Fort Whyte. The riding&#x27;s character is suburban.

St. Norbert&#x27;s population in 1996 was 19,184. In 1999, the average family income was $59,444, and the unemployment rate was 8.20%. The riding is ethnically diverse: 5% of the riding&#x27;s residents are German, 4% are Chinese, 3% are East Indian and 2% are Italian. Six per cent of the riding&#x27;s residents are francophone. Almost 28% of the riding&#x27;s residents have a university degree.

The service sector accounts for 16% of St. Norbert&#x27;s industry, with a further 15% in the educational services.

==Electoral results==
=== 1870 ===


=== 1870 ===



=== 1874 ===


=== 1878 ===



=== 1879 by-election ===



=== 1981 ===




=== 1986 ===



=== 1988 ===



=== 1990 ===



=== 1995 ===



=== 1999 ===
=== 2003 ===
=== 2007 ===
=== 2011 ===
=== 2016 ===
==Previous boundaries==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3463068" start="0" end="11" title="St. Norbert (electoral district)" label="St. Norbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="61" end="69" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="82" end="90" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750172" start="227" end="251" title="1870 Manitoba general election" label="1870 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109174" start="696" end="726" title="1981 Manitoba general election" label="1981 Manitoba general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233493" start="831" end="861" title="2019 Manitoba general election" label="2019 Manitoba general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="925" end="933" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433587" start="976" end="987" title="Seine River (electoral district)" label="Seine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962280" start="1035" end="1047" title="Dawson Trail (electoral district)" label="Dawson Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324398" start="1052" end="1058" title="Morris (electoral district)" label="Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407519" start="1095" end="1099" title="Riel (electoral district)" label="Riel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471196" start="1101" end="1111" title="Fort Garry (electoral district)" label="Fort Garry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077999" start="1119" end="1132" title="Fort Richmond" label="Fort Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078105" start="1138" end="1148" title="Fort Whyte" label="Fort Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1399" end="1405" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1414" end="1421" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="1430" end="1441" title="Indian people" label="East Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1453" end="1460" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280212" wikidata="Q1359610" url="?curid=1280212" title="Jocelyn Thibault">
<text>Joseph Régis Jocelyn Thibault (born January 12, 1975) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey goaltender who played 14 seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL) for the Quebec Nordiques, Colorado Avalanche, Montreal Canadiens, Chicago Blackhawks, Pittsburgh Penguins, and Buffalo Sabres. Thibault was born in Montreal, Quebec and grew up in nearby Laval.

He led a group out of Sherbrooke, Quebec to create an expansion team in the QMJHL. The new team, Sherbrooke Phoenix, started playing in the 2012–13 season. In 2021, Thibault left the Phoenix to become the new executive director of Hockey Quebec.

==Playing career==
As a youth, Thibault played in the 1988 Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament with a minor ice hockey team from Laval, Quebec. He played in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League as part of the Trois-Rivières Draveurs and Sherbrooke Faucons.

Thibault was drafted by the Quebec Nordiques 10th overall in the 1993 NHL Entry Draft. He went on to play for the Nordiques, staying for a short time after they moved to Denver and became the Colorado Avalanche. In 1995, midway through the Avalanche&#x27;s first season in Denver, he was sent to the Montreal Canadiens in a trade that moved Patrick Roy to the Avalanche. Thibault played three seasons with the Canadiens before being traded to the Chicago Blackhawks in November 1998.

Thibault played longer with the Blackhawks than with any other team—five seasons. His best season was the 2002–03 season when he recorded eight shutouts and made an appearance in the 2003 NHL All-Star Game. He recorded his career best GAA of 2.37 and a save percentage of .915. The following season had him suffer a torn labrum in November, requiring surgery and having Michael Leighton replace him.

After the lockout, Thibault was acquired by the Pittsburgh Penguins in August 2005, for a fourth round pick in the 2006 NHL Entry Draft on a two-year contract worth $3 million. However, a hip injury contributed to a bad beginning, with the veteran losing 12 of 13 starts. He was replaced as the starter by Marc-André Fleury in late November and put on waivers. In January 2006, he underwent surgery to repair torn cartilage in his left hip.

Thibault was signed as an unrestricted free agent on July 5, 2007, by the Buffalo Sabres. He played one season with Buffalo as the backup to Ryan Miller and was not re-signed.

Thibault has the distinction of being the winning goaltender of the last game at the Montreal Forum, Maple Leaf Gardens, and the Capital Centre. He also played in the last game at Colisee de Quebec.

==Personal==
Thibault and his wife Melanie have three daughters. The family resides in Sherbrooke, Quebec.

Thibault is the godfather of current Pittsburgh Penguins prospect Samuel Poulin.

==Career statistics==
===Regular season and playoffs===
==Transactions==
* June 26, 1993 – Drafted by the Quebec Nordiques in the first round (10th overall) in 1993 draft.
* June 21, 1995 – Rights transferred to the Colorado Avalanche after the Nordiques franchise relocated.
* December 6, 1995 – Montreal Canadiens traded Patrick Roy and Mike Keane to the Avalanche for Andrei Kovalenko, Martin Ručinský, and Thibault.
*November 16, 1998 – Chicago Blackhawks traded Jeff Hackett, Eric Weinrich, Alain Nasreddine, and fourth-round selection (previously acquired from the Tampa Bay Lightning – Chris Dyment) in 1999 draft to the Canadiens for Thibault, Dave Manson, and Brad Brown.
* August 10, 2005 – Traded to the Pittsburgh Penguins for a fourth-round selection in 2006 draft.
*July 5, 2007 – Signed as an unrestricted free agent by the Buffalo Sabres.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1359610" start="0" end="29" title="Jocelyn Thibault" label="Joseph Régis Jocelyn Thibault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="59" end="67" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="88" end="98" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="99" end="109" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="139" end="161" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="176" end="192" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="194" end="212" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="214" end="232" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="234" end="252" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="254" end="273" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="279" end="293" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="316" end="324" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="326" end="332" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q141810" start="355" end="360" title="Laval, Quebec" label="Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q139473" start="385" end="395" title="Sherbrooke" label="Sherbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="397" end="403" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="439" end="444" title="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League" label="QMJHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194257" start="460" end="478" title="Sherbrooke Phoenix" label="Sherbrooke Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121262" start="503" end="510" title="2012–13 QMJHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138999" start="594" end="607" title="Hockey Quebec" label="Hockey Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535360" start="669" end="715" title="Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament" label="Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869192" start="723" end="739" title="minor ice hockey" label="minor ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q141810" start="750" end="763" title="Laval, Quebec" label="Laval, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="782" end="815" title="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League" label="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255952" start="831" end="854" title="Trois-Rivières Draveurs" label="Trois-Rivières Draveurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q917155" start="859" end="877" title="Sherbrooke Faucons" label="Sherbrooke Faucons"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="908" end="924" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523956" start="945" end="965" title="1993 NHL Entry Draft" label="1993 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="1072" end="1090" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="1180" end="1198" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="1221" end="1232" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="1327" end="1345" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="1471" end="1485" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q242848" start="1548" end="1570" title="2003 NHL All-Star Game" label="2003 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042621" start="1686" end="1692" title="Acetabular labrum" label="labrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q369013" start="1735" end="1751" title="Michael Leighton" label="Michael Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="1814" end="1833" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="1881" end="1901" title="2006 NHL Entry Draft" label="2006 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q193818" start="1954" end="1957" title="hip" label="hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q368554" start="2072" end="2089" title="Marc-André Fleury" label="Marc-André Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q680364" start="2118" end="2125" title="Waivers (NHL)" label="waivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="2180" end="2189" title="cartilage" label="cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="2282" end="2296" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q250011" start="2349" end="2360" title="Ryan Miller" label="Ryan Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q367272" start="2470" end="2484" title="Montreal Forum" label="Montreal Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814534" start="2486" end="2504" title="Maple Leaf Gardens" label="Maple Leaf Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656844" start="2514" end="2528" title="Capital Centre (Landover, Maryland)" label="Capital Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q600226" start="2565" end="2582" title="Colisee de Quebec" label="Colisee de Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q139473" start="2672" end="2682" title="Sherbrooke" label="Sherbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2684" end="2690" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="2730" end="2749" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q65030544" start="2759" end="2772" title="Samuel Poulin (ice hockey)" label="Samuel Poulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="2881" end="2897" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523956" start="2935" end="2945" title="1993 NHL Entry Draft" label="1993 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="2991" end="3009" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="3072" end="3090" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="3098" end="3109" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923505" start="3114" end="3124" title="Mike Keane" label="Mike Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q502310" start="3146" end="3162" title="Andrei Kovalenko" label="Andrei Kovalenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904899" start="3164" end="3179" title="Martin Ručinský" label="Martin Ručinský"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="3216" end="3234" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q730568" start="3242" end="3254" title="Jeff Hackett" label="Jeff Hackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q977247" start="3256" end="3269" title="Eric Weinrich" label="Eric Weinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q373852" start="3271" end="3287" title="Alain Nasreddine" label="Alain Nasreddine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="3346" end="3365" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106458" start="3368" end="3380" title="Chris Dyment" label="Chris Dyment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960919" start="3385" end="3395" title="1999 NHL Entry Draft" label="1999 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173279" start="3427" end="3438" title="Dave Manson" label="Dave Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923382" start="3444" end="3454" title="Brad Brown" label="Brad Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="3490" end="3509" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="3542" end="3552" title="2006 NHL Entry Draft" label="2006 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="3614" end="3628" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280214" wikidata="Q5323405" url="?curid=1280214" title="EMD E9">
<text>The E9 is a , A1A-A1A passenger train-hauling diesel locomotive built by General Motors&#x27; Electro-Motive Division of La Grange, Illinois, between April 1954 and January 1964. 100 cab-equipped A units were produced and 44 cabless booster B units, all for service in the United States. The E9 was the tenth and last model of EMD E-unit and differed from the earlier E8 as built only by the newer engines and a different, flusher-fitting mounting for the headlight glass, the latter being the only visible difference. Since some E8s were fitted with this, it is not a reliable way to distinguish the two. The E9 has two , V12 model 567C engines, each engine driving one generator to power two traction motors.

==Engine and powertrain==
The E9 uses twin 12 cylinder 567C engines developing a total of at 800 rpm. Designed specifically for railroad locomotives, this Roots-blown, mechanically aspirated 2-stroke 45-degree V-type, with an , bore by stroke, giving displacement per cylinder, remained in production until 1966. Two DC generators, one per engine, provide power to four motors, two on each truck, in an A1A-A1A arrangement. This truck design was used on all E units and on MP 7100 and CB&amp;Q 9908 power cars. EMD has built all of its major components since 1939.

== Operation ==
The E9 powered American passenger and mail trains from the 1950s into the late 1970s. Many of America&#x27;s finest trains — such as Union Pacific Railroad&#x27;s &quot;City&quot; fleet, Burlington&#x27;s &quot;Zephyr&quot; fleet and Southern Pacific Railroad&#x27;s &quot;Coast Daylight&quot; and &quot;Sunset Limited&quot; — had E9s pulling them. E9s and their E7 and E8 kin ran throughout the country on lesser-known passenger trains, Chicago&#x27;s network of commuter trains and many mail and express trains. As America&#x27;s passenger train network shrank due to unprofitability, Union Pacific, Rock Island and Illinois Central began using E9s on freight trains while Burlington Northern began upgrading their fleets of E9s with Head-end power and EMD 645 power assemblies for commuter operations in the Chicago metropolitan area into the early 1990s.

Amtrak, founded in 1971, bought 36 E9As and 23 E9Bs from the Union Pacific, Milwaukee Road, B&amp;O and SCL. Amtrak used the E9s until 1979 and converted some E9B units to steam generator and head end power cars.

== Original owners ==
==Surviving examples==
As of 1997, 42 E9 locomotives survived. Many of these have been donated to several museums and tourist railroads. A number of railroads keep a small number in service for hauling inspection specials, charter passenger trains, investor tours and other special trains.
*Five E9s are owned by the Illinois Railway Museum, in Union, Illinois. The operating units are often used pulling trains within museum grounds.
*The Union Pacific Railroad rosters three E9s: two A units, 951 and 949, and a B unit, 963B (built as UP E9B 970B), in their heritage fleet. They were rebuilt in 1993 with a single 2000 hp EMD 16-645E engine and upgraded electrical and control equipment for compatibility with more modern locomotives.
*Southern Pacific 6051, the last surviving SP E9, is preserved at the California State Railroad Museum and operates excursions hosted by the museum.
*CN previously owned ex-Chicago, Burlington &amp; Quincy E9A 9986A, painted in CN&#x27;s heritage livery and numbered 103. It was Delivered to the National Railway Museum in Green Bay Wisconsin on February 29, 2024.
*Milwaukee Road 32A is owned and operated by the Friends of the 261, who acquired it in 2019. This unit was previously used on the Wisconsin and Southern Railroad as their 101.

== See also ==

*List of GM-EMD locomotives

== Notes ==
==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* Reich, Sy (1973). &quot;Diesel Locomotive Rosters – The Railroad Magazine Series&quot;. Wayner Publications. No Library of Congress or ISBN.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Extra 2200 South #43 November December 1973 Amtrak Roster by Dick Will p. 13
* Extra 2200 South #43 November December 1973 E8/E9 Roster and article by Dan Dover and Win Cuisinier (Preston Cook) pp. 14–24
== External links ==
* Illinois Railway Museum&#x27;s Equipment roster (type &quot;E9&quot; and search the collection)
* Andrew Toppan&#x27;s list
* The Union Pacific&#x27;s trio of re-engined E9s</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5323405" start="4" end="6" title="EMD E9" label="E9"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14" end="21" title="AAR wheel arrangement#A1A-A1A" label="A1A-A1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363599" start="22" end="37" title="passenger train" label="passenger train"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="46" end="63" title="diesel locomotive" label="diesel locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="73" end="87" title="General Motors Corporation" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q568501" start="94" end="117" title="Electro-Motive Diesel" label="Electro-Motive Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q968621" start="121" end="140" title="La Grange, Illinois" label="La Grange, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661002" start="196" end="202" title="A unit" label="A unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q282339" start="241" end="247" title="B unit" label="B unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q630089" start="327" end="337" title="EMD E-unit" label="EMD E-unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323404" start="368" end="370" title="EMD E8" label="E8"/>
<link wikidata="Q245272" start="623" end="626" title="V12 engine" label="V12"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="671" end="680" title="Electrical generator" label="generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392476" start="694" end="708" title="traction motor" label="traction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="809" end="812" title="Revolutions per minute" label="rpm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853499" start="867" end="878" title="Roots-type supercharger" label="Roots-blown"/>
<link wikidata="Q245657" start="940" end="944" title="Bore (engine)" label="bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q671554" start="948" end="954" title="Stroke (engine)" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="1427" end="1449" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071790" start="1481" end="1491" title="Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="1528" end="1553" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138091" start="1567" end="1581" title="Coast Daylight (SP)" label="Coast Daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q906130" start="1598" end="1612" title="Sunset Limited" label="Sunset Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323403" start="1657" end="1659" title="EMD E7" label="E7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323404" start="1664" end="1666" title="EMD E8" label="E8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1732" end="1739" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q498404" start="1896" end="1907" title="Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad" label="Rock Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="1912" end="1928" title="Illinois Central Railroad" label="Illinois Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016648" start="1969" end="1988" title="Burlington Northern Railroad" label="Burlington Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689297" start="2030" end="2044" title="Head-end power" label="Head-end power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070122" start="2049" end="2056" title="EMD 645" label="EMD 645"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754965" start="2105" end="2130" title="Chicago metropolitan area" label="Chicago metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="2154" end="2160" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605368" start="2326" end="2341" title="Steam generator (railroad)" label="steam generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689297" start="2346" end="2360" title="head end power" label="head end power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999618" start="2707" end="2730" title="Illinois Railway Museum" label="Illinois Railway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372676" start="2735" end="2750" title="Union, Illinois" label="Union, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="2830" end="2852" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q62279498" start="2950" end="2964" title="Union Pacific Heritage Fleet" label="heritage fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070122" start="3014" end="3025" title="EMD 645" label="EMD 16-645E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="3128" end="3144" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933981" start="3197" end="3229" title="California State Railroad Museum" label="California State Railroad Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="3277" end="3279" title="Canadian National Railway" label="CN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071790" start="3300" end="3332" title="Chicago, Burlington &amp;amp; Quincy" label="Chicago, Burlington &amp;amp; Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071804" start="3493" end="3507" title="Milwaukee Road" label="Milwaukee Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314567" start="3541" end="3559" title="Milwaukee Road 261" label="Friends of the 261"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586077" start="3623" end="3654" title="Wisconsin and Southern Railroad" label="Wisconsin and Southern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497873" start="3687" end="3713" title="List of GM-EMD locomotives" label="List of GM-EMD locomotives"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036581" start="3924" end="3940" title="Extra 2200 South" label="Extra 2200 South"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280222" wikidata="Q4851510" url="?curid=1280222" title="Ballard High School (Louisville, Kentucky)">
<text>Ballard High School is a high school in the eastern suburbs of Louisville, Kentucky, and is a part of the Jefferson County Public Schools (JCPS) school district. The school opened in the fall of 1968. The first students were in grades 7-9, and a grade was added each year as the building was expanded. This kept the school system from having to transfer upper class students from other high schools. The first class (consisting of the original freshmen) graduated in 1972. From its founding until the mid-1980s the principal was Patrick Crawford. Sandy Allen served from the mid-1980s to the 2003–2004 school year. The principal from 2004 through 2013 was Jim Jury. Staci Edelman was the 4th and shortest standing principal, from 2015 to 2017, with a term marked by racial tension and controversy. The current principal is Jason Neuss. The school offers grades 9-12.

Ballard participates in the Jefferson County Public Schools Advanced Program, a program designed to provide accelerated instruction for academically gifted and talented students. The school also offers over 20 advanced placement courses.

Approximately 20 percent of Ballard graduates transition to college.

==Campus==
The campus at Ballard High School consists of the main school building as well as the fine arts building. The main building is referred to by students and faculty as four separate buildings (North, South, East, and West), although all four sections are connected to each other by overhead walkways. The South and North buildings house the majority of the classrooms at Ballard High School as well as the North and South offices. The West building&#x27;s first floor is the home of Ballard&#x27;s famed art department and the 2nd floor houses the Library. The East building&#x27;s 1st floor contains the three cafeterias, the Ballard Bank, and the Ballard Student Guidance Center (College Counselor.) The East building second floor is the home of Ballard&#x27;s award-winning Music department as well as both the large and small gymnasiums.

The Sandy Allen Fine Arts Center is a performing arts facility on the Ballard High School campus. The . facility, which opened in 1998, seats 900. The fine arts center is used for musical and theatrical productions put on by the school&#x27;s fine arts department. In 1999, it was awarded the AIA KY Merit Award of Excellence for its design.

In Kentucky, care must be taken not to confuse this school with Ballard Memorial High School, the public high school that serves Ballard County in the far-western Jackson Purchase.

==Demographics ==
The following table represents the breakdown of students by race/ethnicity from the 2013–14 and 2022–21 school years.
== Choir, band, orchestra and speech ==
The Ballard choral program is one of the largest in the state of Kentucky and is the only fully graded-sequential program in Jefferson County. Each year a large number of students are accepted into the KMEA All-State Choirs and many go on to participate in university choral programs. The choir has received distinguished ratings at the regional KMEA Assessment every year since 1995 and has received national and international awards in the past. The choral program also has a strong club aspect with the school&#x27;s Madrigal Singers, made up of choral students, being known for putting on a Madrigal Feast each year for the community.

==Notable alumni==

* Jo Adell, first round pick in 2017 MLB Draft by Los Angeles Angels
* Ronnie Baker, third-fastest man in history for the 60 Meter Dash
* Dotsie Bausch, track cyclist and member of 2012 U.S. Olympic team
*Dontez Byrd, NFL football player
* Jerry Eaves, NBA basketball player for Utah Jazz
* Craig Greenberg (born 1973), businessman, lawyer, and politician; Mayor of Louisville
* Sid Griffin, musician and co-founder of The Long Ryders
* Earl Heyman, member of NFL Super Bowl champion New Orleans Saints, also CFL defensive lineman for Edmonton Eskimos
* Allan Houston, Kentucky Mr. Basketball (1989), All-SEC, All-American, and all-time leading scorer at University of Tennessee, NBA guard for Detroit Pistons and New York Knicks
* Jeremi Johnson, fullback for Cincinnati Bengals
* Shawn Kelley, Major League Baseball player for Washington Nationals, New York Yankees
* James Kim, 1989, CNET editor and victim of hypothermia
* Jeff Lamp, basketball player
* Kelan Martin, NBA basketball player for the Indiana Pacers
* DeVante Parker, first round pick in 2015 NFL draft, wide receiver for Miami Dolphins
* Bill Plaschke, sports columnist for &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; and panelist on ESPN&#x27;s Around the Horn
* Michael Saag, 1973, physician, infectious disease expert
* Jeremy Sowers, baseball player for Cleveland Indians and Manager of Major League Operations for the Tampa Bay Rays
* Wayne Kent Taylor, founder and former CEO of casual-dining chain Texas Roadhouse
* DeJuan Wheat, NBA basketball player

==See also==
* Public schools in Louisville, Kentucky

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4851510" start="0" end="19" title="Ballard High School (Louisville, Kentucky)" label="Ballard High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="25" end="36" title="high school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="63" end="73" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="75" end="83" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175438" start="106" end="144" title="Jefferson County Public Schools (Kentucky)" label="Jefferson County Public Schools (JCPS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43791171" start="235" end="236" title="Seventh grade" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="237" end="238" title="Ninth grade" label="9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="861" end="862" title="Ninth grade" label="9"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="863" end="865" title="Twelfth grade" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q379676" start="1078" end="1096" title="Advanced Placement" label="advanced placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="2322" end="2325" title="American Institute of Architects" label="AIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q491872" start="2501" end="2515" title="Ballard County, Kentucky" label="Ballard County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117337" start="2535" end="2551" title="Jackson Purchase" label="Jackson Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967786" start="3392" end="3400" title="Jo Adell" label="Jo Adell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128071" start="3422" end="3436" title="2017 MLB Draft" label="2017 MLB Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="3440" end="3458" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Los Angeles Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q29549979" start="3461" end="3473" title="Ronnie Baker (athlete)" label="Ronnie Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q246681" start="3512" end="3525" title="60 Meter Dash" label="60 Meter Dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q290670" start="3528" end="3541" title="Dotsie Bausch" label="Dotsie Bausch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="3571" end="3588" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 U.S. Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110191812" start="3595" end="3606" title="Dontez Byrd" label="Dontez Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="3608" end="3611" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808020" start="3630" end="3641" title="Jerry Eaves" label="Jerry Eaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="3643" end="3646" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q170649" start="3669" end="3678" title="Utah Jazz" label="Utah Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q115180671" start="3681" end="3696" title="Craig Greenberg" label="Craig Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507805" start="3769" end="3780" title="Sid Griffin" label="Sid Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325916" start="3827" end="3838" title="Earl Heyman" label="Earl Heyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="3874" end="3892" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="3899" end="3902" title="Canadian Football League" label="CFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285835" start="3925" end="3941" title="Edmonton Eskimos" label="Edmonton Eskimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q554027" start="3944" end="3957" title="Allan Houston" label="Allan Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="4045" end="4068" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="4084" end="4099" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="4104" end="4119" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180688" start="4122" end="4136" title="Jeremi Johnson" label="Jeremi Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="4151" end="4169" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481622" start="4172" end="4184" title="Shawn Kelley" label="Shawn Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="4219" end="4239" title="Washington Nationals" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="4241" end="4257" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137322" start="4260" end="4269" title="James Kim" label="James Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623156" start="4317" end="4326" title="Jeff Lamp" label="Jeff Lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q31887474" start="4348" end="4360" title="Kelan Martin" label="Kelan Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="4362" end="4365" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17580378" start="4409" end="4423" title="DeVante Parker" label="DeVante Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987467" start="4445" end="4459" title="2015 NFL draft" label="2015 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="4479" end="4493" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910509" start="4496" end="4509" title="Bill Plaschke" label="Bill Plaschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="4538" end="4555" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="4578" end="4582" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795624" start="4590" end="4605" title="Around the Horn" label="Around the Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834090" start="4608" end="4620" title="Michael Saag" label="Michael Saag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177348" start="4667" end="4680" title="Jeremy Sowers" label="Jeremy Sowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="4702" end="4719" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="4767" end="4781" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q106139139" start="4784" end="4801" title="Wayne Kent Taylor" label="Wayne Kent Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707945" start="4849" end="4864" title="Texas Roadhouse" label="Texas Roadhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703886" start="4867" end="4879" title="DeJuan Wheat" label="DeJuan Wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="4881" end="4884" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257971" start="4919" end="4957" title="Public schools in Louisville, Kentucky" label="Public schools in Louisville, Kentucky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280224" wikidata="Q204848" url="?curid=1280224" title="Mathieu Flamini">
<text>Mathieu Pierre Flamini (born 7 March 1984) is a French former professional footballer and biochemical entrepreneur. A midfielder, he played for French side Marseille, English sides Arsenal and Crystal Palace, Italian side Milan and Spanish side Getafe. At international level, he was capped by the France national team on three occasions.

Flamini is a co-founder of GF Biochemicals, the first company in the world able to mass-produce levulinic acid.

==Club career==
===Marseille===
Born in Marseille, Flamini was a youth team player for his local professional club Marseille. He made his debut for the senior team on 20 December 2003 in the 1–0 victory over Toulouse. He impressed the team as a hardworking midfield player and played 14 times for the club. However, it was his performances in Marseille’s UEFA Cup campaign that brought him to the attention of the football world, including the 2–0 semi-final victory over Newcastle United. He then started in the Final in Gothenburg, a match Spanish club Valencia won 2–0. Due to his age, however, Marseille was later unable to offer him a long-term professional contract.

===Arsenal===
On 23 July 2004, Flamini signed a professional contract for English club Arsenal, rejecting Marseille&#x27;s long-term senior contract offer to which he had already verbally agreed. Soon after the incident, then-Marseille manager José Anigo stated, &quot;This is a beautiful treason. He used me.&quot; Arsenal were eventually ordered by The Dispute Resolution Chamber of FIFA to pay Marseille a compensation fee of €480 000 for Flamini.

Flamini made his Arsenal debut in the 1–4 win at Everton on 15 August 2004. In his first season, he was typically used as a utility player, starting only nine games but used as a substitute in 12. The following season saw him filling in for a number of injured players, but again unable to command a first team place in his favoured position. He scored his first Arsenal goal on 11 May 2005 in a 7–0 home win against Everton, scoring the seventh goal, the team&#x27;s last-ever goal scored in their traditional red and white kit at Highbury.

In the 2006–07 season, Flamini scored the winning goal against Dinamo Zagreb in the qualifying stages of the UEFA Champions League. He also scored important goals against Chelsea, Blackburn Rovers and Liverpool in the Premier League. Despite these important goals, however, he remained unsatisfied with his &quot;utility player&quot; role at the club and in April 2007, he admitted that he would most likely be leaving Arsenal in the summer. Flamini, however, turned down a proposed £3m move to Birmingham City and remained with the team.

Flamini started in central midfield for Arsenal&#x27;s first match of the 2007–08 Premier League season due to the absence of Gilberto Silva and Abou Diaby. During Arsenal&#x27;s 2007–08 campaign, he struck up a strong partnership with Cesc Fàbregas, keeping Gilberto out of the starting XI with displays widely regarded by Arsenal fans as a vast improvement on those during his previous years at the club. Flamini enjoyed a generally good rapport with Arsenal&#x27;s fans, who provided him with his own song, an adaptation of the theme tune to British television programme &quot;The Sweeney&quot;. On 29 January 2008, he scored an extraordinary strike in Arsenal&#x27;s 3–0 win over Newcastle United in the Premier League. He played on 8 April 2008, a UEFA Champions League match in which Arsenal were knocked out by English rival Liverpool. After the match, he was reported injured and it proved to be his last match for Arsenal. In April 2009, he stated in an interview that he is still an Arsenal fan and that he has no hard feelings towards the club: &quot;Arsenal are in my heart and they will be in my heart for ever,&quot; he said. &quot;I will always be an Arsenal fan and leaving was not easy.&quot;

===Milan===

Flamini signed a contract with Italian club Milan on 5 May 2008. Flamini wore the number 84 on his shirt to represent his year of birth.

He made his Serie A debut on 30 August 2008 in a 2–1 loss to Bologna. Initially, Flamini did not enjoy the number of starts or appearances for the Italian team, and was regarded as a utility player at Milan. Nevertheless, injuries to other players and his consistent good form helped him to cement a starting place at San Siro. With Milan failing to find a stable defence and a lack of a fit, consistent and reliable right back, Gianluca Zambrotta was switched to the left flank to help Flamini develop as a tenacious right back. After stating that his preferred position is in the midfield, Milan re-deployed him as a defensive midfielder.

Flamini saw limited playing time towards the end of 2009–10 season due to the great form of club captain Massimo Ambrosini. In the following season, Flamini became an important asset of the team that would win its 18th &quot;scudetto&quot;, playing many games as starter and scoring two goals against Bari and Bologna, respectively. After playing as a rotation role in the 2010–11 season, he injured himself in a pre-season training session, suffering a serious knee injury which required an operation. Flamini spent the entire 2011–12 season out.

On 20 June 2012, it was confirmed by the club that he had left following the expiration of his contract, as they had ended negotiations with the player, and so he became a free agent. Two weeks later, Flamini and Adriano Galliani reached a new agreement for a one-year contract, with the Frenchman taking a significant cut in his wages. On 7 April 2013, Flamini scored his first goal of the season, and Milan&#x27;s second of the game, in a 2–2 draw against Fiorentina.

===Return to Arsenal===

Flamini began training with Arsenal midway in early August, with the reason to &quot;solely maintain fitness&quot; with a view to signing for a club in England. Immediately it sparked media attention with claims rising that he would soon sign for Arsenal, but these reports were shunned by many journalists, pointing out that many other ex-Arsenal players had returned to train with Arsenal, including club legends Robert Pires and Thierry Henry.

Flamini, however, did indeed sign for Arsenal on 29 August 2013 and became Arsenal&#x27;s second acquisition of the summer, after Yaya Sanogo. He made his returning debut on 1 September at Emirates Stadium against Tottenham Hotspur, coming on for Jack Wilshere and helping the team secure a 1–0 win. His performances after signing were lauded by both critics and fans alike, and had featured in all of Arsenal&#x27;s Premier League, Football League Cup and European games since, with many seeing his signing, and his combative style of play, as one of the key reasons for Arsenal&#x27;s excellent early season form. He scored his first goal in his second spell at Arsenal on 30 November, the second in a 0–3 away win at Cardiff City. He has also scored in a crucial 1–1 draw against Manchester City after a run of bad form from Arsenal, helping the club rejuvenate and achieve an eventual top four league finish. At the start of Arsenal&#x27;s 2013–14 FA Cup run, Flamini expressed his desire to win the Cup, having been left out of the squad when Arsenal won the 2005 FA Cup Final. Arsenal went on to win the tournament, though Flamini was an unused substitute in the Final, also remaining on the substitutes&#x27; bench when Arsenal repeated the feat, becoming FA Cup champions again in 2015.

On 23 September 2015, Flamini earned his first start of the 2015–16 season in the Football League Cup third round tie against Tottenham Hotspur. He scored both of Arsenal&#x27;s goals with a Man of the Match performance.

===Late career===
Flamini signed as a free-agent for Crystal Palace at the beginning of the 2016–17 season, and released by the club at the season&#x27;s end. He joined Getafe in February 2018, making eight appearances in La Liga before leaving the club at the end of the season. He rejoined Getafe in December 2018, and retired from playing in 2019.

==International career==
Flamini accepted his first call up to France by coach Raymond Domenech for a friendly against Argentina at the Stade de France on 7 February 2007 after Jérémy Toulalan was ruled out due to injury. He later made his international debut in a friendly against Morocco on 16 November 2007 as a substitute.

==Style of play==
A combative, energetic, tactically intelligent, and tenacious midfielder, according to Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger, Flamini was a player with a fantastic work rate, good ball-winning ability and great mentality; he could play anywhere across midfield, in the centre as a box-to-box or defensive midfielder, or on either flank as a cover at full-back.

==Business career==
Flamini is a partner of GF Biochemicals, a leading global producer of levulinic acid and derivatives. He has stated that “we founded GFBiochemicals with the ambition of finding sustainable alternatives to oil-based products”. Levulinic acid includes grass or woodchips, and can be used in plastics, solvents, fuels and the pharmaceutical industry. Levulinic acid has been identified by the U.S. Department of Energy as one of the 12 molecules that can help unlock a “greener” world.

In addition to GFBiochemicals’ established presence in the Netherlands and headquarters in Italy, Flamini has named China and Brazil as potential new markets for expansion.
In 2016, GFBiochemicals fully controls the Segetis, the leading producer of levulinic acid derivatives, in a move towards downstream integration. Segitis was previously owned by Sabic, DSM, and Khosla Ventures, among other entities, and has invested in R&amp;D over the past decade. In 2017, GFBiochemicals announced that it will build a cellulosic biorefinery in the US, in partnership with biotech company American Process.

Flamini was also part of the team that created BIOCIRCE (Bioeconomy in the Circular economy), Europe’s first master&#x27;s degree dedicated to promoting bioeconomy education. It was launched in collaboration with Italian bank Intesa Sanpaolo, Novamont (a producer of bioplastics), and the Universities of Naples, Torino, Milano Bicocca and Bologna.
In addition, Flamini co-founded The BioJournal the world’s first e-magazine devoted entirely to the bio world and eco-sustainability and managed by Italian environmental journalist Mario Bonaccorso.
Flamini is also part of the Environmental Excellence Committee for the candidature of Paris as the location for the 2024 Summer Olympics.

In 2015, Flamini was named one of People of the Year by the NME.

==Career statistics==
===Club===


===International===
Appearances and goals by national team and year

==Honours==
Marseille
* UEFA Cup runner-up: 2003–04

Arsenal
*FA Cup: 2004–05, 2013–14, 2014–15
* FA Community Shield: 2014
* UEFA Champions League runner-up: 2005–06

Milan
* Serie A: 2010–11
Individual
* Arsenal Player of the Season: 2007−08

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204848" start="0" end="22" title="Mathieu Flamini" label="Mathieu Pierre Flamini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="75" end="85" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="102" end="114" title="Entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="118" end="128" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q132885" start="156" end="165" title="Olympique de Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="181" end="188" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="193" end="207" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="222" end="227" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8806" start="245" end="251" title="Getafe CF" label="Getafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="298" end="318" title="France national football team" label="France national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915469" start="367" end="382" title="GF Biochemicals" label="GF Biochemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q903322" start="436" end="450" title="levulinic acid" label="levulinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="493" end="502" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q132885" start="568" end="577" title="Olympique de Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q19518" start="661" end="669" title="Toulouse FC" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="808" end="816" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q239660" start="897" end="919" title="2003–04 UEFA Cup" label="2–0 semi-final victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="925" end="941" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063968" start="966" end="971" title="2004 UEFA Cup Final" label="Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="975" end="985" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="1008" end="1016" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809333" start="1116" end="1124" title="Association football contracts" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="1214" end="1221" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q518454" start="1371" end="1381" title="José Anigo" label="José Anigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="1628" end="1635" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850936" start="1758" end="1768" title="Substitute (association football)" label="substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="2111" end="2119" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607349" start="2129" end="2143" title="2006–07 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q172803" start="2185" end="2198" title="NK Dinamo Zagreb" label="Dinamo Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q192736" start="2231" end="2252" title="2006–07 UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="2293" end="2300" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="2302" end="2318" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="2323" end="2332" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="2605" end="2606" title="pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="2617" end="2632" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q187376" start="2736" end="2758" title="2007–08 Premier League" label="2007–08 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q190142" start="2788" end="2802" title="Gilberto Silva" label="Gilberto Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943" start="2807" end="2817" title="Abou Diaby" label="Abou Diaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609883" start="2841" end="2857" title="2007–08 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2007–08 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17499" start="2898" end="2911" title="Cesc Fàbregas" label="Cesc Fàbregas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489759" start="3166" end="3170" title="football chant" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q257679" start="3242" end="3253" title="The Sweeney" label="The Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="3346" end="3362" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="3415" end="3436" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="3930" end="3935" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893" start="4085" end="4092" title="Bologna F.C. 1909" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q526301" start="4207" end="4221" title="utility player" label="utility player"/>
<link wikidata="Q133566" start="4342" end="4350" title="San Siro" label="San Siro"/>
<link wikidata="Q182907" start="4453" end="4471" title="Gianluca Zambrotta" label="Gianluca Zambrotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q263392" start="4718" end="4732" title="2009–10 A.C. Milan season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q188564" start="4771" end="4788" title="Massimo Ambrosini" label="Massimo Ambrosini"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718511" start="4891" end="4899" title="scudetto" label="scudetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641" start="4967" end="4971" title="A.S. Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893" start="4976" end="4983" title="Bologna F.C. 1909" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q919754" start="5039" end="5053" title="2010–11 A.C. Milan season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470350" start="5194" end="5208" title="2011–12 A.C. Milan season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809333" start="5310" end="5318" title="Association football contracts" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="5387" end="5397" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q264086" start="5428" end="5444" title="Adriano Galliani" label="Adriano Galliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052" start="5673" end="5683" title="ACF Fiorentina" label="Fiorentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q113156" start="6126" end="6138" title="Robert Pires" label="Robert Pires"/>
<link wikidata="Q45901" start="6143" end="6156" title="Thierry Henry" label="Thierry Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245840" start="6289" end="6300" title="Yaya Sanogo" label="Yaya Sanogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q163995" start="6348" end="6364" title="Emirates Stadium" label="Emirates Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="6373" end="6390" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15199" start="6406" end="6419" title="Jack Wilshere" label="Jack Wilshere"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="6576" end="6590" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="6592" end="6611" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="6616" end="6624" title="UEFA" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="6879" end="6891" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="6942" end="6957" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13502290" start="7103" end="7117" title="2013–14 FA Cup" label="2013–14 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="7223" end="7240" title="2005 FA Cup Final" label="2005 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323089" start="7328" end="7333" title="2014 FA Cup Final" label="Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987294" start="7422" end="7428" title="2014–15 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817594" start="7448" end="7452" title="2015 FA Cup Final" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870288" start="7515" end="7529" title="2015–16 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q20118529" start="7537" end="7556" title="2015–16 Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="7581" end="7598" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="7730" end="7744" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8806" start="7846" end="7852" title="Getafe CF" label="Getafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q24529775" start="7899" end="7906" title="2017–18 La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="8092" end="8098" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q192648" start="8108" end="8124" title="Raymond Domenech" label="Raymond Domenech"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="8131" end="8139" title="Exhibition game" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="8148" end="8157" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13205" start="8165" end="8180" title="Stade de France" label="Stade de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944" start="8206" end="8221" title="Jérémy Toulalan" label="Jérémy Toulalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207337" start="8311" end="8318" title="Morocco national football team" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850936" start="8344" end="8354" title="Substitute (association football)" label="substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="8437" end="8447" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47576" start="8478" end="8491" title="Arsène Wenger" label="Arsène Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8636" end="8642" title="Midfielder#Central midfielder" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8648" end="8658" title="Midfielder#Box-to-box midfielder" label="box-to-box"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8662" end="8682" title="Midfielder#Defensive midfielder" label="defensive midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8697" end="8702" title="Midfielder#Winger" label="flank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8717" end="8726" title="Defender (association football)#Full-back" label="full-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915469" start="8773" end="8788" title="GF Biochemicals" label="GF Biochemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q903322" start="8819" end="8833" title="levulinic acid" label="levulinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q497743" start="9908" end="9924" title="Circular economy" label="Circular economy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10363" end="10379" title="Mario Bonaccorso" label="Mario Bonaccorso"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="10497" end="10517" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="10714" end="10722" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q239660" start="10734" end="10741" title="2003–04 UEFA Cup" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="10752" end="10758" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386656" start="10760" end="10767" title="2004–05 FA Cup" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q13502290" start="10769" end="10776" title="2013–14 FA Cup" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987294" start="10778" end="10785" title="2014–15 FA Cup" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="10788" end="10807" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Community Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862607" start="10809" end="10813" title="2014 FA Community Shield" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="10816" end="10837" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q219705" start="10849" end="10856" title="2005–06 UEFA Champions League" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="10866" end="10873" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q276204" start="10875" end="10882" title="2010–11 Serie A" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q65068942" start="10896" end="10924" title="Arsenal Player of the Season" label="Arsenal Player of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609883" start="10926" end="10933" title="2007–08 Arsenal F.C. season" label="2007−08"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280227" wikidata="Q2006107" url="?curid=1280227" title="Vladimir Malakhov (ice hockey)">
<text>Vladimir Igorevich Malakhov (; born August 30, 1968) is a Russian former professional ice hockey player of the National Hockey League (NHL). He has also played in the Russian Super League. Currently, Malakhov is a Player Development coach for the New York Islanders.

Malakhov was drafted by the New York Islanders in the 1989 NHL Entry Draft, tenth round, 191st overall. He has played for Spartak Moscow, CSKA Moscow, New York Islanders, Montreal Canadiens, New Jersey Devils (winning the Stanley Cup in 2000), New York Rangers and the Philadelphia Flyers.

==Transactions==
*June 17, 1989 – New York Islanders&#x27; 10th round draft choice (191st overall) in the 1989 NHL Entry Draft.
*April 5, 1995 – Traded by the New York Islanders, along with Pierre Turgeon to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for Craig Darby, Kirk Muller and Mathieu Schneider.
*March 1, 2000 – Traded by the Montreal Canadiens to the New Jersey Devils in exchange for Sheldon Souray, Josh Dewolf and New Jersey&#x27;s 2001 2nd round draft choice.
*July 10, 2000 – Signed as a free agent with the New York Rangers
*March 8, 2004 – Traded by the New York Rangers to the Philadelphia Flyers in exchange for Rick Kozak and Philadelphia&#x27;s 2005 2nd round draft choice.
*August 5, 2005 – Signed as a free agent with the New Jersey Devils.
*October 1, 2006 – Traded by the New Jersey Devils, along with a conditional 1st round draft choice, to the San Jose Sharks in exchange for Alexander Korolyuk and Jim Fahey.

== Controversies ==
In 1999, Donald Trump’s lawyer, Michael Cohen, was given a check for $350,000 from Malakhov to be given as a loan to his friend, Yulia Fomina. The friend, however, swore in an affidavit that she never received the money and never even knew the check had been written until it was discovered years later in a Florida lawsuit.

During the 1999-2000 NHL season, Malakhov came under fire from Canadiens head coach Alain Vigneault, after it was revealed that he went on a ski trip to a resort in Mont-Tremblant, Quebec with his family during the All-Star break. This proved to be controversial with team management, as he hadn&#x27;t played with the team all season, as he was recovering from a knee injury. As he was in breach of his contract, Malakhov was suspended by the Canadiens as a result.

Malakhov further angered Canadiens fans and coaches after he returned to the lineup following his suspension, after he responded to jeers by waving obscene gestures at fans which prompted louder jeers. When asked about it, Malakhov lashed out at the team&#x27;s fans for his reaction. Malakhov, who was slated to become an unrestricted free agent at the end of the season, was traded to the New Jersey Devils weeks later.

On December 19, 2005, reports surfaced that Malakhov, who joined the Devils for the second time, had unexpectedly retired from the NHL. However, shortly after the story broke, his agent claimed that Malakhov had not retired and was taking a leave of absence &quot;to deal with some internal, personal and medical issues.&quot; This claim was disputed by Lou Lamoriello, Devils CEO, president, general manager, and interim head coach. Lamoriello rejected the request for a leave of absence and treated Malakhov&#x27;s absence as a retirement. This marked the end of Malakhov&#x27;s pro career.

== Achievements ==
* Olympic Bronze Medal (2002)
* 1999–2000 Stanley Cup (New Jersey)
* NHL All-Rookie Team (1993)
* Olympic Gold Medal (1992)

==Career statistics==
===Regular season and playoffs===
===International===
==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2006107" start="0" end="27" title="Vladimir Malakhov (ice hockey)" label="Vladimir Igorevich Malakhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="86" end="96" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="111" end="133" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q843898" start="167" end="187" title="Russian Super League" label="Russian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="247" end="265" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q949629" start="322" end="342" title="1989 NHL Entry Draft" label="1989 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q744753" start="390" end="404" title="HC Spartak Moscow" label="Spartak Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q752418" start="406" end="417" title="HC CSKA Moscow" label="CSKA Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="419" end="437" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="439" end="457" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="459" end="476" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="490" end="501" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="512" end="528" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="537" end="556" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="593" end="611" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q739886" start="749" end="763" title="Pierre Turgeon" label="Pierre Turgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="771" end="789" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138523" start="806" end="817" title="Craig Darby" label="Craig Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q935070" start="819" end="830" title="Kirk Muller" label="Kirk Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344150" start="835" end="852" title="Mathieu Schneider" label="Mathieu Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="911" end="928" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003440" start="945" end="959" title="Sheldon Souray" label="Sheldon Souray"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="1073" end="1089" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="1145" end="1164" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="1422" end="1437" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q620606" start="1454" end="1472" title="Alexander Korolyuk" label="Alexander Korolyuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689094" start="1477" end="1486" title="Jim Fahey" label="Jim Fahey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="1518" end="1530" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277395" start="1541" end="1554" title="Michael Cohen (lawyer)" label="Michael Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="1846" end="1866" title="1999-2000 NHL season" label="1999-2000 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303383" start="1919" end="1934" title="Alain Vigneault" label="Alain Vigneault"/>
<link wikidata="Q142082" start="2000" end="2022" title="Mont-Tremblant, Quebec" label="Mont-Tremblant, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="2050" end="2064" title="2000 NHL All-Star Game" label="All-Star break"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="2694" end="2711" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q126912" start="3080" end="3094" title="Lou Lamoriello" label="Lou Lamoriello"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="3103" end="3106" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255921" start="3108" end="3117" title="president (corporate title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210069" start="3119" end="3134" title="general manager" label="general manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246315" start="3148" end="3158" title="head coach" label="head coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960831" start="3408" end="3427" title="NHL All-Rookie Team" label="NHL All-Rookie Team"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280245" wikidata="Q3177348" url="?curid=1280245" title="Jeremy Sowers">
<text>Jeremy Bryan Sowers (born May 17, 1983) is an American former professional baseball pitcher and current executive. He played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Cleveland Indians from 2006 to 2009, and is currently the manager of major league operations for the Tampa Bay Rays.

Sowers grew up in Louisville, Kentucky, where he attended Ballard High School. His twin brother, Joshua Sowers, formerly played in the Toronto Blue Jays organization. Sowers&#x27; pitching repertoire featured a fastball with which he varied the speed between about 85 and 92 mph, a curveball, a slider that cuts in on right-handed batters, and a changeup.

==High school and college==
Sowers threw four no-hitters in high school. In both his junior and his senior year at Ballard, he led the team to consecutive appearances in the state high school championship game and was named All-State, All-Section, All-Region and County Player of the Year. As a senior, he was named to Baseball America&#x27;s National High School All-American team, Kentucky Gatorade Player of the Year, Mr. Kentucky Baseball and Kentucky High School Coaches Association Athlete of the Year. He was selected out of high school with the 20th overall pick in the 2001 Major League Baseball draft by the Cincinnati Reds.

Rather than sign with the Reds, Sowers chose to attend Vanderbilt University where he was named to the Louisville Slugger Freshman All-American team following the season and to their pre-season All-American team. He was second team All-SEC as both a sophomore and a junior and was also selected second team All-South Region by the American Baseball Coaches Association as a sophomore.

In 2002 and 2003, Sowers played collegiate summer baseball for the Wareham Gatemen of the Cape Cod Baseball League (CCBL). A league all-star in 2003, he posted a 1.20 ERA with 64 strikeouts in innings. Sowers was inducted into the CCBL Hall of Fame in 2017.

After his junior year at Vanderbilt, the Indians selected Sowers with the sixth overall pick in the 2004 Major League Baseball draft. He signed with them for a $2.475 million signing bonus, the third highest bonus in club history. During the 2005–06 offseason, he was granted permission by the club to return to Vanderbilt to complete his political science degree.

==Minor leagues==
Sowers split most of the season between the Indians&#x27; Single-A (Kinston) and Double-A (Akron) farm teams, compiling a combined 13–4 record and 2.40 ERA in 26 starts. He finished 2005 with a single start for the Triple-A Buffalo Bisons in which he was credited with a win. He was named the Indians Minor League Pitcher of the Year (Bob Feller Award) for the 2005 season. &quot;Baseball America&quot; named him the #2 prospect in the Indians organization, the #6 prospect in the Carolina League and the #8 prospect in the Eastern League. He was named the Indians&#x27; 2005 Minor League Player of the Year (receiving the &quot;Lou Boudreau Award&quot;).

In , Sowers was a non-roster invitee at the Indians&#x27; spring training, but did not make the club&#x27;s Opening Day roster, beginning the season with Buffalo. In 15 starts for the Bisons, he picked up where he left off in 2005, posting a sterling 9–1 record and 1.39 ERA. &quot;Baseball America&quot; named him the #3 prospect in the International League.

==Major leagues==
===Cleveland Indians===
Sowers&#x27; performance for Buffalo in 2006 earned him a promotion to Cleveland on June 20. He made his major league debut against the Reds on June 25, taking the loss after allowing four earned runs on five hits while recording three strikeouts and two walks in five innings pitched. He tossed his first major league complete game shutout on July 22, , against the Minnesota Twins, allowing four hits and one walk while striking out four. Six days later, he threw another shutout—this one a 1–0 game against the Seattle Mariners—becoming the first Indians rookie to throw back-to-back shutouts since Dick Tidrow in . In his next start on August 2 against the Boston Red Sox, he extended his scoreless inning streak to 22 before yielding an RBI double in the fifth inning. In 15 starts with Cleveland, Sowers finished 7–4 with a 3.57 ERA.

Sowers was projected to be the Indians&#x27; fourth starter in . When Cliff Lee was injured during spring training, Sowers was bumped up to the third spot in the starting rotation. However, he struggled through the first two months of the season (1–6, 6.93 ERA in 12 starts) and was demoted to Buffalo on June 10. On September 26, Sowers returned to start the second game of a doubleheader against the Mariners. He tossed five scoreless innings and was in line for the win after leaving the game, but earned a no-decision in Seattle&#x27;s 3–2 win.

In , Sowers competed for Cleveland&#x27;s fifth starter job in spring training along with Cliff Lee and Aaron Laffey. Lee won the job, sending Sowers back to Triple-A Buffalo. On April 26, Sowers was recalled from Buffalo to start against the New York Yankees. He allowed three earned runs in innings while striking out three in a no-decision. Sowers was optioned back to Buffalo following the game. He was recalled to make another spot start on May 16. After earning a second no-decision, he was again sent to Buffalo to make room on the roster for Michael Aubrey. On June 8, Sowers was recalled for a third time, and spent the remainder of the season in Cleveland&#x27;s starting rotation. In 22 starts, he was 4–9 with a 5.58 ERA.

During spring training in , Sowers again competed for the fifth starting pitcher slot; he was not selected and was sent down to the Triple-A Columbus Clippers. On May 7, he was recalled to the active roster. Sowers appeared in 23 games (22 starts) with the Indians, going 6–11 with an ERA of 5.25.

On March 31, 2010, after failing to secure a spot in the major league starting rotation, Sowers was sent outright to Triple-A Columbus and removed from the Indians&#x27; 40-man roster. Suffering with a sore shoulder for most of the season, Sowers was finally placed on the disabled list on August 14, 2010, and did not play for the remainder of the 2010 season. He became a free agent on November 2, 2011.

===Southern Maryland Blue Crabs===
After sitting out the 2012 season, Sowers signed with the Southern Maryland Blue Crabs of the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball on April 17, 2013. He announced his retirement on June 1. In eight starts, Sowers went 1–3 with a 4.30 ERA and 25 strikeouts in 44 innings pitched.

==Post-playing career==
After playing independent baseball, Sowers earned his MBA from the University of North Carolina. He worked corporate strategy for Walmart before returning to baseball with the Baltimore Orioles.

In 2016, Sowers was hired by the Tampa Bay Rays to work as an assistant in their baseball operations department. In February 2020, when James Click left the Rays to become the general manager of the Houston Astros, Sowers was promoted to manager of major league operations.

Sowers and his wife, Ashley, have two daughters.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3177348" start="0" end="19" title="Jeremy Sowers" label="Jeremy Bryan Sowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="75" end="83" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="84" end="91" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="128" end="149" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="164" end="181" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="265" end="279" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="300" end="320" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851510" start="340" end="359" title="Ballard High School (Louisville)" label="Ballard High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="365" end="369" title="twin" label="twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="417" end="434" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="493" end="501" title="fastball" label="fastball"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710733" start="564" end="573" title="curveball" label="curveball"/>
<link wikidata="Q608445" start="577" end="583" title="Slider (baseball)" label="slider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="600" end="612" title="right-handed" label="right-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061998" start="628" end="636" title="changeup" label="changeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="685" end="694" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q871928" start="958" end="974" title="Baseball America" label="Baseball America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598870" start="1217" end="1249" title="2001 Major League Baseball draft" label="2001 Major League Baseball draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="1257" end="1272" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="1330" end="1351" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618735" start="1378" end="1396" title="Louisville Slugger" label="Louisville Slugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="1469" end="1481" title="All-American" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="1511" end="1514" title="Southeastern Conference" label="SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610731" start="1693" end="1719" title="collegiate summer baseball" label="collegiate summer baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969273" start="1728" end="1743" title="Wareham Gatemen" label="Wareham Gatemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034674" start="1751" end="1775" title="Cape Cod Baseball League" label="Cape Cod Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1892" end="1909" title="Cape Cod Baseball League#Hall of Fame and Museum" label="CCBL Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603026" start="2020" end="2052" title="2004 Major League Baseball draft" label="2004 Major League Baseball draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742286" start="2372" end="2379" title="Kinston Indians" label="Kinston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825666" start="2395" end="2400" title="Akron Aeros" label="Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="2402" end="2411" title="farm team" label="farm team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="2456" end="2459" title="Earned run average" label="ERA"/>
<link wikidata="Q733939" start="2528" end="2542" title="Buffalo Bisons" label="Buffalo Bisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="2575" end="2578" title="Win (baseball)" label="win"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206676" start="2639" end="2649" title="Bob Feller" label="Bob Feller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135481" start="2785" end="2800" title="Carolina League" label="Carolina League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208358" start="2828" end="2842" title="Eastern League (1938–2020)" label="Eastern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q326781" start="2933" end="2945" title="Lou Boudreau" label="Lou Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738191" start="2979" end="2997" title="non-roster invitee" label="non-roster invitee"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="3019" end="3034" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q903416" start="3069" end="3080" title="Opening Day" label="Opening Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351657" start="3299" end="3319" title="International League" label="International League"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="3528" end="3532" title="Loss (baseball)" label="loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q906099" start="3553" end="3563" title="earned run" label="earned run"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="3573" end="3576" title="Hit (baseball)" label="hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="3600" end="3609" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="3619" end="3623" title="Base on balls" label="walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="3633" end="3648" title="innings pitched" label="innings pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132884" start="3683" end="3696" title="complete game" label="complete game"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="3697" end="3704" title="shutout" label="shutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="3731" end="3746" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="3878" end="3894" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273456" start="3966" end="3977" title="Dick Tidrow" label="Dick Tidrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="4025" end="4039" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="4106" end="4109" title="Run batted in" label="RBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194630" start="4110" end="4116" title="Double (baseball)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q978930" start="4275" end="4284" title="Cliff Lee" label="Cliff Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="4818" end="4833" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q546423" start="4859" end="4871" title="Aaron Laffey" label="Aaron Laffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="4998" end="5014" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308005" start="5305" end="5319" title="Michael Aubrey" label="Michael Aubrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="5622" end="5630" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465998" start="5631" end="5648" title="Columbus Clippers" label="Columbus Clippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q671648" start="6289" end="6317" title="Southern Maryland Blue Crabs" label="Southern Maryland Blue Crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869400" start="6325" end="6365" title="Atlantic League of Professional Baseball" label="Atlantic League of Professional Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="6606" end="6634" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="6669" end="6676" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="6715" end="6732" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="6768" end="6782" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q84324870" start="6871" end="6882" title="James Click" label="James Click"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="6934" end="6948" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280246" wikidata="Q2062631" url="?curid=1280246" title="Rick Mahorn">
<text>Derrick Allen Mahorn (born September 21, 1958) is an American former professional basketball player who played power forward and center for the Washington Bullets, Detroit Pistons, Philadelphia 76ers, and the New Jersey Nets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). He is currently a radio analyst for the Detroit Pistons, works as a co-host/analyst on SiriusXM NBA Radio, and during the summer is the head coach of the Aliens of the BIG3.

Mahorn had a reputation for physical play, and was a member of the late 1980s Detroit Pistons teams known as &quot;The Bad Boys&quot;, and with them won the 1989 NBA Championship. 
After his playing career, Mahorn would go on to be an assistant coach under Pistons teammate and head coach Bill Laimbeer with the Detroit Shock of the Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association (WNBA) and was part of two WNBA Championship teams (2006, 2008). He would eventually become head coach of the Shock, and later became head coach of Trilogy of the BIG3, leading the team to the inaugural BIG3 Championship in 2017, making Mahorn the only one in history to have won a championship in the NBA, WNBA, and BIG3.

==College career==
Mahorn played college basketball at Hampton University. He was a three-time NAIA All-American and owned 18 school records. He scored 2,418 points while playing for the Pirates, averaging 20.3 points per game.

==Playing career==
The turning point of Mahorn&#x27;s career was perhaps when he was traded by the Washington Bullets to the Detroit Pistons. He was unhappy with the trade initially and, as he claimed in a 2014 ESPN documentary, showed up to training camp overweight and out of shape. After teammate Bill Laimbeer took him aside and spoke with him about what he was brought there for, Mahorn acquiesced and became an integral part of the Pistons’ core. In 1989, Mahorn - dubbed by Piston announcer George Blaha the &quot;Baddest Bad Boy of them all&quot; - won his only NBA championship with the Pistons.

Two days after the Pistons won the championship in 1989, the NBA held an expansion draft for its two newest franchises, the Orlando Magic and Minnesota Timberwolves. League rules dictated that only eight players on each roster could be protected from being drafted by either team, and the Pistons elected not to extend that protection to Mahorn. As such, he was made the second pick in the expansion draft and the first to be taken by the Timberwolves; the Pistons were conducting their victory celebration in Detroit while the draft was happening and Mahorn was taken aside during the festivities, so he could be told. Pistons general manager Jack McCloskey tried to reacquire Mahorn to no avail, and years later Mahorn was shown to still be bothered by what transpired as the story of the expansion draft brought him to tears during the 2014 ESPN film about the team.

Mahorn, as it turned out, would never play for Minnesota. After refusing to report to the Timberwolves, he ended up being traded instead to the Philadelphia 76ers, where he teamed with superstar Charles Barkley (despite previous rivalries with him) to form the top-rebounding duo of &quot;Thump N&#x27; Bump&quot;. After two seasons, Mahorn signed a two-year contract with Il Messaggero Roma of the Italian Serie A in 1991. Teaming up with Dino Radja, Mahorn helped Roma win the 1992 FIBA Korać Cup. He started the 1992–1993 season with Roma but was kicked of the team in October after throwing a chair in a heated argument with head coach Paolo Di Fonzo. In November, he returned to the NBA and signed with the New Jersey Nets. He played with the Nets for four seasons, before returning to the Pistons in 1996–97 under coach Doug Collins. He retired after the 1999 season, after a second stint with the 76ers.

==Coaching==
===WNBA===
Mahorn then served as a color commentator for Pistons radio broadcasts, and as an assistant coach under former teammate Bill Laimbeer with the WNBA&#x27;s Detroit Shock. Laimbeer and Mahorn led the Shock to two WNBA titles (2006, 2008).

On July 22, 2008, at a Sparks-Shock game, Mahorn attempted to break up a brawl. When attempting to restrain Lisa Leslie, he put his left hand out and Leslie fell to the ground. Mahorn was suspended for two games.

On June 15, 2009, he became the head coach of the Shock, a position he held until the franchise moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma after the season. Shortly afterward, Mahorn continued his work with Pistons radio, doing color commentary alongside Mark Champion.

===BIG3===
In 2017, Mahorn became head coach of Trilogy, the eventual champion of the BIG3 basketball league&#x27;s inaugural season. His team&#x27;s players included Al Harrington and Kenyon Martin.

==NBA career statistics==

===Regular season===
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Washington
| 52 || 0 || 13.4 || .507 || .000 || .675 || 4.1 || 0.5 || 0.4 || .8 || 4.8
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Washington
| 80 || 80 || 33.3 || .507 || .000 || .632 || 8.8 || 1.9 || 0.7 || 1.7 || 12.2
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Washington
| 82 || 82 || 36.9 || .490 || .000 || .575 || 9.5 || 1.4 || 1.0 || 1.8 || 11.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Washington
| 82 || 82 || 32.9 || .507 || .000 || .651 || 9.0 || 1.6 || 0.8 || 1.5 || 9.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Washington
| 77 || 63 || 26.9 || .499 || .000 || .653 || 7.9 || 1.6 || 0.8 || 1.4 || 6.3
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 80 || 12 || 18.0 || .455 || .000 || .681 || 5.2 || 0.8 || 0.5 || .8 || 4.9
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 63 || 6 || 20.3 || .477 || .000 || .821 || 6.0 || 0.6 || 0.5 || .8 || 6.1
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 67 || 64 || 29.3 || .574 || .500 || .756 || 8.4 || 0.9 || 0.6 || .6 || 10.7
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;| †
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 72 || 61 || 24.9 || .517 || .000 || .748 || 6.9 || 0.8 || 0.6 || .9 || 7.3
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Philadelphia
| 75 || 66 || 30.3 || .497 || .222 || .715 || 7.6 || 1.3 || 0.6 || 1.4 || 10.8
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Philadelphia
| 80 || 74 || 30.5 || .467 || .000 || .788 || 7.8 || 1.5 || 1.0 || .7 || 8.9
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| New Jersey
| 74 || 9 || 14.6 || .472 || .333 || .800 || 3.8 || 0.4 || 0.3 || .4 || 3.9
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| New Jersey
| 28 || 0 || 8.1 || .489 || .000 || .650 || 1.9 || 0.2 || 0.1 || .2 || 2.1
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| New Jersey
| 58 || 7 || 10.9 || .523 || .333 || .796 || 2.8 || 0.4 || 0.2 || .2 || 3.4
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| New Jersey
| 50 || 0 || 9.0 || .352 || .000 || .723 || 2.2 || 0.3 || 0.3 || .3 || 2.4
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 22 || 7 || 9.9 || .370 || .000 || .727 || 2.4 || 0.3 || 0.2 || .1 || 2.5
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 59 || 0 || 12.0 || .457 || .000 || .676 || 3.3 || 0.3 || 0.2 || .1 || 2.4
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Philadelphia
| 16 || 0 || 7.9 || .278 || .000 || .375 || 1.4 || 0.1 || 0.3 || .1 || 0.8
|-class=&quot;sortbottom&quot;
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=&quot;2&quot; | Career
| 1117 || 613 || 23.1 || .493 || .132 || .704 || 6.2 || 1.0 || 0.6 || .9 || 6.9
===Playoffs===
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1982
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Washington
| 7 || 7 || 34.6 || .438 || .000 || .714 || 8.7 || 1.9 || 1.4 || .7 || 10.6
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1984
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Washington
| 4 || 4 || 38.5 || .600 || .000 || .800 || 10.8 || 1.5 || 0.3 || 1.5 || 9.5
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1985
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Washington
| 4 || 1 || 10.3 || .500 || .000 || 1.000 || 1.8 || 0.0 || 0.0 || .8 || 3.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1986
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 4 || 0 || 15.3 || .385 || .000 || 1.000 || 3.0 || 0.0 || 0.3 || .0 || 3.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1987
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 15 || 15 || 32.2 || .541 || .000 || .800 || 9.5 || 0.3 || 0.4 || .7 || 9.7
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1988
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 23 || 21 || 17.8 || .344 || .000 || .684 || 3.9 || 0.6 || 0.2 || .4 || 3.3
| style=&quot;text-align:left;background:#afe6ba;&quot;| 1989†
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 17 || 17 || 21.2 || .580 || .000 || .654 || 5.1 || 0.4 || 0.5 || .8 || 5.7
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1990
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Philadelphia
| 10 || 10 || 34.2 || .430 || .000 || .769 || 7.0 || 1.0 || 0.7 || .8 || 9.4
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1991
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Philadelphia
| 8 || 8 || 26.0 || .556 || .000 || .786 || 5.3 || 1.8 || 0.3 || .5 || 6.4
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1993
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| New Jersey
| 4 || 2 || 15.8 || .400 || .000 || .000 || 3.3 || 0.8 || 0.0 || .5 || 2.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1994
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| New Jersey
| 3 || 0 || 6.3 || .000 || .000 || .000 || 1.3 || 0.0 || 0.0 || .3 || 0.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1997
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Detroit
| 2 || 1 || 9.0 || .000 || .000 || .000 || 0.5 || 0.0 || 0.0 || .0 || 0.0
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 1999
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| Philadelphia
| 5 || 0 || 5.8 || .333 || .000 || .500 || 1.6 || 0.2 || 0.2 || .0 || 1.6
|-class=&quot;sortbottom&quot;
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=&quot;2&quot; | Career
| 106 || 86 || 22.9 || .427 || .000 || .750 || 5.5 || 0.7 || 0.4 || .6 || 5.8
== Personal life ==
Mahorn played himself in a 2017 episode of &quot;Detroiters&quot; titled &quot;Quick Rick Mahorn of Dearborn.&quot;

==Awards and honors==
*1989 NBA Champion (as a player with the Detroit Pistons)
*Two-time WNBA Champion (2006, 2008 - as an assistant coach with the Detroit Shock)
*2017 BIG3 Champion (as head coach of Trilogy)
*Virginia Sports Hall of Fame (class of 2018)

==See also==
* List of NBA career personal fouls leaders

==References==
==External links==
*WNBA.com profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2062631" start="0" end="20" title="Rick Mahorn" label="Derrick Allen Mahorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="82" end="92" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q462471" start="111" end="124" title="Power forward (basketball)" label="power forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q222052" start="129" end="135" title="Center (basketball)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="144" end="162" title="Washington Bullets" label="Washington Bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="164" end="179" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q138089" start="181" end="199" title="Philadelphia 76ers" label="Philadelphia 76ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="209" end="224" title="New Jersey Nets" label="New Jersey Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="232" end="263" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="289" end="302" title="Color commentator" label="radio analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="311" end="326" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530391" start="358" end="376" title="SiriusXM NBA Radio" label="SiriusXM NBA Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246315" start="407" end="417" title="head coach" label="head coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q60684111" start="425" end="431" title="Aliens (basketball)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229711" start="439" end="443" title="BIG3" label="BIG3"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="524" end="539" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q842375" start="608" end="624" title="NBA Championship" label="NBA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q705206" start="735" end="748" title="Bill Laimbeer" label="Bill Laimbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175515" start="758" end="771" title="Detroit Shock" label="Detroit Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="779" end="823" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262883" start="851" end="868" title="WNBA Championship" label="WNBA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608670" start="972" end="979" title="Trilogy (basketball)" label="Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229711" start="987" end="991" title="BIG3" label="BIG3"/>
<link wikidata="Q30636503" start="1048" end="1052" title="2017 Big3 season" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="1181" end="1199" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797817" start="1203" end="1221" title="Hampton University" label="Hampton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="1243" end="1247" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="1248" end="1260" title="All-American" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="1502" end="1517" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q705206" start="1677" end="1690" title="Bill Laimbeer" label="Bill Laimbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537032" start="1875" end="1887" title="George Blaha" label="George Blaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585299" start="1947" end="1963" title="1989 NBA Finals" label="NBA championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622883" start="2056" end="2071" title="1989 NBA Expansion Draft" label="expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q161337" start="2107" end="2120" title="Orlando Magic" label="Orlando Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170558" start="2125" end="2147" title="Minnesota Timberwolves" label="Minnesota Timberwolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210069" start="2611" end="2626" title="general manager" label="general manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q446086" start="2627" end="2641" title="Jack McCloskey" label="Jack McCloskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q138089" start="2998" end="3016" title="Philadelphia 76ers" label="Philadelphia 76ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192707" start="3049" end="3064" title="Charles Barkley" label="Charles Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q36462" start="3227" end="3245" title="Virtus Roma" label="Il Messaggero Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829440" start="3261" end="3268" title="Serie A (basketball)" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q142214" start="3294" end="3304" title="Dino Radja" label="Dino Radja"/>
<link wikidata="Q716483" start="3333" end="3352" title="1991–92 FIBA Korać Cup" label="1992 FIBA Korać Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3494" end="3508" title="Paolo Di Fonzo" label="Paolo Di Fonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="3566" end="3581" title="New Jersey Nets" label="New Jersey Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q919954" start="3680" end="3692" title="Doug Collins (basketball)" label="Doug Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q705206" start="3910" end="3923" title="Bill Laimbeer" label="Bill Laimbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="3933" end="3937" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175515" start="3945" end="3958" title="Detroit Shock" label="Detroit Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950845" start="4101" end="4106" title="Sparks–Shock brawl" label="brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q257980" start="4136" end="4147" title="Lisa Leslie" label="Lisa Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="4347" end="4362" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767041" start="4479" end="4492" title="Mark Champion" label="Mark Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608670" start="4543" end="4550" title="Trilogy (basketball)" label="Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229711" start="4581" end="4585" title="BIG3" label="BIG3"/>
<link wikidata="Q461574" start="4662" end="4675" title="Al Harrington" label="Al Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q362214" start="4680" end="4693" title="Kenyon Martin" label="Kenyon Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018353" start="4821" end="4831" title="1980–81 Washington Bullets season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q767154" start="4985" end="4995" title="1981–82 Washington Bullets season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018356" start="5152" end="5162" title="1982–83 Washington Bullets season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018357" start="5319" end="5329" title="1983–84 Washington Bullets season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018358" start="5485" end="5495" title="1984–85 Washington Bullets season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706192" start="5651" end="5658" title="1985–86 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706193" start="5813" end="5820" title="1986–87 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706194" start="5974" end="5981" title="1987–88 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q684393" start="6157" end="6164" title="1988–89 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901379" start="6319" end="6331" title="1989–90 Philadelphia 76ers season" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901380" start="6488" end="6500" title="1990–91 Philadelphia 76ers season" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948614" start="6655" end="6665" title="1992–93 New Jersey Nets season" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875265" start="6819" end="6829" title="1993–94 New Jersey Nets season" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875266" start="6982" end="6992" title="1994–95 New Jersey Nets season" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875267" start="7146" end="7156" title="1995–96 New Jersey Nets season" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706200" start="7309" end="7316" title="1996–97 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706201" start="7469" end="7476" title="1997–98 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901389" start="7630" end="7642" title="1998–99 Philadelphia 76ers season" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326408" start="7952" end="7956" title="1982 NBA Playoffs" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q767154" start="7995" end="8005" title="1981–82 Washington Bullets season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564539" start="8120" end="8124" title="1984 NBA Playoffs" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018357" start="8163" end="8173" title="1983–84 Washington Bullets season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565152" start="8289" end="8293" title="1985 NBA Playoffs" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018358" start="8332" end="8342" title="1984–85 Washington Bullets season" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565107" start="8457" end="8461" title="1986 NBA Playoffs" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706192" start="8500" end="8507" title="1985–86 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564555" start="8622" end="8626" title="1987 NBA Playoffs" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706193" start="8665" end="8672" title="1986–87 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564521" start="8788" end="8792" title="1988 NBA Playoffs" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706194" start="8831" end="8838" title="1987–88 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565095" start="8973" end="8977" title="1989 NBA Playoffs" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q684393" start="9017" end="9024" title="1988–89 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555387" start="9140" end="9144" title="1990 NBA Playoffs" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901379" start="9183" end="9195" title="1989–90 Philadelphia 76ers season" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724216" start="9311" end="9315" title="1991 NBA Playoffs" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901380" start="9354" end="9366" title="1990–91 Philadelphia 76ers season" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564217" start="9480" end="9484" title="1993 NBA Playoffs" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948614" start="9523" end="9533" title="1992–93 New Jersey Nets season" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564153" start="9647" end="9651" title="1994 NBA Playoffs" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875265" start="9690" end="9700" title="1993–94 New Jersey Nets season" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556705" start="9813" end="9817" title="1997 NBA Playoffs" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706200" start="9856" end="9863" title="1996–97 Detroit Pistons season" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555430" start="9976" end="9980" title="1999 NBA Playoffs" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901389" start="10019" end="10031" title="1998–99 Philadelphia 76ers season" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30104361" start="10354" end="10364" title="Detroiters (TV series)" label="Detroiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626167" start="10450" end="10462" title="NBA Champion" label="NBA Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="10485" end="10500" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175515" start="10571" end="10584" title="Detroit Shock" label="Detroit Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229711" start="10592" end="10596" title="BIG3" label="BIG3"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608670" start="10624" end="10631" title="Trilogy (basketball)" label="Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934524" start="10634" end="10662" title="Virginia Sports Hall of Fame" label="Virginia Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q15073191" start="10695" end="10736" title="List of NBA career personal fouls leaders" label="List of NBA career personal fouls leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280249" wikidata="Q2464958" url="?curid=1280249" title="Mstsislaw Voivodeship">
<text>Mstislaw Voivodeship or Mścisław Voivodeship (; ; ; ) was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (from 1569 the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth), since the 15th century until the Partitions of Poland in 1795.

Zygmunt Gloger in his monumental book Historical Geography of the Lands of Old Poland provides this description of the Mscislaw Voivodeship:

“Mscislaw (Mscislavia), which lies at the Wiechra river, was probably founded in the late 13th century, and named after Duke of Smolensk, Mstislav Romanovich the Old. In the 14th century, it was captured by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, and for a while remained a fief (...) By 1538, the Duchy of Mscislaw was already governed by a starosta, who during the reign of King Zygmunt August was renamed into a voivode, while the Duchy was turned into a voivodeship. First Voivode of Mscislaw was Jerzy Oscik, Traby coat of arms.

The Voivodeship of Mscislaw was not divided into counties (see powiat). Its sejmiks took place at Mscislaw, where two deputies to the Sejm were elected, and two to the Lithuanian Tribunal (...) It ceased to exist in 1772, when after the first partition of Poland, Mscislaw Voivodeship was annexed by the Russian Empire&quot;.

Voivodeship Governor (Wojewoda) seat: 
* Mścisław

== Voivodes ==
* Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz (1621-1626) 
* Mikołaj Kiszka (1626-1636)
* Krzysztof Kiszka (1636–1639)
* Józef Korsak (1639–1643)
* Mikołaj Abramowicz (1643-1647)
* Fryderyk Sapieha (VIII 1647–1650)

== Administrative division ==
* the voivodeship was not divided into counties

== References ==

* Mscislaw Voivodeship, description by Zygmunt Gloger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2464958" start="0" end="20" title="Mstsislaw Voivodeship" label="Mstislaw Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464958" start="24" end="44" title="Mstsislaw Voivodeship" label="Mścisław Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="120" end="144" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="160" end="190" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="226" end="246" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q245332" start="257" end="271" title="Zygmunt Gloger" label="Zygmunt Gloger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="527" end="535" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q497107" start="537" end="564" title="Mstislav Romanovich the Old" label="Mstislav Romanovich the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="610" end="634" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="663" end="667" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231714" start="731" end="739" title="starosta" label="starosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q54058" start="770" end="784" title="Zygmunt August" label="Zygmunt August"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="804" end="811" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639312" start="847" end="858" title="voivodeship" label="voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q257258" start="903" end="921" title="Traby coat of arms" label="Traby coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="987" end="993" title="powiat" label="powiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="1000" end="1006" title="sejmik" label="sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="1058" end="1062" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="1161" end="1186" title="Partitions of Poland" label="first partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1228" end="1242" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="1273" end="1281" title="Wojewoda" label="Wojewoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q744167" start="1292" end="1300" title="Mstsislaw" label="Mścisław"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984149" start="1319" end="1344" title="Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz" label="Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1360" end="1374" title="Mikołaj Kiszka" label="Mikołaj Kiszka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1389" end="1405" title="Krzysztof Kiszka" label="Krzysztof Kiszka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583019" start="1420" end="1432" title="Józef Korsak" label="Józef Korsak"/>
<link wikidata="Q635015" start="1447" end="1465" title="Mikołaj Abramowicz" label="Mikołaj Abramowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76262" start="1480" end="1496" title="Fryderyk Sapieha" label="Fryderyk Sapieha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280251" wikidata="Q2454841" url="?curid=1280251" title="Smolensk Voivodeship">
<text>Smolensk Voivodeship (; ; ; ; ) was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and later the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

==History==

The territory of Smolensk was part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania since 1404, but the voivodeship was established only in 1508. Just six years later, in 1514, it was lost to the Grand Duchy of Moscow during the Muscovite–Lithuanian Wars. The voivodeship was recaptured by the Commonwealth in 1611 during the Polish–Muscovite War (1605–18) and lost again in 1654 during the Russo-Polish War (1654–67). Even when the territory was under Russian control, Poland and Lithuania claimed it as a titular voivodeship. The capital of the voivodeship, and the seat of its governor (voivode), was in Smolensk. It was subdivided into two powiats: Smolensk and Starodub.

Zygmunt Gloger in his monumental book Historical Geography of the Lands of Old Poland provides this description of the Smolensk Voivodeship:
In the 9th century, Smolensk was the main center of the Krivichs. In the 11th century, it became the capital of a separate duchy, the Principality of Smolensk, which in the 14th century was conquered by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. In 1404, it became a permanent part of Lithuania, and later on, the Principality was turned into a Voivodeship. In 1514, Smolensk was captured by Muscovy, which was confirmed by a 1522 treaty. For the next 89 years Smolensk belonged to Muscovy. It was recovered by King Sigismund III of Poland in 1611, but Smolensk Voivodeship as part of the Commonwealth existed only for 56 years. In 1654 it was recaptured by the Russians, which was confirmed by the Truce of Andrusovo in 1667.

Smolensk Voivodeship had three senators: the Bishop, the Voivode, and the Castellan of Smolensk. It was divided into two counties: those of Smolensk and Starodub. After its final annexation by Russia, it continued to exist as a voivodeship in exile, with sejmiks taking place at a Bernardine Church in Vilnius. Furthermore, the title of Bishop of Smolensk remained in use. The last titular Bishops before the partitions of Poland were Adam Naruszewicz, and Tymoteusz Gorzeński.

==See also==
* Prince of Smolensk

==References==

* Smolensk Voivodeship, description by Zygmunt Gloger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2454841" start="0" end="20" title="Smolensk Voivodeship" label="Smolensk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="98" end="122" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="137" end="167" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="362" end="383" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Grand Duchy of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567698" start="395" end="420" title="Muscovite–Lithuanian Wars" label="Muscovite–Lithuanian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044829" start="492" end="522" title="Polish–Muscovite War (1605–18)" label="Polish–Muscovite War (1605–18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q631991" start="557" end="583" title="Russo-Polish War (1654–67)" label="Russo-Polish War (1654–67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="756" end="763" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="773" end="781" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="810" end="816" title="powiat" label="powiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q196483" start="832" end="840" title="Starodub" label="Starodub"/>
<link wikidata="Q245332" start="843" end="857" title="Zygmunt Gloger" label="Zygmunt Gloger"/>
<link wikidata="Q48287" start="1040" end="1048" title="Krivichs" label="Krivichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483495" start="1118" end="1142" title="Principality of Smolensk" label="Principality of Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="1191" end="1215" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="1363" end="1370" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Muscovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="1487" end="1510" title="Sigismund III of Poland" label="Sigismund III of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q721168" start="1670" end="1688" title="Truce of Andrusovo" label="Truce of Andrusovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q196483" start="1852" end="1860" title="Starodub" label="Starodub"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="1892" end="1898" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="1954" end="1960" title="sejmik" label="sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="2001" end="2008" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q350504" start="2134" end="2150" title="Adam Naruszewicz" label="Adam Naruszewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q962870" start="2156" end="2175" title="Tymoteusz Paweł Gorzeński" label="Tymoteusz Gorzeński"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472214" start="2193" end="2211" title="Prince of Smolensk" label="Prince of Smolensk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280252" wikidata="Q502310" url="?curid=1280252" title="Andrei Kovalenko">
<text>Andrei Nikolaevich Kovalenko (; born 7 June 1970) is a Russian former professional ice hockey forward. He played in the National Hockey League with the Quebec Nordiques, Colorado Avalanche, Montreal Canadiens, Edmonton Oilers, Philadelphia Flyers, Carolina Hurricanes and the Boston Bruins. He is currently the chairman of the Kontinental Hockey League players association (KHL PA).

He is the father of NHL Player Nikolai Kovalenko, who currently plays for the San Jose Sharks.
==Playing career==
Nicknamed &quot;The Tank&quot; by his teammates because of his immovable presence from the goal crease, Kovalenko was drafted 148th overall in the 1990 NHL Entry Draft by the Quebec Nordiques while playing in Russia for HC CSKA Moscow.

Kovalenko was traded from the Colorado Avalanche to the Montreal Canadiens with Jocelyn Thibault and Martin Ručinský for Patrick Roy and Mike Keane. In 1996, he scored the final goal in the history of the Montreal Forum, the fourth in a 4–1 victory over the Dallas Stars.

In 1999, Kovalenko scored the first goal in the history of the RBC Center as a member of the Carolina Hurricanes in a 4–2 loss to the New Jersey Devils.

Kovalenko last played in the National Hockey League in 2000–01 with the Boston Bruins, and finished his career playing in the Russian Super League for Lokomotiv Yaroslavl, Avangard Omsk, and Severstal Cherepovets.

Kovalenko is the father of Nikolai Kovalenko, who was drafted by the Colorado Avalanche in the 2018 NHL Entry Draft.

==Member of parliament==
In September 2020 Kovalenko was elected deputy of the State Duma, Russia&#x27;s lower house, at a special election in Yaroslavl constituency No. 194, defeating long-time governor of Yaroslavl Oblast Anatoly Lisitsyn from left-leaning A Just Russia. Kovalenko was a candidate of ruling United Russia. A year later, in the 2021 elections Lisitsyn won the constituency with 36.5% of the vote, while Kovalenko received 27.3%.

==Career statistics==
===Regular season and playoffs===
===International===
==Awards and achievements==
*Soviet championship: 1989 (with CSKA)
*European Ice Hockey Cup: 1990 (with CSKA)
*Russian championship: 2002 (with Lokomotiv Yaroslavl)
*Russian championship: 2003 (with Lokomotiv Yaroslavl)
*European Champions Cup: 2005 (with Avangard)
*Pajulahti Cup: 2006 (with Severstal)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q502310" start="0" end="28" title="Andrei Kovalenko" label="Andrei Nikolaevich Kovalenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="55" end="62" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="83" end="93" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="120" end="142" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="152" end="168" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="170" end="188" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="190" end="208" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="210" end="225" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="227" end="246" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="248" end="267" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="276" end="289" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q190001" start="327" end="352" title="Kontinental Hockey League" label="Kontinental Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q60048704" start="415" end="432" title="Nikolai Kovalenko" label="Nikolai Kovalenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="462" end="477" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774014" start="645" end="665" title="1990 NHL Entry Draft" label="1990 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="673" end="689" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q752418" start="718" end="732" title="HC CSKA Moscow" label="HC CSKA Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="765" end="783" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="791" end="809" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359610" start="815" end="831" title="Jocelyn Thibault" label="Jocelyn Thibault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904899" start="836" end="851" title="Martin Ručinský" label="Martin Ručinský"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="856" end="867" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923505" start="872" end="882" title="Mike Keane" label="Mike Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q367272" start="940" end="954" title="Montreal Forum" label="Montreal Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="993" end="1005" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q39177" start="1071" end="1081" title="RBC Center" label="RBC Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="1101" end="1120" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="1142" end="1159" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1191" end="1213" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="1217" end="1224" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="1234" end="1247" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q843898" start="1288" end="1308" title="Russian Super League" label="Russian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q275825" start="1313" end="1332" title="Lokomotiv Yaroslavl" label="Lokomotiv Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q787888" start="1334" end="1347" title="Avangard Omsk" label="Avangard Omsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422185" start="1353" end="1374" title="Severstal Cherepovets" label="Severstal Cherepovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q60048704" start="1404" end="1421" title="Nikolai Kovalenko" label="Nikolai Kovalenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="1446" end="1464" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897149" start="1472" end="1492" title="2018 NHL Entry Draft" label="2018 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1552" end="1559" title="By-elections to the 7th Russian State Duma#Yaroslavl" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="1574" end="1584" title="State Duma of Russia" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q109283711" start="1638" end="1660" title="Yaroslavl constituency" label="Yaroslavl constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q55663399" start="1690" end="1718" title="governor of Yaroslavl Oblast" label="governor of Yaroslavl Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q840698" start="1719" end="1735" title="Anatoly Lisitsyn" label="Anatoly Lisitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q210692" start="1754" end="1767" title="A Just Russia" label="A Just Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="1805" end="1818" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30244784" start="1841" end="1855" title="2021 Russian legislative election" label="2021 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q843898" start="2048" end="2067" title="Russian Super League" label="Soviet championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500573" start="2087" end="2110" title="IIHF European Champions Cup" label="European Ice Hockey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q843898" start="2130" end="2150" title="Russian Super League" label="Russian championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q843898" start="2185" end="2205" title="Russian Super League" label="Russian championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="2240" end="2262" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125328" start="2286" end="2299" title="Pajulahti Cup" label="Pajulahti Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280255" wikidata="Q550403" url="?curid=1280255" title="Vitebsk Voivodeship">
<text>Vitebsk Voivodeship (; ; ) was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (from 1569 Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth) from the 15th century until the partitions of Poland in 1795.

==History==
Zygmunt Gloger in his monumental book Historical Geography of the Lands of Old Poland provides this description of the Witebsk Voivodeship:

“Witebsk (in Latin Vitebscum), located on the Dvina river, was one of main gord of the Principality of Polotsk. In the second half of the 12th century, it emerged as a local center of government. Conquered by one of the sons of Mindaugas in ca. 1239, it became a permanent part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania since the times of Gediminas. In ca. 1342 Witebsk was already the seat of a starosta, who in the early 16th century were named voivodes. First voivode of Witebsk was Jerzy Chlebowicz (...)

The Dvina river divided the voivodeship into two parts, of which northern one was smaller. Since the town of Witebsk was located in the middle of a sparsely populated province, at first the voivodeship was not divided into counties. Later on, however, the County of Orsza, which had been part of Smolensk Voivodeship, was attached to Witebsk Voivodeship (...) Witebsk Voivodeship remained in the Commonwealth until September 1772, when most of it was annexed by the Russian Empire. What remained was southern part of the Land of Orsza, which belonged to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania until 1793 (...)

Starostas resided at Witebsk and Orsza, while local sejmiks took place in both towns. Altogether, Witebsk Voivodeship elected four deputies to the Sejm - two from each county. After the first partition, the sejmiks were moved to the town of Cholopienicze, located in Minsk Voivodeship”.

==Administration==
Voivodeship Governor (Wojewoda) seat: 
* Vitebsk

Voivodes: Samuel Sanguszko (1629- XI 1638), Paweł Jan Sapieha (15 VIII 1646-)

Administrative division:
* since the Truce of Andrusovo (1667), Vitebsk Voivodeship consisted of two counties (powiats): Witebsk and Orsza. The first was lost to the Russian Empire in 1772, and only a little part of the second belonged to the Commonwealth until 1793.

== Sources ==
* Witebsk Voivodeship, description by Zygmunt Gloger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q550403" start="0" end="19" title="Vitebsk Voivodeship" label="Vitebsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="93" end="117" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="129" end="159" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="193" end="213" title="partitions of Poland" label="partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q245332" start="236" end="250" title="Zygmunt Gloger" label="Zygmunt Gloger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="423" end="428" title="Daugava River" label="Dvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q88598" start="452" end="456" title="Gord (archaeology)" label="gord"/>
<link wikidata="Q517333" start="464" end="487" title="Principality of Polotsk" label="Principality of Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q242436" start="605" end="614" title="Mindaugas" label="Mindaugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="662" end="686" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q244852" start="706" end="715" title="Gediminas" label="Gediminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231714" start="763" end="771" title="starosta" label="starosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="814" end="821" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="881" end="886" title="Daugava River" label="Dvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q208609" start="1143" end="1148" title="Orsha" label="Orsza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454841" start="1173" end="1193" title="Smolensk Voivodeship" label="Smolensk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1343" end="1357" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231714" start="1478" end="1486" title="Starosta" label="Starosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="1530" end="1536" title="sejmik" label="sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="1625" end="1629" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q782119" start="1745" end="1762" title="Minsk Voivodeship" label="Minsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="1807" end="1815" title="Wojewoda" label="Wojewoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q102217" start="1826" end="1833" title="Vitebsk" label="Vitebsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646469" start="1845" end="1861" title="Samuel Sanguszko" label="Samuel Sanguszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991218" start="1879" end="1896" title="Paweł Jan Sapieha" label="Paweł Jan Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="Q721168" start="1951" end="1969" title="Truce of Andrusovo" label="Truce of Andrusovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="2025" end="2031" title="powiat" label="powiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2080" end="2094" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280257" wikidata="Q2347987" url="?curid=1280257" title="Polotsk Voivodeship">
<text>Polotsk or Połock Voivodeship (; ; , ) was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (Grand Duchy of Lithuania) since the 15th century until the partitions of Poland in 1793.

==History==

The voivodeship history can be traced to the Principality of Polotsk, conquered by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania around late 14th / early 15th centuries. From 1504 the former Principality was recognized as a voivodeship.

Zygmunt Gloger in his monumental book Historical Geography of the Lands of Old Poland provides this description of the Połock Voivodeship:

“Połock, in Latin Polocia, Polocium, lies on the right bank of the Dvina, and is regarded as one of the oldest gords of Rus’. In the 13th century, the Principality of Polotsk was ruled by Kievan princes, but in app. 1225 it was seized by the Lithuanians under Duke Mindaugas (...) Duke Vytautas named the first starosta of Połock, and in app. 1500, the starosta was renamed into the Voivode of Połock, while the Duchy was turned into a voivodeship, divided into halves by the Dvina (...)

The voivodeship had two senators, who were the Voivode and the Castellan of Połock (...) Since it was not too large and its population was not numerous, furthermore, its capital was located in the middle, the voivodeship was not divided into counties. Its courts were located in Połock, where the sejmiks also took place. Połock Voivodeship had two envoys in the Sejm, and two deputies to the Lithuanian Tribunal”.

==Population==
* 109,848 in 1790

==Administration==

Voivodeship Governor (Wojewoda) seat: 
* Połock

Administrative division:
* this voivodeship was not divided into counties

Number of Senators: 
* 2

Number of envoys in the Sejm: 
* 2

==Voivodes==
*Stanisław Hlebowicz 
*Albertas Goštautas
*Stanisław Ościk
*Piotr Kiszka 
*Jan Hlebowicz
*Stanisław Dowojno 
*Mikołaj Dorohostajski 
*Andrzej Sapieha 
*Michał Drucki-Sokoliński
*Janusz Kiszka 
*Aleksander Ludwik Radziwiłł 
*Jan Karol Kopeć 
*Kazimierz Jan Sapieha
*Jan Jacek Ogiński 
*Dominik Michał Słuszka 
*Stanisław Ernest Denhoff 
*Aleksander Michał Sapieha 
*Józef Sylwester Sosnowski 
*Tadeusz Żaba

== References ==
==Bibliography==
* Polock Voivodeship, description by Zygmunt Gloger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2347987" start="0" end="7" title="Polotsk Voivodeship" label="Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347987" start="11" end="29" title="Polotsk Voivodeship" label="Połock Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="105" end="135" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="137" end="161" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="196" end="216" title="partitions of Poland" label="partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q517333" start="285" end="308" title="Principality of Polotsk" label="Principality of Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639312" start="447" end="458" title="voivodeship" label="voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q245332" start="461" end="475" title="Zygmunt Gloger" label="Zygmunt Gloger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="668" end="673" title="Daugava River" label="Dvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q88598" start="712" end="716" title="Gord (archaeology)" label="gord"/>
<link wikidata="Q914114" start="721" end="725" title="Rus&amp;#x27; people" label="Rus’"/>
<link wikidata="Q517333" start="752" end="775" title="Principality of Polotsk" label="Principality of Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q242436" start="866" end="875" title="Mindaugas" label="Mindaugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q218186" start="887" end="895" title="Vytautas" label="Vytautas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231714" start="912" end="920" title="starosta" label="starosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="984" end="991" title="Voivode" label="Voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="1387" end="1393" title="sejmik" label="sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="1453" end="1457" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="1582" end="1590" title="Wojewoda" label="Wojewoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q200797" start="1601" end="1607" title="Polatsk" label="Połock"/>
<link wikidata="Q98975" start="1694" end="1702" title="Polish Senat" label="Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="1734" end="1738" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1760" end="1779" title="Stanisław Hlebowicz" label="Stanisław Hlebowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657145" start="1782" end="1800" title="Albertas Goštautas" label="Albertas Goštautas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1802" end="1817" title="Stanisław Ościk" label="Stanisław Ościk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917754" start="1819" end="1831" title="Piotr Kiszka" label="Piotr Kiszka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1834" end="1847" title="Jan Hlebowicz" label="Jan Hlebowicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1849" end="1866" title="Stanisław Dowojno" label="Stanisław Dowojno"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1869" end="1890" title="Mikołaj Dorohostajski" label="Mikołaj Dorohostajski"/>
<link wikidata="Q958111" start="1893" end="1908" title="Andrzej Sapieha" label="Andrzej Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1911" end="1935" title="Michał Drucki-Sokoliński" label="Michał Drucki-Sokoliński"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669826" start="1937" end="1950" title="Janusz Kiszka" label="Janusz Kiszka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272778" start="1953" end="1980" title="Aleksander Ludwik Radziwiłł" label="Aleksander Ludwik Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1983" end="1998" title="Jan Karol Kopeć" label="Jan Karol Kopeć"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453437" start="2001" end="2022" title="Jan Kazimierz Sapieha the Younger" label="Kazimierz Jan Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917220" start="2024" end="2041" title="Jan Jacek Ogiński" label="Jan Jacek Ogiński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2044" end="2066" title="Dominik Michał Słuszka" label="Dominik Michał Słuszka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33517" start="2069" end="2093" title="Stanisław Ernest Denhoff" label="Stanisław Ernest Denhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607550" start="2096" end="2121" title="Aleksander Michał Sapieha" label="Aleksander Michał Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917240" start="2124" end="2149" title="Józef Sylwester Sosnowski" label="Józef Sylwester Sosnowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2152" end="2164" title="Tadeusz Żaba" label="Tadeusz Żaba"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280261" wikidata="Q3433587" url="?curid=1280261" title="Seine River (electoral district)">
<text>Seine River () is a provincial electoral division in the Canadian province of Manitoba. It was created by redistribution in 1989, and has formally existed since the 1990 provincial election. The constituency is located in the southern section of the City of Winnipeg.

Seine River is bordered to the south and east by the rural riding of Dawson Trail, to the north by Southdale and Riel, and to the west by St. Norbert. The riding is mostly urban, although it also includes some rural space.

The riding&#x27;s population in 1996 was 18,833. In 1999, the average family income was $63,800, and the unemployment rate was 4.20%. Seine River&#x27;s francophone population is 9%, and there is also a significant German community (4%). Health and social services account for 14% of the riding&#x27;s industry.

==List of provincial representatives==
This riding has elected the following MLAs:

==Electoral results==


|Progressive Conservative
|Louise Dacquay
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |3,582
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |42.40
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |-5.38
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |$16,327.06




==Previous boundaries==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3433587" start="0" end="11" title="Seine River (electoral district)" label="Seine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="57" end="74" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="78" end="86" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750212" start="165" end="189" title="1990 Manitoba general election" label="1990 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="258" end="266" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962280" start="338" end="350" title="Dawson Trail (electoral district)" label="Dawson Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398974" start="368" end="377" title="Southdale (electoral district)" label="Southdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407519" start="382" end="386" title="Riel (electoral district)" label="Riel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463068" start="407" end="418" title="St. Norbert (electoral district)" label="St. Norbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="708" end="714" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517320" start="883" end="887" title="Legislative Assembly of Manitoba" label="MLAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366633" start="915" end="939" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688700" start="941" end="955" title="Louise Dacquay" label="Louise Dacquay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280266" wikidata="Q629858" url="?curid=1280266" title="First Band on the Moon">
<text>First Band on the Moon is the third studio album by the Cardigans. It features the international single &quot;Lovefool&quot;. It was first released on 12 August 1996 and internationally on 6 September 1996.

The album was a major breakthrough for the band, both in their native Sweden and internationally. It is their best-selling album in the United States, having sold around 664,000 copies there as of September 2010.

==Critical reception==
AllMusic critic John Bush viewed &quot;First Band on the Moon&quot; as a return to the &quot;mood and feel&quot; of the Cardigans&#x27; 1994 debut album &quot;Emmerdale&quot;, with a new lyrical focus on &quot;unfaithful lovers&quot; and, in the case of &quot;Lovefool&quot;, &quot;unrequited affection&quot;. He noted that while its stylistic shift from its 1995 predecessor &quot;Life&quot; may confuse listeners, the album is buoyed by Nina Persson&#x27;s vocals and Peter Svensson&#x27;s arrangements, &quot;the Cardigans&#x27; core strengths&quot;.

==Track listing==
&quot;Happy Meal II&quot; is a re-recording of &quot;Happy Meal&quot;, a song that was originally a bonus track on the US edition of &quot;Life&quot;, with some minor lyric changes.

===Black Sabbath connections===

At least two songs on the album directly reference Black Sabbath material. In addition to the cover &quot;Iron Man&quot;, &quot;Heartbreaker&quot; begins and ends with a quotation of the primary material from the song &quot;Black Sabbath&quot;, the first track on Black Sabbath&#x27;s debut album.

== Personnel ==
Credits adapted from the liner notes of &quot;First Band On The Moon&quot;.
The Cardigans
*Lars-Olof Johansson – keyboards, piano
*Bengt Lagerberg – drums, percussion
*Nina Persson – lead vocals
*Magnus Sveningsson – bass, vocals
*Peter Svensson – guitar, vocals

&quot;Your New Cuckoo&quot;
*Åva Håkansson – violin
*Inga Zeppezauer – violin
*Mattias Svensson – violin
*Maria Holm – violin
*David Wilczewski – flute
*Lynette Koyana – background vocals
&quot;Heartbreaker&quot;
*Petter Lindgård – trumpet
*Patrik Bartosch – clavinet 
*Ulf Thuresson – background vocals

&quot;Never Recover&quot;
* David Wilczewski – flute

&quot;Losers&quot;
* Annette Helmers – cello

&quot;Great Divide&quot;
*Ronnie Weber – violin
*Gabriele Freese – violin
*Anna Berström – violin
*Ivan Bakran – cello, double bass

&quot;Choke&quot;
*Jens Lindgård – trombone
*Sven Andersson – saxophone
==Singles==
* &quot;Lovefool&quot; (9 September 1996, #21 UK)
* &quot;Been It&quot; (25 November 1996, #56 UK)
* &quot;Lovefool&quot; (re-release 24 February 1997, #2 UK)
* &quot;Your New Cuckoo&quot; (25 August 1997, #35 UK)

Release dates refer to UK single releases. In Europe and Japan, &quot;Your New Cuckoo&quot; was released much earlier than in the UK, where the release was delayed due to the continued success of &quot;Lovefool&quot; and also to commission new remixes for the single release.

&quot;Been It&quot; and &quot;Your New Cuckoo&quot; were both slightly shortened for single release; the former also had the word &quot;whore&quot; obscured by a guitar lick to make it more palatable for radio play.

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

===Single charts===
United States
*Billboard Hot 100 Airplay: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #1
*Billboard Adult Top 40: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #2
*Billboard Modern Rock Tracks: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #9
*Billboard Top 40 Mainstream: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #1
*Billboard Adult Contemporary: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #23
*Billboard Hot Dance Music/Club Play: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #5
*Billboard Hot Dance Music/Maxisingle Sales: &quot;Lovefool; #24
*Billboard Rhythmic Top 40: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #18
*Billboard Top 40 Adult Recurrents: &quot;Lovefool&quot; #1
UK
*UK Radio Airplay: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #1
*UK Top 100 Singles: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #21, &quot;Been It&quot;; #56, &quot;Lovefool&quot; (Re-issue); #2, &quot;Your New Cuckoo&quot;; #35
Australia
*ARIA Top 100 Singles 1997 Year-End Chart: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #52
Sweden
*Swedish Top 100 Singles 1996 Year-end Chart: &quot;Lovefool&quot;; #60

==Certifications==


==References==
==External links==
* First Band on the Moon microsite
*
* The Cardigans&#x27; discography on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; website
* IFPI Sweden
*Polyhex UK chart information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q106379" start="52" end="65" title="the Cardigans" label="the Cardigans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547704" start="110" end="118" title="Lovefool" label="Lovefool"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="445" end="453" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931837" start="604" end="613" title="Emmerdale (album)" label="Emmerdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931277" start="827" end="831" title="Life (The Cardigans album)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q231880" start="884" end="896" title="Nina Persson" label="Nina Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199100" start="915" end="929" title="Peter Svensson" label="Peter Svensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931277" start="1157" end="1161" title="Life (Cardigans album)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="1285" end="1298" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q910905" start="1340" end="1348" title="Iron Man (song)" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q880537" start="1458" end="1471" title="Black Sabbath (song)" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q106379" start="1640" end="1659" title="Lars-Olof Johansson" label="Lars-Olof Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106379" start="1680" end="1695" title="Bengt Lagerberg" label="Bengt Lagerberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q231880" start="1717" end="1729" title="Nina Persson" label="Nina Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197951" start="1745" end="1763" title="Magnus Sveningsson" label="Magnus Sveningsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199100" start="1780" end="1794" title="Peter Svensson" label="Peter Svensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15445085" start="1940" end="1956" title="David Wilczewski" label="David Wilczewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="2072" end="2080" title="clavinet" label="clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="3949" end="3953" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="ARIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="4232" end="4245" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280267" wikidata="Q5424087" url="?curid=1280267" title="F. W. Williams">
<text>F. W. Williams was a Canadian architect.

==Work==
Williams was the architect in charge of the Canadian Building at the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair. The Canadian Building was constructed out of almost entirely Canadian materials. Canadian life and products were depicted in dioramas, animated maps, photo montages, panoramas, and a reflecting pool.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5424087" start="0" end="14" title="F. W. Williams" label="F. W. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="21" end="29" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="30" end="39" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="68" end="77" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95" end="112" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair pavilions#Government Zone" label="Canadian Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="120" end="151" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="278" end="285" title="diorama" label="diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q828107" start="303" end="316" title="Photomontage" label="photo montage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41363" start="319" end="327" title="panorama" label="panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328914" start="336" end="351" title="reflecting pool" label="reflecting pool"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280272" wikidata="Q369590" url="?curid=1280272" title="Chernihiv Voivodeship">
<text>Czernihów (Chernihiv) Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Kingdom of Poland (part of Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth) from 1635 until Khmelnytsky Uprising in 1648 (technically it existed up until 1654). Also it was used as a fictitious title in the Commonwealth until the Partitions of Poland in 1772/1795. In 1635, Marcin Kalinowski was the first voivode (governor) of the Chernihiv Voivodeship.

The voivodeship was part of the Lesser Poland Province, and was divided into two counties: Czernihów and Nowogród Siewierski. Local sejmiks took place at Czernihów, and it had two senators in the Polish–Lithuanian Senate. Together with Kijów Voivodeship (Kyiv) and Bracław Voivodeship (Bratslav) it made the territory that came to be known as Ukraine.

==History==
The history of Czernihow Voivodeship dates back to 1618, when after the Truce of Deulino, the Commonwealth gained control of the towns of Smolensk, Czernihow and Nowogród Siewierski. Since the truce was set to expire in 14.5 years, new acquisitions were not organized in official way. Smolensk was annexed by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, while both Czernihow and Nowogrod became part of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland forming the Duchy of Siveria. In 1633, during the Smolensk War, Polish Parliament (Sejm) introduced a bill in which both land court and starosta office were established at Czernihow. In 1634 the Treaty of Polyanovka confirmed that Czernihow remained part of Poland, so finally in 1635 the Sejm created the voivodeship, with two senators – the Voivode and the Castellan of Czernihow. Both county elected two deputies to the Sejm, and one deputy to the Lesser Poland Tribunal at Lublin. In 1637, construction of a fortress at Konotop began, whose purpose was to protect the newly acquired province. The fortress was completed in 1642.

The Commonwealth lost control of the province as early as 1648, during the Khmelnytsky Uprising. In the Treaty of Hadiach (1658), the Duchy of Ruthenia was created out of Czernihow Voivodship, Kiev Voivodeship and Bracław Voivodeship. The idea however was quickly abandoned, and after the Truce of Andrusovo (1667), Czernihow Voivodeship was annexed by the Tsardom of Russia.

The history of Czernihow Voivodeship does not end in 1667. Following the example of other provinces lost by the Commonwealth in the mid-17th century (e.g. Smolensk Voivodeship), the government in Warsaw continued to claim it as a titular voivodeship, with fictitious titles of voivode, senators, deputies and starostas named by the King, and remaining in use until the Partitions of Poland. The nobility of former Czernihow Voivodeship had its sejmiks at Wlodzimierz Wolynski. Last voivode of Czernihow was a man named Ludwik Wilga, nominated in 1783. In 1785, Stanisław August Poniatowski gave fictitious title of starosta of Nowogrod Siewierski to Tadeusz Czacki.

Zygmunt Gloger in his monumental book &quot;Historical Geography of the Lands of Old Poland&quot; gives a detailed description of Czernihow Voivodeship:

==Seat and administrative division==
Voivodeship Governor (Wojewoda) seat: 
* Czerihów

Administrative divisions:
* Czerihów County
* Nowogród County

==Voivodes==

*Marcin Kalinowski 1602–1652 
*Stefan Bieniewski 1598–1648 
*Krzysztof Łohojski-Tyszkiewicz 1616–1666 
*Stanisław Kazimierz Bieniewski 1611–1695
*Mariusz Stanisław Jaskólski 1624–1683
*Jan Gniński 1650–1703 
*Otto Fryderyk Felkerzamb 1641–1705 
*Franciszek Jan Załuski 1660–1735
*Mikołaj Franciszek Krosnowski 1652–1723 
*Piotr Jan Potocki 1679–1726 
*Józef Lubomirski 1680–1732
*Józef Remigian Potulicki 1732–1734
*Jakub Florian Narzymski 1690–1759
*Piotr Michał Miączyński 1695–1776 
*Franciszek Antoni Ledóchowski 1755–1835
*Ludwik Wilga, died 1797

== References ==
== External links ==

* Czernihow Voivodeship, description by Zygmunt Gloger
*&quot;Central European Superpower&quot;, Henryk Litwin, &quot;BUM Magazine&quot;, October 2016.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q369590" start="0" end="33" title="Chernihiv Voivodeship" label="Czernihów (Chernihiv) Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="103" end="120" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="130" end="160" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q641479" start="178" end="198" title="Khmelnytsky Uprising" label="Khmelnytsky Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="316" end="336" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960458" start="360" end="377" title="Marcin Kalinowski" label="Marcin Kalinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="392" end="399" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763782" start="474" end="496" title="Lesser Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Lesser Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="523" end="531" title="powiat" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="574" end="580" title="sejmik" label="sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662430" start="638" end="662" title="Offices in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419574" start="678" end="695" title="Kijów Voivodeship" label="Kijów Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="697" end="701" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347999" start="707" end="726" title="Bracław Voivodeship" label="Bracław Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q903241" start="728" end="736" title="Bratslav" label="Bratslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q542169" start="879" end="895" title="Truce of Deulino" label="Truce of Deulino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="945" end="953" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q147758" start="969" end="988" title="Novhorod-Siverskyi" label="Nowogród Siewierski"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="1120" end="1144" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="1199" end="1229" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140492" start="1280" end="1292" title="Smolensk War" label="Smolensk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660626" start="1313" end="1317" title="Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231714" start="1366" end="1374" title="starosta" label="starosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383153" start="1425" end="1445" title="Treaty of Polyanovka" label="Treaty of Polyanovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="1573" end="1580" title="Voivode" label="Voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505781" start="1589" end="1598" title="Castellan" label="Castellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="1707" end="1713" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162083" start="1754" end="1761" title="Konotop" label="Konotop"/>
<link wikidata="Q641479" start="1939" end="1959" title="Khmelnytsky Uprising" label="Khmelnytsky Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q386038" start="1968" end="1985" title="Treaty of Hadiach" label="Treaty of Hadiach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419574" start="2057" end="2073" title="Kiev Voivodeship" label="Kiev Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347999" start="2078" end="2097" title="Bracław Voivodeship" label="Bracław Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q721168" start="2153" end="2171" title="Truce of Andrusovo" label="Truce of Andrusovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="2221" end="2238" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsardom of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454841" start="2396" end="2416" title="Smolensk Voivodeship" label="Smolensk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="2437" end="2443" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="2610" end="2630" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="2636" end="2644" title="szlachta" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="2685" end="2691" title="sejmik" label="sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="2696" end="2716" title="Wlodzimierz Wolynski" label="Wlodzimierz Wolynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="2802" end="2830" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanisław August Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638575" start="2891" end="2905" title="Tadeusz Czacki" label="Tadeusz Czacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q245332" start="2908" end="2922" title="Zygmunt Gloger" label="Zygmunt Gloger"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="3121" end="3129" title="Wojewoda" label="Wojewoda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3140" end="3148" title="Czerihów" label="Czerihów"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3178" end="3193" title="Czerihów County" label="Czerihów County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3196" end="3211" title="Nowogród County" label="Nowogród County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960458" start="3228" end="3245" title="Marcin Kalinowski" label="Marcin Kalinowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3258" end="3275" title="Stefan Bieniewski" label="Stefan Bieniewski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3288" end="3318" title="Krzysztof Łohojski-Tyszkiewicz" label="Krzysztof Łohojski-Tyszkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3331" end="3361" title="Stanisław Kazimierz Bieniewski" label="Stanisław Kazimierz Bieniewski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3373" end="3400" title="Mariusz Stanisław Jaskólski" label="Mariusz Stanisław Jaskólski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3412" end="3433" title="Jan Gniński (1650–1703)" label="Jan Gniński 1650–1703"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3436" end="3460" title="Otto Fryderyk Felkerzamb" label="Otto Fryderyk Felkerzamb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3473" end="3495" title="Franciszek Jan Załuski" label="Franciszek Jan Załuski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3507" end="3536" title="Mikołaj Franciszek Krosnowski" label="Mikołaj Franciszek Krosnowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3549" end="3566" title="Piotr Jan Potocki" label="Piotr Jan Potocki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3579" end="3605" title="Józef Lubomirski (1680–1732)" label="Józef Lubomirski 1680–1732"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3607" end="3631" title="Józef Remigian Potulicki" label="Józef Remigian Potulicki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3643" end="3666" title="Jakub Florian Narzymski" label="Jakub Florian Narzymski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3678" end="3701" title="Piotr Michał Miączyński" label="Piotr Michał Miączyński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3714" end="3743" title="Franciszek Antoni Ledóchowski" label="Franciszek Antoni Ledóchowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3755" end="3767" title="Ludwik Wilga" label="Ludwik Wilga"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280273" wikidata="Q782119" url="?curid=1280273" title="Minsk Voivodeship">
<text>Minsk Voivodeship (; ; ; ) was a unit of administrative division and local government in Grand Duchy of Lithuania since 1566 and later in Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, until the partitions of the Commonwealth in 1793. Centred on the city of Minsk and subordinate to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the region continued the traditions – and shared the borders – of several previously existing units of administrative division, notably a separate Duchy of Minsk, annexed by Lithuania in the 13th century. It was replaced with Minsk Governorate in 1793.

== Geography ==

The voivodeship was stretched along the Berezina and Dneper rivers, with the earlier river having both its source and its estuary within the limits of the voivodeship, as well as most of its basin. To the north east it bordered Polotsk, Vitebsk and Mscislaw voivodeships. To the east it bordered with the lands of Chernigov (on both sides of the Dneper and Sozh rivers), while to the south-east it was delimited by the river Snov. Further southwards the voivodeship was bordering the land of Kiev. Across the basin of the Pripyat river the land of Minsk was bordering the Brześć Voivodeship (across Ubort river) and Nowogródek Voivodeship (across Ptsich river). Further northwards it was bordering the capital of the Grand Duchy, the Vilnius Voivodeship.

== History ==

Minsk had been a capital of a semi-independent duchy at least since 1067. Raided on a yearly basis by the Lithuanians, by the 12th century it was made a fief and in the 14th century it was directly incorporated into the Grand Duchy. In 1441 the city of Minsk was granted with a city charter, by the king Casimir IV Jagiellon. His son, Alexander Jagiellon extended the privilege in 1496 and granted the town with Magdeburg Laws. Since then, the entire region shared the fate of its capital city. In 1773 a post-Jesuit academy had been founded in Minsk by the Commission of National Education.

== Politics ==

All voivodeships played an important role within the Polish political system, extended to Lithuania by the Polish–Lithuanian unions. Following the final Union of Lublin of 1569, the Minsk Voivodeship received two seats within the Senate. The seats were held &quot;ex officio&quot; by the voivod and the castellan of Minsk. Each of the three powiats organized its own Sejmik, which had a right to elect two members of Sejm each, and two deputies to the Lithuanian Tribunal.

The three cities were also entitled to house local courts. Since 1599, the Tribunal of Lithuania did also held sessions in Minsk (every three years, other cities it visited were Vilnius and Navahrudak). The court held there served the role of the highest juridical authority for all of &quot;Ruthenian voivodeships&quot;, that is Minsk, Nowogródek, Vitebsk, Mstislav and Kiev. Following the first partition of Poland in 1775, the tribunal abandoned Minsk and held its sessions in Hrodna.

Notable voivodes of Minsk include Balcer Strawiński (1631–33), Aleksander Suszka (1633–38) and Mikołaj Sapieha (since 1638).

== Voivodes of Minsk Voivodeship ==

* Gabriel Hornostaj (1566–76)
* (Elder) (1576–88)
* Bohdan Sapieha (1588–93)
* Jan Abramowicz (1593–96)
* Andriusz Zawisza (1596–98)
* Jan Pac (1600–11)
* Mikołaj Sapieha (1611–18)
* Piotr Tyszkiewicz (1618–31)
* Balcer Strawiński (1631–33)
* Aleksander Suszka (1633–38)
* Mikołaj Sapieha (1638)
* Aleksander Massalski (1638–43)
* Andriusz Massalski (1643–45) 
* Aleksander Ogiński (1645–49)
* Gideon Rajecké (1649–54)
* Krzysztof Ciechanowiecki (1654–55)
* Krzysztof Rudomina-Dusiacki (1655)
* Jan Sebastian Kęsztort (1656–67)
* Kazimierz Białłozor (1667–80)
* Michael Siasickis (1680–98)
* Władysław Jozafat Sapieha (1699–1709)
* Krzysztof Zenovicz (1709–17)
* Krzysztof Stanisław Zawisza (1720–21)
* Jan Kazimierz Toad (1721–54)
* Jan August Hylzen (1754–67)
* Józef Jerzy Hylzen (1767–70)
* Tadeusz Burzyński (1770–73)
* Józef Mikołaj Radziwiłł (1773–84)
* Adam Chmara (1784–93)

== Colours ==

Much like other Ruthenian lands, the Minsk voivodeship signed its documents with the Pogoń (Chase) coat of arms. The flag was Or, in field Gules a chase Carnation. The official uniform was a crimson kontusz and żupan, with a navy blue collar. The powiat of Rechytsa adopted a white żupan with white collar.

==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q782119" start="0" end="17" title="Minsk Voivodeship" label="Minsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="89" end="113" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="138" end="168" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="180" end="210" title="partitions of Poland" label="partitions of the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="243" end="248" title="Minsk, Belarus" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662372" start="445" end="459" title="Duchy of Minsk" label="Duchy of Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q593230" start="524" end="541" title="Minsk Governorate" label="Minsk Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207927" start="609" end="617" title="Berezina" label="Berezina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="622" end="628" title="Dneper" label="Dneper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347987" start="797" end="804" title="Połock Voivodeship" label="Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q550403" start="806" end="813" title="Witebsk Voivodeship" label="Vitebsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464958" start="818" end="826" title="Mścisław Voivodeship" label="Mscislaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q369590" start="883" end="892" title="Czernihów Voivodeship" label="Chernigov"/>
<link wikidata="Q784682" start="926" end="930" title="Sozh River" label="Sozh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540215" start="994" end="998" title="Snov" label="Snov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419574" start="1053" end="1065" title="Kiev Voivodeship" label="land of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q157042" start="1091" end="1104" title="Pripyat River" label="Pripyat river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347977" start="1141" end="1159" title="Brest Litovsk Voivodeship" label="Brześć Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050400" start="1168" end="1173" title="Ubort" label="Ubort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991196" start="1185" end="1207" title="Nowogródek Voivodeship (1507-1795)" label="Nowogródek Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q915889" start="1216" end="1222" title="Ptsich" label="Ptsich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347932" start="1303" end="1322" title="Vilnius Voivodeship" label="Vilnius Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263549" start="1446" end="1457" title="Lithuanians (tribe)" label="Lithuanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="1644" end="1664" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53450" start="1675" end="1694" title="Alexander Jagiellon" label="Alexander Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="1752" end="1765" title="Magdeburg Law" label="Magdeburg Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957847" start="1809" end="1833" title="History of Minsk" label="fate of its capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562345" start="1898" end="1930" title="Commission of National Education" label="Commission of National Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q825902" start="2056" end="2079" title="Polish–Lithuanian union" label="Polish–Lithuanian union"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="2102" end="2117" title="Union of Lublin" label="Union of Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="2237" end="2243" title="Voivode" label="voivod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505781" start="2252" end="2261" title="castellan" label="castellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="2316" end="2322" title="Sejmik" label="Sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="2366" end="2370" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666678" start="2401" end="2420" title="Lithuanian Tribunal" label="Lithuanian Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q278743" start="2613" end="2623" title="Navahrudak" label="Navahrudak"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="2814" end="2839" title="partitions of Poland" label="first partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="2903" end="2909" title="Hrodna" label="Hrodna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2946" end="2963" title="Balcer Strawiński" label="Balcer Strawiński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2975" end="2992" title="Aleksander Suszka" label="Aleksander Suszka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492460" start="3007" end="3022" title="Mikołaj Sapieha (1581-1644)" label="Mikołaj Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3077" end="3094" title="Gabriel Hornostaj" label="Gabriel Hornostaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918634" start="3127" end="3141" title="Bohdan Pawłowicz Sapieha" label="Bohdan Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582933" start="3154" end="3168" title="Jan Abramowicz" label="Jan Abramowicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3181" end="3197" title="Andriusz Zawisza" label="Andriusz Zawisza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3210" end="3217" title="Jan Pac" label="Jan Pac"/>
<link wikidata="Q86598" start="3230" end="3245" title="Mikołaj Sapieha (1588–1638)" label="Mikołaj Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096335" start="3258" end="3275" title="Piotr Tyszkiewicz" label="Piotr Tyszkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3288" end="3305" title="Balcer Strawiński" label="Balcer Strawiński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3318" end="3335" title="Aleksander Suszka" label="Aleksander Suszka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492460" start="3348" end="3363" title="Mikołaj Sapieha (1581–1644)" label="Mikołaj Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="Q140972" start="3384" end="3393" title="Massalski" label="Massalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q140972" start="3415" end="3424" title="Massalski" label="Massalski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3438" end="3456" title="Aleksander Ogiński" label="Aleksander Ogiński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3469" end="3483" title="Gideon Rajecké" label="Gideon Rajecké"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3496" end="3520" title="Krzysztof Ciechanowiecki" label="Krzysztof Ciechanowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3533" end="3560" title="Krzysztof Rudomina-Dusiacki" label="Krzysztof Rudomina-Dusiacki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3570" end="3592" title="Jan Sebastian Kęsztort" label="Jan Sebastian Kęsztort"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3605" end="3624" title="Kazimierz Białłozor" label="Kazimierz Białłozor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3637" end="3654" title="Michael Siasickis" label="Michael Siasickis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3667" end="3692" title="Władysław Jozafat Sapieha" label="Władysław Jozafat Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3707" end="3725" title="Krzysztof Zenovicz" label="Krzysztof Zenovicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3738" end="3765" title="Krzysztof Stanisław Zawisza" label="Krzysztof Stanisław Zawisza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3778" end="3796" title="Jan Kazimierz Toad" label="Jan Kazimierz Toad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3809" end="3826" title="Jan August Hylzen" label="Jan August Hylzen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3839" end="3857" title="Józef Jerzy Hylzen" label="Józef Jerzy Hylzen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3870" end="3887" title="Tadeusz Burzyński" label="Tadeusz Burzyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492050" start="3900" end="3923" title="Józef Mikołaj Radziwiłł" label="Józef Mikołaj Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3936" end="3947" title="Adam Chmara" label="Adam Chmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q188047" start="4059" end="4064" title="Pogoń" label="Pogoń"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783432" start="4173" end="4180" title="kontusz" label="kontusz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423981" start="4185" end="4190" title="żupan" label="żupan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280275" wikidata="Q2347977" url="?curid=1280275" title="Brest Litovsk Voivodeship">
<text>Brest Litovsk Voivodeship (; ) was a unit of administrative territorial division and a seat of local government (voivode) in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth) from 1566 until the May Constitution in 1791, and from 1791 to 1795 (partitions of Poland) as a voivodeship in Poland. It was constituted from Brest-Litovsk and Pinsk counties.

== History ==

It was created from the southern part of Trakai Voivodeship in 1566. In 1791 Kobryn and Pinsk-Zarzeche (whose center was Poltnica, now Plotnitsa) counties were created. Pinsk-Zarzeche country was renamed Zapynsky and its seat was moved to Stolin. After the Second Partition of Poland, in 1793, Pinsk and Zapynsky countries became part of the Russian Empire&#x27;s Minsk Governorate. The remainder of it was dissolved in 1795 and became part of Slonim Governorate.

==Governors==
Voivodeship Governor (Wojewoda) seat: 
* Brest-Litovsk

Voivodes:
* Jerzy Ilinicz (1566)
* Jerzy Tyszkiewicz Łohojski (1566-1576)
* Gabriel Hornostaj (1576-1587)
* Mikołaj Michał Sapieha (1587-1588)
* Jan Kiszka (1589—1592)
* Krzysztof Zenowicz (Zienowicz) (1592—1615)
* Jan Ostafi Tyszkiewicz Łohojski (1615-1631)
* Aleksander Ludwik Radziwiłł (1631–1635)
* Mikołaj Sapieha (XI 1638-VII 1642)
* Teofil Iwan Tryzna (1642—1644)
* Andrzej Massalski (1645-1651/1652)
* Jerzy Klonowski (1652—1653)
* Maksymilian Brzozowski (1653-1659)
* Kazimierz Ludwik Jewłaszewski (1659—1664)
* Jakub Teodor Kuncewicz (1664—1666/1667)
* Melchior Stanisław Sawicki (1666—1668)
* Krzysztof Piekarski (1668-1672)
* Stefan Kurcz (1672—1702)
* Krzysztof Komorowski (1702-1708)
* Władysław Jozafat Sapieha (1709-1733)
* Kazimierz Leon Sapieha (1735-1738)
* Adam Tadeusz Chodkiewicz (1738-1745)
* Jan Michał Sołłohub (1745-1748)
* Karol Józef Sapieha (1748-1768)
* Jan Antoni Horain (1768-1777)
* Mikołaj Tadeusz Łopaciński (1777—1778)
* Jan Tadeusz Zyberg (1783—1795)

==References==

* Słownik geograficzny Królestwa Polskiego i innych krajów słowiańskich, vol. I, pages 399-401
* Brest Litovsk Voivodeship, description by Zygmunt Gloger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2347977" start="0" end="25" title="Brest Litovsk Voivodeship" label="Brest Litovsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="129" end="153" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="155" end="185" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="207" end="223" title="Constitution of May 3, 1791" label="May Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="256" end="276" title="partitions of Poland" label="partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347967" start="421" end="439" title="Trakai Voivodeship" label="Trakai Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q956565" start="619" end="625" title="Stolin" label="Stolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="637" end="663" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="722" end="736" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q593230" start="744" end="761" title="Minsk Governorate" label="Minsk Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294422" start="824" end="842" title="Slonim Governorate" label="Slonim Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="881" end="889" title="Wojewoda" label="Wojewoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="900" end="913" title="Brest-Litovsk" label="Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272778" start="1176" end="1203" title="Aleksander Ludwik Radziwiłł" label="Aleksander Ludwik Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492460" start="1218" end="1233" title="Mikołaj Sapieha (1581-1644)" label="Mikołaj Sapieha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280276" wikidata="Q461609" url="?curid=1280276" title="Chris Nilan">
<text>Christopher John Nilan (born February 9, 1958) is an American former professional ice hockey player and former radio host. Nilan played 688 National Hockey League (NHL) regular season games as a right-wing for the Montreal Canadiens, New York Rangers, and Boston Bruins between 1980 and 1992. He won the Stanley Cup in 1986 with Montreal.

Known as &quot;Knuckles&quot; or &quot;Knux&quot;, he was famous for his propensity to fight. He holds a record for most penalty minutes by an American-born player. Nilan&#x27;s life and career are prominently featured in Alex Gibney&#x27;s 2011 documentary film &quot;The Last Gladiators&quot;.

==Playing career==
Nilan grew up in Massachusetts where he idolized Bobby Orr and dreamed of playing for the Boston Bruins. He played his youth hockey with the Parkway (West Roxbury, Massachusetts) team of the Greater Boston Youth Hockey League (GBYHL), sponsored by the Metropolitan District Commission (MDC). He later played college hockey for the Northeastern University Huskies, from 1976 to 1979, averaging 3.5 penalty minutes per game in his final collegiate season.

Nilan was selected 231st overall in the 1978 NHL Entry Draft, and was best known as a tough-guy for the Montreal Canadiens in the mid 1980s. One of only nine players in National Hockey League (NHL) history to have recorded more than 3,000 career penalty minutes, he holds the records of highest penalty minute average per game at 4.42 minutes per game, the most penalty minutes in a single playoff season at 141, as well as the record for most penalties in a single game; on March 31, 1991, when the Hartford Whalers visited Nilan&#x27;s Bruins, Nilan was assessed a record ten penalties: six minors, two majors, one misconduct and one game misconduct, for a total of 42 penalty minutes.

Seriously hobbled by repeated injuries, Nilan missed over two hundred games in his final five seasons, and would only play as many as 50 games twice in his final four seasons. He retired after the 1991–92 season. Highlights of his career include winning the Stanley Cup in 1986 with the Canadiens, being named to Team USA for the 1987 Canada Cup, and his controversial selection to the 1991 NHL All-Star Game by his then-coach Mike Milbury (Nilan missed the game with a broken left ankle), which led to changes in how players are selected for all-star games.

==Post career==
Nilan returned to the Boston area and went into the insurance business after retirement. He spent three years as community relations consultant for John Hancock Insurance before returning to hockey as a coach. He was initially hired as an assistant coach of the New Jersey Devils on August 3, 1995, and remained in that position until May 1996, before becoming a head coach for the Chesapeake Icebreakers of the ECHL.

Nilan was married to Karen Stanley in 1981. They were divorced in 2006. They have two daughters, Colleen and Tara, and one son, Christopher. Karen was a daughter of Theresa Stanley, who was one of notorious crime boss Whitey Bulger&#x27;s girlfriends.

Today Nilan talks openly about his past problems with alcohol and prescription drugs, as well as battling a heroin addiction. He is involved in numerous social and charitable causes. Nilan also speaks to local students in Montreal about learning from his life experiences and mistakes.

Nilan lived in Oregon for two years, where he met his current girlfriend, Jaime Holtz (who is originally from Kailua-Kona, Hawaii). Chris moved back to Montreal with Jaime in 2011, and they currently reside in Montreal.

He began hosting his own program, &quot;Off the Cuff&quot; on TSN Radio 690 Montreal, on March 18, 2013, after being a daily phone-in guest on Melnick in the Afternoon for a number of months. The show aired from noon to 3:00 p.m. weekdays local time, also streamed live online. In 2022, he was fired from his &quot;Off the Cuff&quot; hosting position by Bell Media after he refused to get vaccinated against COVID-19.

Nilan Currently hosts his own Podcast &quot;The Raw Knuckles Podcast&quot;

==Awards==
*Won the Stanley Cup in 1986 with the Montreal Canadiens
*Selected to one NHL All-Star Game: 1991

==Career statistics==
===Regular season and playoffs===

===International===
==See also==
*List of NHL players with 2000 career penalty minutes

==References==
==External links==
*Chris Nilan&#x27;s Hockeydraftcentral.com profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q461609" start="0" end="22" title="Chris Nilan" label="Christopher John Nilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="82" end="92" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="140" end="162" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827965" start="195" end="205" title="Winger (ice hockey)" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="214" end="232" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="234" end="250" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="256" end="269" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q461609" start="349" end="369" title="Chris Nilan" label="&amp;quot;Knuckles&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q461609" start="373" end="389" title="Chris Nilan" label="&amp;quot;Knux&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832952" start="562" end="573" title="Alex Gibney" label="Alex Gibney"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="673" end="686" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="705" end="714" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="746" end="759" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516663" start="806" end="818" title="West Roxbury" label="West Roxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="820" end="833" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784392" start="908" end="940" title="Massachusetts Water Resources Authority" label="Metropolitan District Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="987" end="1010" title="Northeastern University (Boston, Massachusetts)" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q586578" start="1151" end="1171" title="1978 NHL Entry Draft" label="1978 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1280" end="1302" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q830968" start="1611" end="1627" title="Hartford Whalers" label="Hartford Whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="2058" end="2069" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031967" start="2130" end="2145" title="1987 Canada Cup" label="1987 Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q233028" start="2186" end="2208" title="1991 NHL All-Star Game" label="1991 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313457" start="2227" end="2239" title="Mike Milbury" label="Mike Milbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237561" start="2524" end="2546" title="John Hancock Insurance" label="John Hancock Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="2638" end="2655" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q682559" start="2758" end="2780" title="Chesapeake Icebreakers" label="Chesapeake Icebreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="2788" end="2792" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q557801" start="3013" end="3026" title="Whitey Bulger" label="Whitey Bulger"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="3156" end="3162" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q770180" start="3618" end="3631" title="CKGM" label="TSN Radio 690"/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="3910" end="3920" title="Bell Media" label="Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="3945" end="3972" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="vaccinated against COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="4071" end="4082" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583228" start="4086" end="4090" title="1986 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="4100" end="4118" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q29144" start="4136" end="4153" title="National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q233028" start="4155" end="4159" title="42nd National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591190" start="4252" end="4304" title="List of NHL players with 2000 career penalty minutes" label="List of NHL players with 2000 career penalty minutes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280280" wikidata="Q2347967" url="?curid=1280280" title="Trakai Voivodeship">
<text>Trakai Voivodeship, Trakai Palatinate, or Troki Voivodeship (, , ), was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania from 1413 until 1795.

==History==

Trakai Voivodeship together with Vilnius Voivodeship was established by the Grand Duke of Lithuania Vytautas the Great in 1413 according to the Union of Horodło. Vytautas copied the Polish system of administrative division in order to centralize and strengthen the government. Trakai Voivodeship replaced the former Duchy of Trakai, which was ruled directly by the Grand Duke or his close relative (brother or son). The Duke of Trakai () was replaced by appointed officials – voivodes and his deputy castellan.

The voivodeship was divided into four : Grodno, Kaunas, Trakai (ruled directly by the voivode), and Upytė. The biggest cities in the voivodeship were Kaunas, Grodno and Trakai.

The western portion of the voivodeship was split off in 1513 by Sigismund I the Old and transferred to the Polish Crown. It was organized as the Podlaskie Voivodeship. In 1793, the counties of Grodno, Sokółka and Wołkowysk one of Nowogródek Voivodeship were merged into Grodno Voivodeship.

After the Union of Lublin the voivodeship, together with the whole Grand Duchy of Lithuania, became part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth until the partitions of the Commonwealth in 1795. Most of the territory became part of the Russian Empire, while territories west of the Neman River – part of the Province of East Prussia.

==Voivodes==
The Voivode of Trakai (, ) was one of the most important state offices in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. They were appointed from prominent magnate families and competed only with voivode of Vilnius and Grand Chancellors for power and prestige. Voivodes were the &quot;ex officio&quot; members of the Lithuanian Council of Lords. Voivodes had their residence in Trakai city, near Galvė Lake, north of the Trakai Peninsula Castle.

===List of voivodes===
* Jonas Goštautas (1440)
* Iwaszko Moniwidowicz (1443–1458)
* Radvila Astikas (1466–1477)
* Martynas Goštautas (1480–1483)
* Jan Zabrzeziński (1498–1505)
* Olbracht Gasztołd (Albrecht Goštautas) (1519–1522)
* Konstanty Ostrogski (1522–1530)
* Stanisław Gasztołd (Stanislovas Goštautas) (1542)
* Mikołaj Krzysztof &quot;the Orphan&quot; Radziwiłł (1590–1604)
* Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz (1626–1640)
* Piotr Pac (X 1640–VII 1642)
* Mikołaj Abramowicz (1647–1651?)
* Marcjan Ogiński (since 1670)
* Tadeusz Franciszek Ogiński (1770–1783)
* Józef Mikołaj Radziwiłł (since 1788)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2347967" start="0" end="18" title="Trakai Voivodeship" label="Trakai Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347967" start="20" end="37" title="Trakai Voivodeship" label="Trakai Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347967" start="42" end="59" title="Trakai Voivodeship" label="Troki Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="134" end="158" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347932" start="228" end="247" title="Vilnius Voivodeship" label="Vilnius Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639920" start="271" end="294" title="Grand Duke of Lithuania" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218186" start="295" end="313" title="Vytautas the Great" label="Vytautas the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055227" start="339" end="355" title="Union of Horodło" label="Union of Horodło"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463693" start="511" end="526" title="Duchy of Trakai" label="Duchy of Trakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939812" start="671" end="679" title="Voivodes of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="voivodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505781" start="695" end="704" title="castellan" label="castellan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="747" end="753" title="Grodno powet (First Polish Republic)" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="755" end="761" title="Kaunas powet (First Polish Republic)" label="Kaunas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="763" end="769" title="Trakai powet (First Polish Republic)" label="Trakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899509" start="807" end="812" title="Upytė" label="Upytė"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115712" start="857" end="863" title="Kaunas" label="Kaunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="865" end="871" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q191015" start="876" end="882" title="Trakai" label="Trakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="949" end="968" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="992" end="1004" title="Crown of the Polish Kingdom" label="Polish Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662340" start="1030" end="1051" title="Podlaskie Voivodeship (1513–1795)" label="Podlaskie Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991196" start="1115" end="1137" title="Nowogródek Voivodeship (1507–1795)" label="Nowogródek Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="1186" end="1201" title="Union of Lublin" label="Union of Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="1288" end="1318" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="1329" end="1359" title="partitions of Poland" label="partitions of the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1410" end="1424" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622" start="1456" end="1467" title="Neman River" label="Neman River"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="1482" end="1506" title="Province of East Prussia" label="Province of East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070965" start="1724" end="1741" title="Kanclerz" label="Grand Chancellors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089737" start="1822" end="1849" title="Lithuanian Council of Lords" label="Lithuanian Council of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q191015" start="1883" end="1889" title="Trakai" label="Trakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579161" start="1901" end="1911" title="Galvė Lake" label="Galvė Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436990" start="1926" end="1949" title="Trakai Peninsula Castle" label="Trakai Peninsula Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976306" start="1977" end="1992" title="Jonas Goštautas" label="Jonas Goštautas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607497" start="2002" end="2022" title="Iwaszko Moniwidowicz" label="Iwaszko Moniwidowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981276" start="2037" end="2052" title="Radvila Astikas" label="Radvila Astikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635642" start="2067" end="2085" title="Martynas Goštautas" label="Martynas Goštautas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624068" start="2100" end="2116" title="Jan Zabrzeziński" label="Jan Zabrzeziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657145" start="2131" end="2169" title="Albrecht Goštautas" label="Olbracht Gasztołd (Albrecht Goštautas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q712444" start="2184" end="2203" title="Konstanty Ostrogski" label="Konstanty Ostrogski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607440" start="2218" end="2260" title="Stanislovas Goštautas" label="Stanisław Gasztołd (Stanislovas Goštautas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q968484" start="2270" end="2320" title="Mikołaj Krzysztof &amp;quot;the Orphan&amp;quot; Radziwiłł" label="Mikołaj Krzysztof &amp;quot;the Orphan&amp;quot; Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984149" start="2335" end="2360" title="Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz" label="Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q278076" start="2375" end="2384" title="Piotr Pac" label="Piotr Pac"/>
<link wikidata="Q635015" start="2405" end="2423" title="Mikołaj Abramowicz" label="Mikołaj Abramowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987284" start="2439" end="2454" title="Marcjan Ogiński" label="Marcjan Ogiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628160" start="2470" end="2496" title="Tadeusz Franciszek Ogiński" label="Tadeusz Franciszek Ogiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492050" start="2511" end="2534" title="Józef Mikołaj Radziwiłł" label="Józef Mikołaj Radziwiłł"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280282" wikidata="Q820534" url="?curid=1280282" title="E-mu Emax">
<text>The Emax was a line of samplers, developed, manufactured, and sold by E-mu Systems from 1986 to 1995. Sold alongside their more expensive Emulator II and III samplers, the Emax line was conceived after the release of the Akai S-612 and Sequential Prophet 2000, and was designed to compete for the lower end of the sampling market.

The name &quot;Emax&quot; can refer to one of two specific models, the Emax (which was grey), and the Emax II (which was black). The Emax is sometimes referred to as the &quot;Emax I&quot; or the &quot;Emax 1000&quot; to avoid confusion between the two models (although E-mu Systems never referred to it this way, there is an internal control label that says EMAX 1000 inside every unit).

==Emax==
The original Emax was released in 1986, as a low cost version of the Emulator II. The base model cost $2,995; a rack version was also available for $2,695. Although it was fairly similar to the Emulator II in sampling specifications, the Emax used much more reliable parts, and stored sounds on 3½&quot; floppy disks, as opposed to the more antiquated 5¼&quot; floppy disks that the Emulator used.
Several upgrades were available for the Emax during its lifetime. The Emax HD featured a 20 megabyte hard drive for storing samples. The Emax SE added an additive synthesis engine that let the user create sounds from scratch. The Emax Plus added external SCSI device capability in addition to the other updates.

Sample memory remained the same at 512 KB for all models. SCSI can be retrofitted to second and third revision motherboards and was standard on the final model the Plus. The Emax was discontinued in 1989 and replaced by Emax-II

==Emax II==

The Emax was replaced in 1989 by the Emax II and Emax II Turbo. Although the Emax II was a true 16-bit sampler with more polyphony, it also used digital filters and components, which sounded noticeably different from the original&#x27;s analogue filter chips. The Emax II also sported a higher pricetag; a base model cost $3,595, while a fully expanded model could cost as much as $8,000. Nevertheless, the Emax II found a niche among many professionals due to its large and varied sample library, and it enjoyed the longest production run of any E-mu product.

The EMAX II has different versions, labeled between 2201 and 2214, including mono and stereo versions. The Emax II Turbo, released in 1990, added more built-in sample memory (8 Mb from factory) and an internal SCSI Hard Disk.
In 1995, the Emax II was discontinued, replaced by the rackmountable ESi-32, and later the ESI-4000 and the ESI-2000.

==Notable users==

* Alphaville - Emax
* Beastie Boys - on &quot;Paul&#x27;s Boutique&quot;
* Cabaret Voltaire
* Depeche Mode - all three keyboard players can be seen operating Emax keyboards on their 1989 live film, &quot;101,&quot; and Emax II keyboards in the &quot;Devotional&quot; film.
* Faith No More
* Fear Factory
* Ice MC
* Johnny Hates Jazz - Emax used on &quot;Turn Back the Clock (album)&quot; 
* KMFDM - Used an Emax
* Krush - used on the 1987 single  House Arrest (song)
* Little Angels - Jimmy Dickinson used an Emax SE on all Little Angels records including their number 1 Jam (album)
* Los Prisioneros
* Mats/Morgan Band - Emax II
* Minimal Compact
* Meat Beat Manifesto
* Mouse on Mars
* Nine Inch Nails - used an Emax SE extensively on &quot;Pretty Hate Machine&quot;
* Die Krupps - Emax II
* Orbital
* Tony Toni Tone
* Saint Etienne - credited with using the Emax on their 1991 album &quot;Foxbase Alpha&quot;
* Skinny Puppy
* Steve Roach
* Tyske Ludder - Emax II
* U2
* Tom Waits - credited with using the Emax on his 1993 album &quot;The Black Rider&quot;
* The Whispers
* The Wiggles - credited with using the Emax on their 1991 album &quot;The Wiggles&quot;
* White Town - Emax II extensively used on &quot;Your Woman&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q820534" start="4" end="8" title="E-mu Emax" label="Emax"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="23" end="31" title="Sampler (musical instrument)" label="samplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273181" start="70" end="82" title="E-mu Systems" label="E-mu Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273173" start="138" end="149" title="E-mu Emulator II" label="Emulator II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273173" start="154" end="157" title="E-mu Emulator III" label="III"/>
<link wikidata="Q415294" start="221" end="231" title="Akai" label="Akai S-612"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435418" start="236" end="259" title="Sequential Circuits" label="Sequential Prophet 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q820534" start="403" end="407" title="E-mu Emax" label="Emax"/>
<link wikidata="Q820534" start="434" end="441" title="E-mu Emax" label="Emax II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="1230" end="1240" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q353280" start="1283" end="1301" title="additive synthesis" label="additive synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="1805" end="1814" title="polyphony" label="polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2541" end="2547" title="E-Mu ESi-32" label="ESi-32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2563" end="2571" title="E-Mu ESI-4000" label="ESI-4000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2580" end="2588" title="E-Mu ESI-2000" label="ESI-2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q153926" start="2612" end="2622" title="Alphaville (band)" label="Alphaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="2632" end="2644" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q977418" start="2656" end="2676" title="Paul&amp;#x27;s Boutique" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s Boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024747" start="2685" end="2701" title="Cabaret Voltaire (band)" label="Cabaret Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="2704" end="2716" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q836687" start="2814" end="2817" title="101 (album)" label="101"/>
<link wikidata="Q765509" start="2854" end="2876" title="Devotional (video)" label="&amp;quot;Devotional&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="2885" end="2898" title="Faith No More" label="Faith No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q128010" start="2901" end="2913" title="Fear Factory" label="Fear Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q463432" start="2916" end="2922" title="Ice MC" label="Ice MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294961" start="2925" end="2942" title="Johnny Hates Jazz" label="Johnny Hates Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855651" start="2964" end="2991" title="Turn Back the Clock (album)" label="Turn Back the Clock (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351424" start="3001" end="3006" title="KMFDM" label="KMFDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790275" start="3024" end="3029" title="Krush" label="Krush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3056" end="3076" title=" House Arrest (song)" label=" House Arrest (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q246745" start="3079" end="3092" title="Little Angels" label="Little Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127035" start="3181" end="3192" title="Jam (album)" label="Jam (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q783578" start="3195" end="3210" title="Los Prisioneros" label="Los Prisioneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787943" start="3213" end="3229" title="Mats/Morgan Band" label="Mats/Morgan Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909910" start="3242" end="3257" title="Minimal Compact" label="Minimal Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366325" start="3260" end="3279" title="Meat Beat Manifesto" label="Meat Beat Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q702006" start="3282" end="3295" title="Mouse on Mars" label="Mouse on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="3298" end="3313" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q836587" start="3353" end="3372" title="Pretty Hate Machine" label="Pretty Hate Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q318322" start="3381" end="3391" title="Die Krupps" label="Die Krupps"/>
<link wikidata="Q515942" start="3404" end="3411" title="Orbital (band)" label="Orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q420023" start="3414" end="3428" title="Tony Toni Tone" label="Tony Toni Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430158" start="3431" end="3444" title="Saint Etienne (band)" label="Saint Etienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003247" start="3502" end="3515" title="Foxbase Alpha" label="Foxbase Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q371535" start="3524" end="3536" title="Skinny Puppy" label="Skinny Puppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q714470" start="3539" end="3550" title="Steve Roach (musician)" label="Steve Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q689271" start="3553" end="3565" title="Tyske Ludder" label="Tyske Ludder"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="3578" end="3580" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="3583" end="3592" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759267" start="3648" end="3663" title="The Black Rider (album)" label="The Black Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527931" start="3672" end="3684" title="The Whispers" label="The Whispers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409039" start="3687" end="3698" title="The Wiggles" label="The Wiggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774809" start="3756" end="3767" title="The Wiggles (album)" label="The Wiggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q781236" start="3776" end="3786" title="White Town" label="White Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360367" start="3823" end="3833" title="Your Woman" label="Your Woman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280290" wikidata="Q558272" url="?curid=1280290" title="Dignāga">
<text>Dignāga (also known as &quot;Diṅnāga&quot;, ) was an Indian Buddhist philosopher and logician. He is credited as one of the Buddhist founders of Indian logic (&quot;hetu vidyā&quot;) and atomism. Dignāga&#x27;s work laid the groundwork for the development of deductive logic in India and created the first system of Buddhist logic and epistemology (pramāṇa).

According to Georges B. Dreyfus, his philosophical school brought about an Indian &quot;epistemological turn&quot; and became the &quot;standard formulation of Buddhist logic and epistemology in India and Tibet.&quot; Dignāga&#x27;s thought influenced later Buddhist philosophers like Dharmakirti and also Hindu thinkers of the Nyaya school. Dignāga&#x27;s epistemology accepted only &quot;perception&quot; (&quot;pratyaksa&quot;) and &quot;inference&quot; (&quot;anumāṇa&quot;) as valid instruments of knowledge and introduced the widely influential theory of &quot;exclusion&quot; (&quot;apoha&quot;) to explain linguistic meaning. His work on language, inferential reasoning and perception were also widely influential among later Indian philosophers. According to Richard P. Hayes &quot;some familiarity with Dinnaga&#x27;s arguments and conclusions is indispensable for anyone who wishes to understand the historical development of Indian thought.&quot;

== Early life ==
Dignāga was born in a Brahmin family. at Seeyamangalam also known as Simhavakta near Kanchipuram in what is now the Indian state of Tamil Nadu, and very little is known of his early years, except that he took Nagadatta of the Pudgalavada school as his spiritual preceptor, before being expelled and becoming a student of Vasubandhu.

==Philosophy==

Dignāga mature philosophy is expounded in his &quot;magnum opus&quot;, the &quot;Pramāṇa-samuccaya&quot;. In chapter one, Dignāga explains his epistemology which holds that there are only two &#x27;instruments of knowledge&#x27; or &#x27;valid cognitions&#x27; (&quot;pramāṇa&quot;); &quot;perception&quot; or &quot;sensation&quot; (&quot;pratyakṣa&quot;) and &quot;inference&quot; or &quot;reasoning&quot; (&quot;anumāna&quot;). In chapter one, Dignāga writes:

Sensation and reasoning are the only two means of acquiring knowledge, because two attributes are knowable; there is no knowable object other than the peculiar and the general attribute. I shall show that sensation has the peculiar attribute as its subject matter, while reasoning has the general attribute as its subject matter.

Perception is a non-conceptual knowing of particulars which is bound by causality, while inference is reasonable, linguistic and conceptual. This conservative epistemic theory was in contrast to the Nyaya school who accepted other means of knowledge such as &quot;upamāna&quot; (comparison and analogy).

=== Pratyakṣa ===
Pratyakṣa is a kind of awareness that acquires information about particulars, and is immediately present to one of the senses. This is the topic of the first chapter of the &quot;Pramāṇa-samuccaya.&quot; For Dignāga, perception is pre-verbal, pre-conceptual and unstructured sense data. In chapter two of the &quot;Pramāṇa-samuccaya&quot; he writes:

Sensation is devoid of structure. That cognition in which there is no structure is sensation. What kind of thing is this so-called structure? Attaching a name, a universal and so forth.

According to Dignāga our mind always takes raw sense data or particulars and interprets them or groups them together in more complex ways, compares them to past experiences, gives them names to classify them based on general attributes (&quot;samanyalaksana&quot;) and so forth. This process he terms &quot;kalpana&quot; (arranging, structuring). This cognitive process is already different from sensation, which is a simple cognition based only on the immediately present. Thus pratyakṣa is only awareness of particular sense data such as a patch of green color and the sensation of hardness, never awareness of a macroscopic object such an apple which is always a higher level synthesis. For Dignāga, sensation is also inerrant, it cannot &quot;stray&quot; because it is the most basic and simple phenomenon of experience or as he puts it:

&quot;it is impossible too for the object of awareness itself to be errant, for errancy is only the content of misinterpretation by the mind.&quot;

Also, for Dignaga, &quot;pratyakṣa&quot; is mostly phenomenalist and is not dependent on the existence of an external world. It is also inexpressible and private.

=== Anumāṇa ===
&quot;Anumāṇa&quot; (inference or reasoning) for Dignāga is a type of cognition which is only aware of general attributes, and is constructed out of simpler sensations. Inference can also be communicated through linguistic conventions.

A central issue which concerned Dignāga was the interpretation of signs (&quot;linga&quot;) or the evidence (&quot;hetu&quot;) which led one to an inference about states of affairs; such as how smoke can lead one to infer that there is a fire. This topic of &quot;svārthānumāna&quot; (reasoning, literally &quot;inference for oneself&quot;) is the subject of chapter two of the &quot;Pramāṇa-samuccaya&quot; while the topic of the third chapter is about demonstration (&quot;parārthānumāna&quot;, literally &quot;inference for others&quot;), that is, how one communicates one&#x27;s inferences through proper argument.

According to Richard Hayes, in Dignāga&#x27;s system, to obtain knowledge that a property (the &quot;inferable property&quot;, &quot;sadhya&quot;) is inherent in a &quot;subject of inference&quot; (&quot;paksa&quot;) it must be derived through an inferential sign (&quot;linga&quot;). For this to occur, the following must be true:

#The inferential sign must be a property of the subject of the inference. That is, there exists in the subject of inference a property, which is different from the inferable property and which is furthermore evident to the person drawing the inference; this second property may serve as an inferential sign in case it has two further characteristics.
#The inferential sign must be known to occur in at least one locus, other than the subject of inference, in which the inferable property occurs.
#The inferential sign must not be known to occur in &quot;any&quot; other loci in which the inferable property is absent.

Richard Hayes interprets these criteria as overly strict and this is because he sees Dignāga&#x27;s system as one of rational skepticism. Dignāga&#x27;s epistemology, argues Hayes, is a way to express and practice the traditional Buddhist injunction to not become attached to views and opinions. According to Hayes, for Dignāga, the role of logic is:

to counter dogmatism and prejudice. As a weapon in the battle against prejudice that rages in every mind that seeks wisdom--in minds of the vast majority of people who do not seek wisdom, prejudice simply takes full control without a contest-there is nothing as powerful as the kind of reason that lies at the heart of Dignaga&#x27;s system of logic. For it should be clear that very few of our judgments in ordinary life pass the standards set by the three characteristics of legitimate&#x27; evidence. Taken in its strictest interpretation, none of the judgments of any but a fully omniscient being passes. And, since there is no evidence that there exist any fully omniscient beings, the best available working hypothesis is that no one&#x27;s thinking is immune from errors that require revision in the face of newly discovered realities.

===&quot;Apohavada&quot; and language===
Dignāga considered the interpretation of conventional and symbolic signs such as the words and sentences of human language to be no more than special or conventional instances of the general principles of inference or anumana. He takes up several issues relating to language and its relationship to inference in the fifth chapter of his &quot;Pramāṇa-samuccaya&quot;.

During Dignāga&#x27;s time, the orthodox Indian Nyaya school and also Hindu Sanskrit grammarians (such as Bhartṛhari) had discussed issues of epistemology and language respectively, but their theories generally accepted the concept of universals which was rejected by most Buddhist philosophers. Influenced by the work of these thinkers as well as by Buddhist philosophers of the Sautrantika school who rejected Hindu theories of universals in favor of nominalism (&quot;prajñapti&quot;), Dignāga developed his own Buddhist theory of language and meaning based on the concept of &quot;apoha&quot; (exclusion). Hattori Masaaki explains the doctrine thus:

a word indicates an object merely through the exclusion of other objects (&quot;anyapoha&quot;, &quot;-vyavrtti&quot;). For example, the word &quot;cow&quot; simply means that the object is not a non-cow. As such, a word cannot denote anything real, whether it be an individual (vyakti), a universal (jati), or any other thing. The apprehension of an object by means of the exclusion of other objects is nothing but an inference. 

==Works==
As noted by Hayes, the difficulty in studying the highly terse works of Dignāga is considerable, because none of them have survived in the original Sanskrit and the Tibetan and Chinese translations which do survive show signs of having been done by translators who were not completely certain of the meaning of the work. This difficulty has also led scholars to read Dignaga through the lens of later authors such as Dharmakirti and their Indian and Tibetan interpreters as well as their Hindu Nyaya opponents. Because of this tendency in scholarship, ideas which are actually innovations of Dharmakirti and later authors have often been associated with Dignaga by scholars such as Fyodor Shcherbatskoy and S. Mookerjee, even though these thinkers often differ.

=== &quot;Pramāṇa-samuccaya&quot; ===
Dignāga&#x27;s &quot;magnum opus&quot;, the (&quot;Compendium of Epistemology,&quot; Derge Kanjur no. 4203) and its auto-commentary &quot;(Pramāṇasamuccayavṛtti&quot;), examined perception, language and inferential reasoning. It presents perception as a bare cognition, devoid of conceptualization and sees language as useful fictions created through a process of exclusion (apoha).

The work has six chapters. Chapter one is on perception (&quot;pratyakṣa&quot;), chapter on inference for one’s self (&quot;svārthānumāna&quot;), chapter three on inference for others (&quot;parārthānumāna&quot;), chapter four discusses reason and examples (&quot;hētu-dṛṣṭāna&quot;), chapter five deals &quot;apoha&quot; and chapter six deals with analogy (&quot;jāti&quot;).

This work exists in two Tibetan translations. The Sanskrit text was initially thought to be lost by modern scholars, but then a manuscript of the commentary by Jinendrabuddhi was discovered. Modern scholars are currently working to extract and reconstruct the Sanskrit text of the &quot;Pramāṇasamuccaya&quot; from the commentary in which it is embedded.

Kumarila Bhatta, in his &quot;Shlokavartika&quot;, responds to Dignāga&#x27;s criticism of Mimamsa Sutra 1.1.4.

=== List of other known works ===
His other surviving works on reasoning and epistemology include:
*&quot;Alambana-parīkṣā&quot; (&quot;Examination of the Object of Cognition,&quot; Derge Kanjur no. 4205) and its auto commentary (&quot;Ālambanaparīkṣāvṛtti&quot;). This work seeks to prove that &quot;ālambanas&quot;, the objects of perception, are not real and that consciousness alone is real.
*&quot;Hetucakraḍamaru&quot; (&quot;The Reason Wheel&quot; &quot;Drum&quot;), considered his first work on formal logic. It may be regarded as a bridge between the older doctrine of &quot;trairūpya&quot; and Dignāga&#x27;s own later theory of &quot;vyapti&quot; which is a concept related to the Western notion of implication.
* &quot;*Hetvābhāsamukha (Introduction to Fallacious Reasoning)&quot;
*&quot;Nyāya-mukha&quot; (&quot;Introduction to Logic&quot;), Taisho no. 1628 translated by Xuanzang and T. 1629 by Yijing
* &quot;*Sāmānyalakṣaṇaparīkṣā (Examination of General Characteristics),&quot; i.e. Guanzongxiang lun (觀總相論)
*&quot;Trikāla-parikṣa&quot; (&quot;Examination of tri-temporality&quot;)
*&quot;*Upādāyaprajñaptiprakaraṇa&quot; or &quot;*Prajñaptihetusaṃgrahaśāstra&quot; (only available in Chinese as &quot;Qushishishe lun&quot; 取事施設論)
He also wrote other works of a more religious or scriptural nature:

* &quot;Samantabhadracaryāpraṇidhānārthasaṃgraha&quot; (Derge Kanjur no. 4012) - a commentary on the &quot;Samantabhadracaryāpraṇidhāna&quot;, part of the &quot;Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra&quot;.
* &quot;Abhidharmakośamarmapradīpa&quot; (Derge no. 4095) – a condensed summary of Vasubandhu&#x27;s seminal work the &quot;Abhidharmakośa&quot;
*&quot;Āryamañjughoṣastotra&quot; (Tibetan: &quot;Ḥphags-pa ḥjam-paḥi-dbyans-kyibstod-pa&quot;, Derge no. 2712)
*&quot;Prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtha&quot; (Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom, Derge 3809) - a summary of the Mahayana &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikaprajñāpāramitā,&quot; survives in Tibetan and Sanskrit.
*&quot;Guṇaparyantastotraṭīkā&quot; (Tibetan: &quot;Yon-tam mthaḥ-yas-par bstod-paḥi ḥgrelpa&quot;, Derge no. 1156) - a commentary on the &quot;Guṇaparyantastotra&quot; of Ratnadāsa
*&quot;Miśraka-stotra&quot; (&quot;Mixed Hymn,&quot; Tibetan&quot;: Spel-mar bstod-pa shes-bya-ba,&quot; Derge no. 1150), it has also been ascribed to a different author: Mātṛceṭa
*&quot;Yogāvatāra&quot; (&quot;Introduction to Yoga&quot;, Tibetan: &quot;Rnal-ḥbyor-la ḥjug-pa&quot;, Derge no. 4074) - a work on yoga from the perspective of mind-only
*&quot;Hastavālaprakaraṇa&quot; (Derge no. 3844 and 3848) it has been wrongly ascribed to Āryadeva;
There are also several works said to be by Dignaga that are now lost:

* &quot;Dvādaśaśatikā&quot;
* &quot;*Vaiśeṣikaparīkṣā (Examination of Vaiśeṣika)&quot;
* &quot;Vādavidhānaṭīkā - Commentary on Vasubandhu&#x27;s Vādavidhi&quot;
* &quot;Nyāyaparīkṣā (Examination of Logic)&quot;
*&quot;*Sāṅkhyaparīkṣā (Examination of Samkhya)&quot;
*&quot;Hetumukha (Introduction to Reasoning)&quot;
*&quot;Sāmānyaparīkṣā (Examination of Generality),&quot; either lost or the same as &quot;*Sāmānyalakṣaṇaparīkṣā&quot;

==Tradition and influence==

Dignāga founded a tradition of Buddhist epistemology and reasoning, and this school is sometimes called the &quot;School of Dignāga&quot; or &quot;The school of Dinnāga and Dharmakīrti&quot; (due to the strong influence of Dharmakīrti as well). In Tibetan it is often called &quot;those who follow reasoning&quot; (Tibetan: &quot;rigs pa rjes su ‘brang ba&quot;); in modern literature it is sometimes known by the Sanskrit &#x27;pramāṇavāda&#x27;, often translated as &quot;the Epistemological School.&quot; Many of the figures in these were commentators on the works of Dinnāga and Dharmakīrti, but some of them also wrote original works and developed the tradition in new directions.

The work of this tradition also went on to influence the Buddhist Madhyamaka school, through the work of figures like Bhāvaviveka (), Jñanagarbha (700-760), and Śāntarakṣita (725–788). These thinkers attempted to adopt the logical and epistemological insights of Dinnāga and Dharmakīrti to defend the tenets of the Madhyamaka school.

Dignāga&#x27;s tradition of logic and epistemology continued in Tibet, where it was expanded by thinkers such as Cha-ba (1182–1251) and Sakya Pandita (1182–1251).

Dignāga also influenced non-Buddhist Sanskrit thinkers. According to Lawrence J. McCrea, and Parimal G. Patil, Dignāga set in motion an &quot;epistemic turn&quot; in Indian philosophy. After Dignāga, most Indian philosophers were now expected to defend their views by using a fully developed epistemological theory (which they also had to defend).

==See also==
* Hetucakra
* Trairūpya
* Buddhist logic
* Critical Buddhism

==References==
==Further reading==
* Chu, Junjie (2006).On Dignāga&#x27;s theory of the object of cognition as presented in PS (V) 1, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 29 (2), 211–254
* Frauwallner, Erich, &quot;Dignāga, sein Werk und seine Entwicklung.&quot; (Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- und Ostasiens 2:83–164, 1959)
* Hattori Masaaki, &quot;Dignāga, On Perception, being the Pratyakṣapariccheda of Dignāga&#x27;s Pramāṇasamuccaya from the Sanskrit fragments and the Tibetan Versions&quot; (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968)
* Hayes, Richard, &quot;Dignāga on the Interpretation of Signs&quot; (Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company, 1982)
* Katsura Shoryu, &quot;Dignāga and Dharmakīrti on apoha&quot; in E. Steinkellner (ed.), &quot;Studies in the Buddhist Epistemological Tradition&quot; (Vienna, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1991), pp. 129–146
* Mookerjee, S. &quot;The Buddhist Philosophy of Universal Flux, an Exposition of the Philosophy of Critical Realism as expounded by the School of Dignāga&quot; (Calcutta, 1935)
* Sastri, N. Aiyaswami, &quot;Diṅnāga&#x27;s Ālambanaparīkṣā and Vṛtti. Restored with the commentary of Dharmapāla into Sanskrit from the Tibetan and Chinese versions and edited with English translations and notes with extracts from Vinītadeva&#x27;s commentary.&quot; (Madras: The Adyar Library. 1942)
* Tucci, Giuseppe, &quot;The Nyāyamukha of Dignāga, the oldest Buddhist Text on Logic after Chinese and Tibetan Materials&quot; (Materialien zur Kunde des Buddhismus, 15 Heft, Heidelberg, 1930)
* Vidyabhusana, S.C. &quot;A History of Indian Logic – Ancient, Mediaeval and Modern Schools&quot; (Calcutta, 1921)

==External links==
*Dignaga&#x27;s Logic of Invention, by Volker Peckhaus
*Vidhabhusana, Satis Chandra (1907). History of the Mediaeval School of Indian Logic. Calcutta University.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q558272" start="0" end="7" title="Dignāga" label="Dignāga"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="124" end="132" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661527" start="145" end="157" title="Indian logic" label="Indian logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984266" start="187" end="194" title="Buddhist atomism" label="atomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="259" end="274" title="deductive logic" label="deductive logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925603" start="316" end="330" title="Buddhist logic" label="Buddhist logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="335" end="347" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714540" start="349" end="356" title="pramāṇa" label="pramāṇa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102230" start="373" end="391" title="Georges Dreyfus" label="Georges B. Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q457990" start="645" end="656" title="Dharmakirti" label="Dharmakirti"/>
<link wikidata="Q595650" start="688" end="693" title="Nyaya" label="Nyaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="717" end="729" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="768" end="789" title="Pramana#Hinduism" label="&amp;quot;pratyaksa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714540" start="824" end="831" title="anumāṇa" label="anumāṇa"/>
<link wikidata="Q105431139" start="950" end="955" title="apoha" label="apoha"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="1006" end="1014" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="1016" end="1027" title="Inference" label="inferential"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="1042" end="1052" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326341" start="1128" end="1144" title="Richard Hayes (professor)" label="Richard P. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="1297" end="1311" title="Indian philosophy" label="Indian thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="1359" end="1366" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445997" start="1378" end="1391" title="Seeyamangalam" label="Seeyamangalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="1422" end="1433" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="1469" end="1479" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638029" start="1563" end="1574" title="Pudgalavada" label="Pudgalavada"/>
<link wikidata="Q316343" start="1658" end="1668" title="Vasubandhu" label="Vasubandhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631099" start="1768" end="1785" title="Pramāṇa-samuccaya" label="Pramāṇa-samuccaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="1830" end="1842" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714540" start="1955" end="1962" title="Pramana" label="pramāṇa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207323" start="2026" end="2035" title="Pratyaksha" label="pratyakṣa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714540" start="2101" end="2108" title="anumāna" label="anumāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q595650" start="2680" end="2685" title="Nyaya" label="Nyaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="6449" end="6459" title="skepticism" label="skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q595650" start="7977" end="7982" title="Nyaya" label="Nyaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q335161" start="8035" end="8045" title="Bhartṛhari" label="Bhartṛhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551307" start="8164" end="8174" title="Universal (metaphysics)" label="universals"/>
<link wikidata="Q255774" start="8309" end="8320" title="Sautrantika" label="Sautrantika"/>
<link wikidata="Q105431139" start="8514" end="8519" title="apoha" label="apoha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="9174" end="9182" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q457990" start="9443" end="9454" title="Dharmakirti" label="Dharmakirti"/>
<link wikidata="Q595650" start="9520" end="9525" title="Nyaya" label="Nyaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341741" start="9708" end="9728" title="Fyodor Shcherbatskoy" label="Fyodor Shcherbatskoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="9848" end="9859" title="Masterpiece" label="magnum opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q592980" start="9918" end="9924" title="Kangyur" label="Kanjur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10202" end="10207" title="Buddhist logic#Doctrine of Anyapoha" label="apoha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207323" start="10274" end="10283" title="pratyakṣa" label="pratyakṣa"/>
<link wikidata="Q105431139" start="10521" end="10526" title="apoha" label="apoha"/>
<link wikidata="Q185816" start="10560" end="10567" title="analogy" label="analogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q774847" start="10945" end="10953" title="Kumārila Bhaṭṭa" label="Kumarila"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109516" start="11164" end="11172" title="Alambana" label="Alambana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748124" start="11461" end="11470" title="Hetucakra" label="Hetucakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833019" start="11642" end="11651" title="trairūpya" label="trairūpya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943879" start="11703" end="11709" title="vyapti" label="vyapti"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="11768" end="11779" title="logical consequence" label="implication"/>
<link wikidata="Q595650" start="11858" end="11863" title="Nyaya" label="Nyāya"/>
<link wikidata="Q592980" start="12431" end="12443" title="Kanjur" label="Derge Kanjur"/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="12536" end="12551" title="Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra" label="Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q316343" start="12642" end="12652" title="Vasubandhu" label="Vasubandhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582672" start="12683" end="12697" title="Abhidharmakosha" label="Abhidharmakośa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12937" end="12964" title="Prajnaparamita#A.E1.B9.A3.E1.B9.ADas.C4.81hasrik.C4.81 Praj.C3.B1.C4.81p.C4.81ramit.C4.81" label="Aṣṭasāhasrikaprajñāpāramitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q651387" start="13779" end="13788" title="Vaisheshika" label="Vaiśeṣika"/>
<link wikidata="Q164828" start="13959" end="13966" title="Samkhya" label="Samkhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="14588" end="14596" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q844421" start="14927" end="14937" title="Madhyamaka" label="Madhyamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357245" start="14979" end="14990" title="Bhāvaviveka" label="Bhāvaviveka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17993229" start="14995" end="15006" title="Jñānagarbha" label="Jñanagarbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q553722" start="15022" end="15034" title="Śāntarakṣita" label="Śāntarakṣita"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="15260" end="15265" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q982008" start="15332" end="15345" title="Sakya Pandita" label="Sakya Pandita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748124" start="15724" end="15733" title="Hetucakra" label="Hetucakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833019" start="15736" end="15745" title="Trairūpya" label="Trairūpya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925603" start="15748" end="15762" title="Buddhist logic" label="Buddhist logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241345" start="15765" end="15782" title="Critical Buddhism" label="Critical Buddhism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280292" wikidata="Q30294590" url="?curid=1280292" title="University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center">
<text>&lt;noinclude&gt;
University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center (UH Cleveland Medical Center), formerly known as &quot;University Hospitals Case Medical Center&quot; (&quot;UH Case Medical Center&quot;), is a large not-for-profit academic medical complex in Cleveland, Ohio, United States.

UH Cleveland Medical Center is the main campus of University Hospitals. With 150 locations throughout the Cleveland metropolitan area, the University Hospitals health system encompasses hospitals, outpatient centers, and primary care clinics.

University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center is the main teaching hospital of Case Western Reserve University. It also has an affiliation with the Northeast Ohio Medical University.

==Locations==
The main campus of the University Hospitals system is UH Cleveland Medical Center in the University Circle neighborhood of Cleveland, neighboring both Case Western Reserve University and the Cleveland Clinic to the west. The UH Cleveland Medical Center complex comprises the Alfred and Norma Lerner Tower, Samuel Mather Pavilion, Lakeside Hospital, Rainbow Babies &amp; Children&#x27;s Hospital, MacDonald Women&#x27;s Hospital, Seidman Cancer Center, and Hanna Pavilion. In addition to the main campus, UH provides hospital services at 11 regional locations throughout Northeast Ohio.

Main Campus
* UH Cleveland Medical Center (&quot;Lakeside&quot;, &quot;Bolwell&quot;, &quot;Humphrey&quot;, &quot;Mather&quot;)
* UH Rainbow Babies &amp; Children&#x27;s Hospital (&quot;Rainbow&quot;)
* UH Seidman Cancer Center (&quot;Seidman&quot;)
* UH MacDonald Women&#x27;s Hospital (&quot;MacDonald&quot;)

Regional Hospitals
* UH Ahuja Medical Center - Beachwood
* UH Beachwood Medical Center - Beachwood (former Lake Health)
* UH Conneaut Medical Center - Conneaut
* UH Elyria Medical Center - Elyria
* UH Geauga Medical Center - Chardon
* UH Geneva Medical Center - Geneva
* UH Lake West Medical Center - Willoughby (former Lake Health)
* UH Parma Medical Center - Parma
* UH Portage Medical Center - Ravenna
* UH Samaritan Medical Center - Ashland
* UH St. John Medical Center - Westlake
* UH TriPoint Medical Center - Painesville (former Lake Health)

On April 16, 2021, University Hospitals acquired nearby Lake Health, which operated 10+ facilities.

=== Former Hospitals ===

* Crile General Hospital - Cleveland (changed affiliation to VA)
* Lakeside Hospital - Cleveland
* UH St. Michael Hospital - Cleveland
* UH Marymount Hospital - Garfield Heights (changed affiliation and merged with Cleveland Clinic)
* UH Richmond Medical Center - Richmond Heights, where inpatient psychiatry was previously housed
* UH Bedford Medical Center - Bedford

==Rankings==
* UH Cleveland Medical Center is ranked in the top 25 nationally in Ear, Nose &amp; Throat; Gastroenterology &amp; GI Surgery, Gynecology; Nephrology; and Neurology &amp; Neurosurgery.
*Rainbow Babies &amp; Children&#x27;s Hospital, is ranked #6 nationally for Neonatal Care by the &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;.
*Among UH Rainbow pediatric specialties, Neonatology, Pulmonology, Diabetes &amp; Endocrinology, Orthopedics, Cancer, and Urology are ranked among the top 25 in the nation.
* Cleveland Medical Center and Case School of Medicine together form the largest biomedical research center in Ohio.
* In biomedical research, Case Medical Center ranks among top 15 centers in the United States with approximately $75 million in annual extramural research funding and a further $20 million in various clinical trials.
* University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center also includes MacDonald Women&#x27;s Hospital, Ohio&#x27;s only hospital for women; and Seidman Cancer Center (formerly known as Ireland Cancer Center).

==Vision 2010==

Vision 2010 was the largest construction and upgrade project in the history of University Hospitals. New construction included a new 200-bed cancer hospital (UH Seidman Cancer Center), upgraded emergency room facilities at CMC, a new neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) at Rainbow Babies &amp; Children&#x27;s Hospital, and new construction at other hospital sites. The capital expenditure for this project, according to hospital press releases, was to be approximately US$1 billion. Construction was originally due to be completed by the year 2010, but was not scheduled completed until 2011.

==Harrington Project==
The Harrington Project for Discovery &amp; Development, launched in 2012, is a $300 million initiative at the University Hospitals whose purpose is to speed the delivery of new drugs and enhance the medical reputations of Cleveland and the Hospitals. It was established through a $50 million gift from the Harrington family and an additional $100 million in support from University Hospitals. The project has three components, the Harrington Discovery Institute (HDI), the Innovation Support Center (ISC), and Biomotiv.

In June 2014, the Harrington Discovery Institute received a $25 million grant from the State of Ohio through the Third Frontier economic development program to further its mission.

==Notable alumni and faculty==
* George Washington Crile (1910-1924 Chair of Surgery) - Performed first blood transfusion. Established Lakeside Hospital, and later co-founded Cleveland Clinic
* Claude Beck (Surgery residency alum; 1924 -1971 Professor of Cardiovascular Surgery - first such position in US)
** Performed first surgical treatment of coronary artery disease (1935).
** Performed first defibrillation using machine he built with James Rand (1947)
** Developed concept of Beck&#x27;s Triad
** Started the first CPR teaching course for medical professionals (1950).
* Peter C. Agre (1978 Internal Medicine alumnus) - co-recipient 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for discoveries that have clarified how salts and water are transported out of and into the cells of the body, leading to a better understanding of many diseases of the kidneys, heart, muscles and nervous system.
* Alfredo Palacio (Internal Medicine alumnus) - President of Ecuador (2005–2007)
* Peter Pronovost - intensive care physician known globally for his work on patient safety
* Sanjay Rajagopalan - Division Chief of Cardiovascular Medicine

==In popular culture==
* In 2015, the cable network NatGeo broadcast Brain Surgery Live from UH Cleveland Medical Center, the first brain surgery ever televised live in the United States.
*In 2017, Roger Daltrey of The Who visited cancer patients at the Angie Fowler Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer Institute at UH Rainbow Babies &amp; Children&#x27;s Hospital, part of University Hospitals.
* In 2018, the nationally syndicated program The Doctors featured an in-utero cardiac procedure performed at University Hospitals.

== Controversy ==
University Hospitals faced multiple lawsuits following an incident in March 2018 at its Fertility Center that compromised 4,000+ eggs and embryos stored in liquid nitrogen as the result of an unexpected temperature fluctuation with a tissue cryo storage tank.

In 2021, amid the COVID-19 pandemic, University Hospitals required all workers to be vaccinated against the disease. It later permitted its careworkers to be unvaccinated against COVID due to a federal injunction. The mandate was reinstated following a Supreme Court ruling.

==See also==
*Rainbow Babies &amp; Children&#x27;s Hospital
*Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
*Cleveland Clinic
*Medical centers in the United States

==References==
==External links==
*University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30294590" start="18" end="93" title="University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center" label="University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center (UH Cleveland Medical Center)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116834119" start="215" end="229" title="not-for-profit" label="not-for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="258" end="267" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="269" end="273" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="275" end="288" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q30294590" start="341" end="361" title="University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center" label="University Hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600502" start="397" end="424" title="Greater Cleveland" label="Cleveland metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048331" start="614" end="645" title="Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine" label="Case Western Reserve University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057949" start="683" end="716" title="Northeast Ohio Medical University" label="Northeast Ohio Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894574" start="822" end="839" title="University Circle" label="University Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="884" end="915" title="Case Western Reserve University" label="Case Western Reserve University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117596" start="924" end="940" title="Cleveland Clinic" label="Cleveland Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057945" start="1303" end="1317" title="Northeast Ohio" label="Northeast Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284577" start="1450" end="1498" title="Rainbow Babies &amp;amp; Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="UH Rainbow Babies &amp;amp; Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894774" start="1653" end="1676" title="University Hospitals Ahuja Medical Center" label="UH Ahuja Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q812890" start="1679" end="1688" title="Beachwood, OH" label="Beachwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q868777" start="1783" end="1791" title="Conneaut, OH" label="Conneaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323499" start="1794" end="1818" title="University Hospitals Elyria Medical Center" label="UH Elyria Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q932561" start="1821" end="1827" title="Elyria, OH" label="Elyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q986306" start="1857" end="1864" title="Chardon, OH" label="Chardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005715" start="1894" end="1900" title="Geneva, OH" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233824" start="1933" end="1943" title="Willoughby, Ohio" label="Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q862711" start="1993" end="1998" title="Parma, OH" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353039" start="2001" end="2026" title="UH Portage Medical Center" label="UH Portage Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q989843" start="2029" end="2036" title="Ravenna, OH" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q725573" start="2069" end="2076" title="Ashland, OH" label="Ashland"/>
<link wikidata="Q140006" start="2108" end="2116" title="Westlake, OH" label="Westlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q998689" start="2148" end="2159" title="Painesville, OH" label="Painesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476128" start="2238" end="2249" title="Lake Health" label="Lake Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="2336" end="2345" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227716" start="2446" end="2467" title="Cleveland Clinic Marymount Hospital" label="UH Marymount Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007032" start="2470" end="2486" title="Garfield Heights, Ohio" label="Garfield Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q961954" start="2573" end="2589" title="Richmond Heights, OH" label="Richmond Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="2607" end="2617" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q813866" start="2670" end="2677" title="Bedford, OH" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284577" start="2878" end="2923" title="Rainbow Babies &amp;amp; Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Rainbow Babies &amp;amp; Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="2980" end="3008" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="3936" end="3950" title="emergency room" label="emergency room"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="3976" end="3984" title="neonatal" label="neonatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008292" start="4006" end="4010" title="NICU" label="NICU"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987878" start="4870" end="4878" title="Biomotiv" label="Biomotiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545958" start="5096" end="5119" title="George Washington Crile" label="George Washington Crile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117596" start="5238" end="5254" title="Cleveland Clinic" label="Cleveland Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590825" start="5257" end="5268" title="Claude Beck" label="Claude Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141839" start="5505" end="5515" title="James Rand, Jr." label="James Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622301" start="5547" end="5564" title="Beck&amp;#x27;s triad (cardiology)" label="Beck&amp;#x27;s Triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="5586" end="5589" title="Cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="CPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q102250" start="5642" end="5655" title="Peter C. Agre" label="Peter C. Agre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="5709" end="5720" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q217555" start="5949" end="5964" title="Alfredo Palacio" label="Alfredo Palacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="6008" end="6015" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176458" start="6030" end="6045" title="Peter Pronovost" label="Peter Pronovost"/>
<link wikidata="Q679690" start="6048" end="6062" title="intensive care" label="intensive care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475557" start="6104" end="6118" title="patient safety" label="patient safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q117194587" start="6121" end="6139" title="Sanjay Rajagopalan" label="Sanjay Rajagopalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="6765" end="6772" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="6867" end="6873" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="6932" end="6943" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284577" start="7280" end="7325" title="Rainbow Babies &amp;amp; Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Rainbow Babies &amp;amp; Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048331" start="7327" end="7377" title="Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine" label="Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117596" start="7379" end="7395" title="Cleveland Clinic" label="Cleveland Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806485" start="7397" end="7433" title="Medical centers in the United States" label="Medical centers in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280293" wikidata="Q5246081" url="?curid=1280293" title="Dean College">
<text>Dean College is a private college in Franklin, Massachusetts. It offers bachelor&#x27;s degrees, associate degrees, and certificates.

== History ==
Dean College was founded by Oliver Dean as a co-educational academy, Dean Academy, in 1865. He gave the school approximately nine acres of land and donated $125,000 towards its construction. The first class at Dean Academy was on October 1, 1866, with 44 students attending at the local Universalist Church.

The main building of the Academy, Dean Hall, was completed in 1868. During the summer of 1872, it was destroyed by a fire, but reconstruction began and finished on June 7, 1874.

The school&#x27;s name changed twice more, Dean Junior College in May 1941 and then Dean College in May 1994. The school&#x27;s academic mascot is a bulldog named Boomer.

== Campus ==
The campus includes Dean Hall, the college&#x27;s oldest structure which houses classrooms, radio station Power 88 WGAO, offices, athletics offices, basketball/volleyball gymnasium, the Center for Student Administrative Services (CSAS), Campus Safety, video production studios/classrooms, the president&#x27;s office and board room, and two floors of student residences. In 2011, Dean College unveiled a new campus center.

Dean has completed over $60 million in campus improvements over the past 10 years, including Dorothy and Glendon Horne &#x27;31 Hall, Green Family Library Learning Commons, Morton Family Learning Center, athletic field updates (press box, scoreboards, dugouts), Grant Field renovation, and the Rooney Shaw Center for Innovation in Teaching.

There are 13 different residence halls on campus, including furnished condominiums in downtown Franklin, suite-style living, all-female residence halls, all-male residence halls and co-ed residence halls.

Dean College offers bachelor&#x27;s degree and associate degree programs within four schools: School of the Arts, Dean R. Sanders &#x27;47 School of Business, Joan Phelps Palladino School of Dance, and School of Liberal Arts. Dean also offers part-time continuing studies options to serve students who wish to pursue their education on a part-time basis. Part-time students may also enroll in certificate programs.

== Athletics ==
The school has 16 athletic teams, known as Bulldogs. They participate in Division III of the NCAA in the following sports:
Upon transition into the NCAA, they accepted membership for all sports into the Great Northeast Athletic Conference except for football.

They accepted membership into the Eastern Collegiate Football Conference. Dean College students also participate in intramural sports.

==Notable alumni==

* Richard Belzer, actor, stand-up comedian, and author
* Broderick Crawford, Academy Award-winning actor
* Jack Cronin, professional football player
* Greg Dickerson, sportscaster
* Zachary Dixon, professional football player
* Sage Francis, hip hop recording artist and spoken word poet
* Eddie Grant, lawyer, professional baseball player, U.S. soldier during World War I, and namesake of Grant Field at Dean College
* William D. Green, business executive
* Walt Handelsman, editorial cartoonist
* Gabby Hartnett, professional baseball player
* Doc Hazelton, professional baseball player and college coach
* Eric Holtz, basketball coach
* James Gordon Irving, natural-history illustrator
* Emilie Baker Loring, romance novelist
* Andrae Murphy, American football player and coach
* Kodo Nishimura, Japanese Buddhist monk, and makeup artist
* Baran Süzer, Turkish businessman
* Thomas Paolino, politician
* Lucky Whitehead, professional football player
* Francis H. Woodward, politician
* Maury Youmans, professional football player
* Joe Swan, Guitarist

==See also==
* Dean Bulldogs football
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Norfolk County, Massachusetts

==References==
==External links==
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5246081" start="0" end="12" title="Dean College" label="Dean College"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="18" end="33" title="private college" label="private college"/>
<link wikidata="Q942254" start="37" end="60" title="Franklin, Massachusetts" label="Franklin, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="72" end="94" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="97" end="113" title="associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q55418434" start="177" end="188" title="Oliver Dean" label="Oliver Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="194" end="208" title="co-educational" label="co-educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q893252" start="436" end="455" title="Universalist Church" label="Universalist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="751" end="780" title="school mascot" label="school&amp;#x27;s academic mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949642" start="937" end="941" title="WGAO" label="WGAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1814" end="1836" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="1841" end="1857" title="associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="2299" end="2311" title="NCAA Division III" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="2319" end="2323" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599647" start="2429" end="2464" title="Great Northeast Athletic Conference" label="Great Northeast Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330064" start="2521" end="2559" title="Eastern Collegiate Football Conference" label="Eastern Collegiate Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q382647" start="2603" end="2620" title="intramural sports" label="intramural sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q542816" start="2645" end="2659" title="Richard Belzer" label="Richard Belzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182349" start="2700" end="2718" title="Broderick Crawford" label="Broderick Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090517" start="2750" end="2761" title="Jack Cronin (American football)" label="Jack Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605495" start="2794" end="2808" title="Greg Dickerson" label="Greg Dickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063951" start="2825" end="2838" title="Zachary Dixon" label="Zachary Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q676223" start="2871" end="2883" title="Sage Francis" label="Sage Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="2885" end="2892" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="2914" end="2925" title="spoken word" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336080" start="2933" end="2944" title="Eddie Grant (baseball)" label="Eddie Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3004" end="3015" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007467" start="3063" end="3079" title="William D. Green" label="William D. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963978" start="3102" end="3117" title="Walt Handelsman" label="Walt Handelsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024627" start="3119" end="3139" title="editorial cartoonist" label="editorial cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093501" start="3142" end="3156" title="Gabby Hartnett" label="Gabby Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287060" start="3189" end="3201" title="Doc Hazelton" label="Doc Hazelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q63090860" start="3252" end="3262" title="Eric Holtz" label="Eric Holtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22005578" start="3283" end="3302" title="James Gordon Irving" label="James Gordon Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371777" start="3334" end="3353" title="Emilie Baker Loring" label="Emilie Baker Loring"/>
<link wikidata="Q117226685" start="3374" end="3387" title="Andrae Murphy" label="Andrae Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75076046" start="3426" end="3440" title="Kodo Nishimura" label="Kodo Nishimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="3442" end="3450" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3451" end="3459" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q62140822" start="3486" end="3497" title="Baran Süzer" label="Baran Süzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58975367" start="3521" end="3535" title="Thomas Paolino" label="Thomas Paolino"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066342" start="3550" end="3565" title="Lucky Whitehead" label="Lucky Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105252" start="3598" end="3617" title="Francis H. Woodward" label="Francis H. Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793990" start="3632" end="3645" title="Maury Youmans" label="Maury Youmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316406" start="3678" end="3686" title="Joe Swan" label="Joe Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q117273295" start="3714" end="3736" title="Dean Bulldogs football" label="Dean Bulldogs football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977026" start="3738" end="3816" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Norfolk County, Massachusetts" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Norfolk County, Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280301" wikidata="Q1454739" url="?curid=1280301" title="Languages of Gabon">
<text>French is the official language in Gabon, spoken natively in large metropolitan areas and in total by 320,000 people or 14% of the country. 32% of the people speak Fang as a mother tongue. 
French is the medium of instruction. Before World War II very few Gabonese learned French, nearly all of them working in either business or government administration. After the war, France worked for universal primary education in Gabon, and by the 1960-61 census, 47% of the Gabonese over the age of 14 spoke some French, while 13% were literate in the language. By the 1990s, the literacy rate had risen to about 60%.

Gabon is a Francophone country, where, as of 2024, 1.683 million (66.3%) out of 2.539 million people speak French.

It is estimated that 80% of the country&#x27;s population can speak the language competently and one-third of residents of Libreville, the capital city, had become native French speakers. 

Across major metropolitan areas, French is increasingly being spoken as a native language as well. 

More than 10,000 French people live in Gabon, and France predominates the country&#x27;s foreign cultural and commercial influences. Outside the capital, French is less commonly spoken, though it is used by those who have completed a secondary or university education.

The indigenous languages are all members of the Bantu family, estimated to have come to Gabon about 2,000 years ago, and differentiated into about 40 languages. They are generally spoken but not written; while missionaries from the United States and France developed transcriptions for a number of languages based on the Latin alphabet starting in the 1840s, and translated the Bible into several of them, French colonial policy officially promoted the study of French and discouraged African languages. The languages continue to be transmitted through family and clan, and individuals in cities and other areas where different people may learn several Bantu languages.

The Gabonese government sponsored research on the Bantu languages starting in the 1970s.

The three largest languages are Fang, Mbere, and Sira (Eshira), each with about 25–30% of the speakers. The remainder of the languages (including Teke, Vili, Punu, Myene and Kota) are single-digit percentages, and some have only a few thousand speakers.

Education for the deaf in Gabon uses American Sign Language, introduced by the deaf American missionary Andrew Foster. (See Francophone African Sign Language.)

== List of languages ==
*Indo-European languages
**&quot;Romance languages&quot;
***French (ISO code fra)
*Niger–Congo languages
**&quot;Beti languages&quot;
***Fang (fan)
**&quot;Kele–Tsogo languages&quot;
***Kendell (kbs)
***Sake (sag)
***Seki (syi)
***Sighu (sxe)
***Simba (sbw)
***Tsogo (tsv)
***Viya (gev)
***Wumbvu (wum)
**&quot;Makaa–Njem languages&quot;
***Bekwel (bkw)
**&quot;Mbam languages&quot;
***Bubi (buw)
**&quot;Mbete languages&quot;
***Kanin (kzo)
**&quot;Nzebi languages&quot;
***Duma (dma)
***Tsaangi (tsa)
***Wandji (wdd)
**&quot;Sawabantu languages&quot;
***Benga (ben)
***Yasa (yko)
**&quot;Sira languages&quot;
***Barama (bbg)
***Bwisi (bwz)
***Lumbu (lup)
***Sangu (snq)
***Sira (swj), aka Eshira, Shira
***Vili (vif)
**&quot;Teke languages&quot;
***Northern Teke (teg)
***Western Teke (tez)
***Vumbu (vum)
*Ubangian languages
**&quot;Ngbaka languages&quot;
***Baka

==References==
==External links==
* Ethnologue.com report on languages of Gabon
* PanAfriL10n page on Gabon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="35" end="40" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33484" start="164" end="168" title="Fang language" label="Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="234" end="246" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582658" start="256" end="264" title="Gabonese people" label="Gabonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="273" end="279" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="372" end="378" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="421" end="426" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582658" start="466" end="474" title="Gabonese people" label="Gabonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="505" end="511" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="622" end="633" title="Francophone" label="Francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825" start="850" end="860" title="Libreville" label="Libreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="1035" end="1048" title="French people" label="French people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="1057" end="1062" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1068" end="1074" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="1336" end="1341" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="1376" end="1381" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1520" end="1533" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1538" end="1544" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="1609" end="1623" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1666" end="1671" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q33484" start="2081" end="2085" title="Fang language" label="Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q36062" start="2087" end="2092" title="Mbere language" label="Mbere"/>
<link wikidata="Q36599" start="2098" end="2102" title="Sira language" label="Sira"/>
<link wikidata="Q36528" start="2195" end="2199" title="Teke languages" label="Teke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558409" start="2201" end="2205" title="Vili language" label="Vili"/>
<link wikidata="Q36401" start="2207" end="2211" title="Punu language" label="Punu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35832" start="2213" end="2218" title="Myene language" label="Myene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35607" start="2223" end="2227" title="Kota language (Gabon)" label="Kota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="2330" end="2335" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="2341" end="2363" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756985" start="2408" end="2421" title="Andrew Foster (educator)" label="Andrew Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808158" start="2428" end="2461" title="Francophone African Sign Language" label="Francophone African Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="2490" end="2513" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="2522" end="2539" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2549" end="2555" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="2572" end="2593" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger–Congo languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35118" start="2602" end="2616" title="Beti languages" label="Beti languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33484" start="2626" end="2630" title="Fang language" label="Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385577" start="2645" end="2665" title="Kele–Tsogo languages" label="Kele–Tsogo languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35556" start="2675" end="2682" title="Kande language" label="Kendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q36425" start="2692" end="2696" title="Sake language" label="Sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q36547" start="2706" end="2710" title="Seki language" label="Seki"/>
<link wikidata="Q36431" start="2720" end="2725" title="Sighu language" label="Sighu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36430" start="2735" end="2740" title="Simba language" label="Simba"/>
<link wikidata="Q36674" start="2750" end="2755" title="Tsogo language" label="Tsogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937974" start="2765" end="2769" title="Viya language" label="Viya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36891" start="2779" end="2785" title="Wumbvu language" label="Wumbvu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603899" start="2800" end="2820" title="Makaa–Njem languages" label="Makaa–Njem languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34950" start="2830" end="2836" title="Bekwel language" label="Bekwel"/>
<link wikidata="Q687826" start="2851" end="2865" title="Mbam languages" label="Mbam languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35110" start="2875" end="2879" title="Bubi language" label="Bubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346910" start="2894" end="2909" title="Mbete languages" label="Mbete languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35683" start="2919" end="2924" title="Kaningi language" label="Kanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755498" start="2939" end="2954" title="Nzebi languages" label="Nzebi languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35319" start="2964" end="2968" title="Duma language" label="Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q36675" start="2978" end="2985" title="Tsaangi language" label="Tsaangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36976" start="2995" end="3001" title="Wandji language" label="Wandji"/>
<link wikidata="Q532003" start="3016" end="3035" title="Sawabantu languages" label="Sawabantu languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34952" start="3045" end="3050" title="Benga language" label="Benga"/>
<link wikidata="Q36899" start="3060" end="3064" title="Yasa language" label="Yasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436372" start="3079" end="3093" title="Sira languages" label="Sira languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34884" start="3103" end="3109" title="Barama language" label="Barama"/>
<link wikidata="Q35067" start="3119" end="3124" title="Bwisi language" label="Bwisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35793" start="3134" end="3139" title="Lumbu language" label="Lumbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36609" start="3149" end="3154" title="Sangu language (Gabon)" label="Sangu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36599" start="3164" end="3168" title="Sira language" label="Sira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558409" start="3197" end="3201" title="Vili language" label="Vili"/>
<link wikidata="Q36528" start="3216" end="3230" title="Teke languages" label="Teke languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36478" start="3240" end="3253" title="Northern Teke language" label="Northern Teke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36596" start="3263" end="3275" title="Western Teke language" label="Western Teke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36629" start="3285" end="3290" title="Vumbu language" label="Vumbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33932" start="3298" end="3316" title="Ubangian languages" label="Ubangian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217499" start="3325" end="3341" title="Ngbaka languages" label="Ngbaka languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34905" start="3351" end="3355" title="Baka language" label="Baka"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280302" wikidata="Q1931676" url="?curid=1280302" title="500 kHz">
<text>From early in the 20th century, the radio frequency of 500 kilohertz (500 kHz) was an international calling and distress frequency for Morse code maritime communication. For much of its early history, this frequency was referred to by its equivalent wavelength, 600 meters, or, using the earlier frequency unit name, 500 kilocycles (per second) or 500 kc.

Maritime authorities of many nations, including the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the United States Coast Guard, once maintained 24 hour watches on this frequency, staffed by skilled radio operators. Many SOS calls and medical emergencies at sea were handled via this frequency. However, as the use of Morse code over radio is now obsolete in commercial shipping, 500 kHz is obsolete as a Morse distress frequency. Beginning in the late 1990s, most nations ended monitoring of transmissions on 500 kHz and emergency traffic on 500 kHz has been replaced by the Global Maritime Distress Safety System (GMDSS).

== Current status ==
The 500 kHz frequency has now been allocated to the maritime Navigational Data or &quot;NAVDAT&quot; broadcast system.

The nearby frequencies of 518 kHz and 490 kHz are used for the NAVTEX component of GMDSS. Proposals to allocate frequencies at or near 500 kHz to amateur radio use resulted in the international allocation of 472–479 kHz to the 630-meter amateur radio band, now implemented in many countries.

== Initial adoption ==
International standards for the use of 500 kHz first appeared in the first International Radiotelegraph Convention in Berlin, which was signed 3 November 1906, and became effective 1 July 1908.

The second service regulation affixed to this Convention designated 500 kHz as one of the standard frequencies to be employed by shore stations, specifying that
: &quot;Two wave lengths, one of 300 meters [1 MHz] and the other of 600 meters, are authorized for general public service. Every coastal station opened to such service shall use one or the other of these two wave lengths.&quot;

These regulations also specified that ship stations normally used 1 MHz.

== Expanded policies ==
International standards for the use of 500 kHz were expanded by the second International Radiotelegraph Convention, which was held in London after the sinking of the RMS &quot;Titanic&quot;. This meeting produced an agreement which was signed on 5 July 1912, and became effective 1 July 1913.

The Service Regulations, affixed to the 1912 convention, established 500 kHz as the primary frequency for seagoing communication, and the standard ship frequency was changed from 1,000 kHz to 500 kHz, to match the coastal station standard. Communication was generally conducted in Morse code, initially using spark-gap transmitters. Most two-way radio contacts were to be initiated on this frequency, although once established, the participating stations could shift to another frequency to avoid the congestion on 500 kHz. To facilitate communication between operators speaking different languages, standardized abbreviations were used, including a set of &quot;Q codes&quot; specified by the 1912 Service Regulations.
Article XXI of the Service Regulations required that whenever an distress call was heard, all transmissions unrelated to the emergency had to immediately cease until the emergency was declared over.

There was a potential problem if a ship transmitted a distress call: The use of 500 kHz as a common frequency often led to heavy congestion, especially around major ports and shipping lanes, and it was possible the distress message would be drowned out by the bedlam of ongoing commercial traffic. To help address this problem, the Service Regulation&#x27;s Article XXXII specified that
: Coastal stations engaged in the transmission of long radiograms shall suspend the transmission at the end of each period of 15 minutes, and remain silent for a period of three minutes before resuming the transmission. Coastal and shipboard stations working under the conditions specified in Article XXXV, par. 2, shall suspend work at the end of each period of 15 minutes and listen in with a wave length of 600 meters during a period of 3 minutes before resuming the transmission.

During distress working all non-distress traffic was banned from 500 kHz and adjacent coast stations then monitored 512 kHz as an additional calling frequency for ordinary traffic.

== Later policies ==
The silent and monitoring periods were soon expanded and standardized. For example, Regulation 44, from the 27 July 1914, edition of &quot;Radio Communication Laws of the United States&quot;, stated: &quot;The international standard wave length is &quot;600&quot; meters, and the operators of all &quot;coast stations&quot; are required, during the hours the station is in operation, to &#x27;listen in&#x27; at intervals of not more than 15 minutes and for a period not less than 2 minutes, with the receiving apparatus tuned to receive this wave length, for the purpose of determining if any distress signals or messages are being sent and to determine if the transmitting operations of the &#x27;listening station&#x27; are causing interference with other radio communication.&quot;

International refinements for the use of 500 kHz were specified in later agreements, including the 1932 Madrid Radio Conference. In later years, except for distress traffic, stations shifted to nearby &quot;working frequencies&quot; to exchange messages once contact was established: 425, 454, 468, 480, and 512 kHz were used by ships while the coast stations had their own individual working frequencies.

Twice each hour, all stations operating on 500 kHz were required to maintain a strictly enforced three-minute silent period, starting at 15 and 45 minutes past the hour.

As a visual memory aid, a typical clock in a ship&#x27;s radio room would have the silence periods marked by shading the sectors between h+15ᵐ to h+18ᵐ and h+45ᵐ to h+48ᵐ in RED. Similar sectors between h+00ᵐ to h+03ᵐ and h+30ᵐ to h+33ᵐ are marked in GREEN which is the corresponding silence period for the 2182 kHz voice communications distress signals.

In addition, during this silent period all coastal and ship stations were required to monitor the frequency, listening for any distress signals. All large ships at sea had to monitor 500 kHz at all times, either with a licensed radio operator or with equipment (called an auto-alarm) that detected an automatically sent distress signal consisting of long dashes.

Shore stations throughout the world operated on this frequency to exchange messages with ships and to issue warning about weather and other navigational warnings.

At night, transmission ranges of 3,000–4,000 miles (4,500–6,500 kilometers) were typical. Daytime ranges were much shorter, on the order of 300–1,500 miles (500–2,500 kilometers). &quot;Terman&#x27;s Radio Engineering Handbook&quot; (1948) shows the maximum distance for 1 kW over salt water to be 1,500 miles, and this distance was routinely covered by ships at sea, where signals from ships and nearby coastal stations would cause congestion, covering up distant and weaker signals. During the silence, a distress signal could more easily be heard at great distances.

== NAVDAT ==

Following the adoption of GMDSS in 1999 and the subsequent obsolescence of 500 kHz as a Morse distress frequency, the 2019 World Radiocommunication Conference (WRC-19) allocated to the maritime NAVDAT service.

NAVDAT is intended for the broadcast of data from shore-to-ship and may thus be compared to NAVTEX. However, NAVDAT uses QAM modulation (in comparison to the SITOR used by NAVTEX) and is therefore capable of much higher data throughput. This allows NAVDAT broadcasts to carry images and other data as well as plain text, further allowing this data to be presented directly on an Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS). This presents a significant improvement over the text-only NAVTEX system.

As of February 2023, no maritime authorities have begun NAVDAT broadcasts.

==Amateur radio==

Maritime traffic currently displaced from the 500 kHz band in most countries, and with the ITU 472–479 kHz amateur allocation, most countries no longer using it have allocated frequencies near 500 kHz to amateur radio use on a secondary basis, although the primary allocation of the band remains with the maritime mobile service.

Full details of these allocations can be found under the article on the 630 metre amateur radio band.

== See also ==
* 2182 kHz the international distress frequency for &quot;voice&quot; maritime communication
* 630-meter band
* Navtex a maritime weather and safety text broadcast on 518 kHz and 490 kHz
* Aircraft emergency frequency
* Call for help for emergency frequencies in current use
* Distress signal
* GMDSS
* Mayday
* Medium frequency radio propagation
* Radio Act of 1912
* Radio propagation
* SOS

==References==
==External links==
* — (Includes the 1912 London Radiotelegraphic Convention)
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1931676" start="55" end="68" title="500 kHz" label="500 kilohertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090451" start="86" end="130" title="international distress frequency" label="international calling and distress frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="135" end="145" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="250" end="260" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931676" start="262" end="272" title="500 kHz" label="600 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198171" start="321" end="331" title="Cycle per second" label="kilocycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q693667" start="409" end="439" title="Maritime and Coastguard Agency" label="Maritime and Coastguard Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="448" end="473" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q214266" start="567" end="570" title="SOS" label="SOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363338" start="922" end="960" title="Global Maritime Distress Safety System" label="Global Maritime Distress Safety System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1080" end="1086" title="NAVDAT" label="NAVDAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756992" start="1175" end="1181" title="Navtex" label="NAVTEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363338" start="1195" end="1200" title="Global Maritime Distress Safety System" label="GMDSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="1258" end="1271" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q250886" start="1339" end="1367" title="630-meter band" label="630-meter amateur radio band"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042583" start="1503" end="1542" title="International Radiotelegraph Convention (1906)" label="International Radiotelegraph Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1546" end="1552" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q280350" start="2187" end="2226" title="International Radiotelegraph Convention (1912)" label="International Radiotelegraph Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577588" start="2263" end="2301" title="sinking of the RMS Titanic" label="sinking of the RMS &amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="2687" end="2697" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776868" start="2715" end="2736" title="spark-gap transmitter" label="spark-gap transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q507696" start="3069" end="3075" title="Q code" label="Q code"/>
<link wikidata="Q203435" start="5887" end="5894" title="Circular sector" label="sectors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6073" end="6081" title="2182 kHz" label="2182 kHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363338" start="7261" end="7266" title="Global Maritime Distress Safety System" label="GMDSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q680268" start="7358" end="7393" title="World Radiocommunication Conference" label="World Radiocommunication Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756992" start="7538" end="7544" title="NAVTEX" label="NAVTEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q749753" start="7567" end="7581" title="Quadrature amplitude modulation" label="QAM modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459652" start="7604" end="7609" title="SITOR" label="SITOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035351" start="7825" end="7880" title="Electronic Chart Display and Information System" label="Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8013" end="8019" title="NAVDAT" label="NAVDAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="8143" end="8146" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="8256" end="8269" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q250886" start="8455" end="8464" title="630-meter band" label="630 metre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8503" end="8511" title="2182 kHz" label="2182 kHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q250886" start="8596" end="8610" title="630-meter band" label="630-meter band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756992" start="8613" end="8619" title="Navtex" label="Navtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698543" start="8690" end="8718" title="Aircraft emergency frequency" label="Aircraft emergency frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="8721" end="8734" title="Call for help" label="Call for help"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="8778" end="8793" title="Distress signal" label="Distress signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363338" start="8796" end="8801" title="GMDSS" label="GMDSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q283777" start="8804" end="8810" title="Mayday" label="Mayday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8813" end="8847" title="Medium frequency#Propagation" label="Medium frequency radio propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039902" start="8850" end="8867" title="Radio Act of 1912" label="Radio Act of 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474701" start="8870" end="8887" title="Radio propagation" label="Radio propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214266" start="8890" end="8893" title="SOS" label="SOS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280309" wikidata="Q3476628" url="?curid=1280309" title="Gladstone, New Jersey">
<text>Gladstone is an unincorporated community located within Peapack-Gladstone in Somerset County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. The area is served as United States Postal Service ZIP Code 07934. Gladstone was named in honor of William Ewart Gladstone, who served as British Prime Minister several times between 1868 and 1894. 

The community is home to the Hamilton Farm Golf Club, the Stronghold Soccer Club, the United States Equestrian Team and the Gill St. Bernard&#x27;s School, a private, nonsectarian, coeducational day school, serving students in pre-kindergarten through twelfth grade.

In the &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine 2017 ranking of the &quot;Most Expensive ZIP Codes in the United States&quot;, Gladstone was ranked as the 457th most expensive in the country, with its median home sale price of $938,042. In 2018, &quot;New Jersey Business Magazine&quot; listed Gladstone at 46th in its listing of &quot;The Most Expensive ZIP Codes in New Jersey&quot;, with a median sale price 2017 of $627,500.

As of the 2010 United States census, the population for ZIP Code Tabulation Area 07934 was 1,501.

==Culture==
Gladstone is home to the United States Equestrian Team and the Stronghold Soccer Club, which plays its matches at Mount St. John&#x27;s on the grounds of Montgomery Academy.

The Hamilton Farm Golf Club is located in Gladstone and has been the site of the Sybase Match Play Championship since its inception in 2010. It is the only match play format event on the LPGA Tour.

==Education==
As part of Peapack-Gladstone, residents of Gladstone are served by the Somerset Hills Regional School District.

Located along the border with Chester Township is the Gill St. Bernard&#x27;s School, a private, nonsectarian, coeducational day school, serving students in pre-kindergarten through twelfth grade. Situated on Pottersville Road and Route 206 is the Willow School, which serves students in preschool through eight grade.

==Transportation==

===Roads and highways===
A few major roads pass through the community including U.S. Route 206 and County Route 512.

===Public transportation===
Gladstone is an NJ Transit station that is the western terminus of the Gladstone Branch of the Morris and Essex line. Out of 23 inbound and 26 outbound daily weekday trains, 2 inbound and 2 outbound trains (about 8%) use the Kearny Connection to Secaucus Junction and New York Penn Station in Midtown Manhattan; the rest go to Hoboken Terminal. Passengers can transfer at Newark Broad Street or Summit stations to reach the other destination if necessary.

The Gladstone train station building was re-labeled &quot;Boston,&quot; and its surroundings were supplied with peat-moss dirt, period vehicles and extras in Victorian dress, for a 1962 movie shoot. In the Oscar-winning film &quot;The Miracle Worker,&quot; Anne Bancroft in the role of Annie Sullivan boards a long-distance steam train there to take the job as Helen Keller&#x27;s teacher.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Gladstone include:
* Charles E. Apgar (1865–1950), business executive and amateur radio operator best known for making early recordings of coded German radio transmissions at the start of World War I.
* Jason Gore (born 1974), PGA Tour professional golfer who is the Senior Director of Player Relations for the United States Golf Association.
* Orin R. Smith, former chairman and CEO of Engelhard Corporation

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3476628" start="0" end="9" title="Gladstone, New Jersey" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16" end="40" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084597" start="56" end="73" title="Peapack-Gladstone, New Jersey" label="Peapack-Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="77" end="92" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="101" end="111" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="115" end="125" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="149" end="177" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="178" end="186" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="226" end="249" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="265" end="287" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="British Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027798" start="413" end="442" title="United States Equestrian Team" label="United States Equestrian Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561906" start="451" end="481" title="Gill St. Bernard&amp;#x27;s School" label="Gill St. Bernard&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049579" start="494" end="506" title="nonsectarian" label="nonsectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="508" end="519" title="coeducation" label="coeducation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493752" start="522" end="532" title="day school" label="day school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="554" end="570" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="579" end="592" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="608" end="614" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1022" end="1047" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063114" start="1068" end="1092" title="ZIP Code Tabulation Area" label="ZIP Code Tabulation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027798" start="1148" end="1177" title="United States Equestrian Team" label="United States Equestrian Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659489" start="1379" end="1409" title="Sybase Match Play Championship" label="Sybase Match Play Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187356" start="1454" end="1464" title="match play" label="match play"/>
<link wikidata="Q27650" start="1485" end="1494" title="LPGA Tour" label="LPGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559875" start="1582" end="1621" title="Somerset Hills Regional School District" label="Somerset Hills Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014459" start="1654" end="1670" title="Chester Township, New Jersey" label="Chester Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561906" start="1678" end="1708" title="Gill St. Bernard&amp;#x27;s School" label="Gill St. Bernard&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049579" start="1721" end="1733" title="nonsectarian" label="nonsectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="1735" end="1746" title="coeducation" label="coeducation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493752" start="1749" end="1759" title="day school" label="day school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="1781" end="1797" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="1806" end="1819" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q811472" start="2044" end="2058" title="U.S. Route 206" label="U.S. Route 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q858774" start="2063" end="2079" title="County Route 512 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 512"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566317" start="2110" end="2119" title="Gladstone station (NJ Transit)" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="2126" end="2136" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566325" start="2181" end="2197" title="Gladstone Branch" label="Gladstone Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382222" start="2335" end="2352" title="Kearny Connection" label="Kearny Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295999" start="2356" end="2373" title="Secaucus Junction" label="Secaucus Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q54451" start="2378" end="2399" title="Pennsylvania Station (New York City)" label="New York Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="2403" end="2420" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128305" start="2437" end="2453" title="Hoboken Terminal" label="Hoboken Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016633" start="2482" end="2501" title="Newark Broad Street station" label="Newark Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637756" start="2505" end="2511" title="Summit station (NJ Transit)" label="Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479772" start="2798" end="2816" title="The Miracle Worker" label="The Miracle Worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q183532" start="2824" end="2837" title="Anne Bancroft" label="Anne Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q239135" start="2853" end="2867" title="Annie Sullivan" label="Annie Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38203" start="2928" end="2940" title="Helen Keller" label="Helen Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075167" start="3075" end="3091" title="Charles E. Apgar" label="Charles E. Apgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="3128" end="3141" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3242" end="3253" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293162" start="3257" end="3267" title="Jason Gore" label="Jason Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="3281" end="3289" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187243" start="3365" end="3395" title="United States Golf Association" label="United States Golf Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102693" start="3399" end="3412" title="Orin R. Smith" label="Orin R. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342078" start="3441" end="3462" title="Engelhard Corporation" label="Engelhard Corporation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280312" wikidata="Q92978" url="?curid=1280312" title="Jon Kleinberg">
<text>Jon Michael Kleinberg (born 1971) is an American computer scientist and the Tisch University Professor of Computer Science and Information Science at Cornell University known for his work in algorithms and networks. He is a recipient of the Nevanlinna Prize by the International Mathematical Union.

==Early life and education==
Jon Kleinberg was born in 1971 in Boston, Massachusetts to a mathematics professor father and a computer consultant mother. He received a Bachelor of Science degree in computer science from Cornell University in 1993 and a PhD from Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1996. He is the older brother of fellow Cornell computer scientist Robert Kleinberg.

==Career==
Since 1996 Kleinberg has been a professor in the Department of Computer Science at Cornell, as well as a visiting scientist at IBM&#x27;s Almaden Research Center. His work has been supported by an NSF Career Award, an ONR Young Investigator Award, a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship, a Packard Foundation Fellowship, a Sloan Foundation Fellowship, and grants from Google, Yahoo!, and the NSF. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2011, he was elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences. In 2013 he became a fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery.

==Research==
Kleinberg is best known for his work on networks. One of his best-known contributions is the HITS algorithm, developed while he was at IBM. HITS is an algorithm for web search that builds on the eigenvector-based methods used in algorithms and served as the full-scale model for PageRank by recognizing that web pages or sites should be considered important not only if they are linked to by many others (as in PageRank), but also if they &quot;link to&quot; many others. Search engines themselves are examples of sites that are important because they link to many others. Kleinberg realized that this generalization implies two different classes of important web pages, which he called &quot;hubs&quot; and &quot;authorities&quot;. The HITS algorithm is an algorithm for automatically identifying the leading hubs and authorities in a network of hyperlinked pages.

Kleinberg is also known for his work on algorithmic aspects of the small world experiment. He was one of the first to realize that Stanley Milgram&#x27;s famous &quot;six degrees&quot; letter-passing experiment implied not only that there are short paths between individuals in social networks but also that people seem to be good at finding those paths, an apparently simple observation that turns out to have profound implications for the structure of the networks in question. The formal model in which Kleinberg studied this question is a two dimensional grid, where each node has both short-range connections (edges) to neighbours in the grid and long-range connections to nodes further apart. For each node v, a long-range edge between v and another node w is added with a probability that decays as the second power of the distance between v and w. This is generalized to a d-dimensional grid, where the probability decays as the d-th power of the distance.

Kleinberg has written numerous papers and articles as well as a textbook on computer algorithms, &quot;Algorithm Design&quot;, co-authored the first edition with Éva Tardos and sole authored the second edition. Among other honors, he received a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship also known as the &quot;genius grant&quot; in 2005 and the Nevanlinna Prize in 2006, an award that is given out once every four years along with the Fields Medal as the premier distinction in Computational Mathematics.
His new book is entitled &quot;Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning About a Highly Connected World&quot;, published by Cambridge University Press in 2010.

Cornell&#x27;s Association of Computer Science Undergraduates awarded him the &quot;Faculty of the Year&quot; award in 2002.

==References==
==External links==
*Still the Rebel King -Video
*Interview with Jon Kleinberg, ACM Infosys Foundation Award recipient by Stephen Ibaraki
*Yury Lifshits, Four Results of Jon Kleinberg: a talk for St. Petersburg Mathematical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92978" start="0" end="21" title="Jon Kleinberg" label="Jon Michael Kleinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="49" end="67" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387" start="127" end="146" title="Information science" label="Information Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="150" end="168" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q902556" start="241" end="257" title="Nevanlinna Prize" label="Nevanlinna Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q828490" start="265" end="297" title="International Mathematical Union" label="International Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="363" end="384" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="467" end="486" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="497" end="513" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="519" end="537" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="552" end="555" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="561" end="598" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346400" start="669" end="685" title="Robert Kleinberg" label="Robert Kleinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="826" end="829" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146518" start="837" end="860" title="IBM Almaden Research Center" label="Almaden Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="1086" end="1089" title="National Science Foundation" label="NSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="1113" end="1144" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="1153" end="1190" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="1223" end="1265" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="United States National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="1287" end="1293" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="1301" end="1336" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q665189" start="1392" end="1400" title="complex network" label="networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031957" start="1445" end="1459" title="HITS algorithm" label="HITS algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1487" end="1490" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="1547" end="1558" title="eigenvector" label="eigenvector"/>
<link wikidata="Q184316" start="1631" end="1639" title="PageRank" label="PageRank"/>
<link wikidata="Q578846" start="2286" end="2308" title="small world experiment" label="small world experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q208236" start="2350" end="2365" title="Stanley Milgram" label="Stanley Milgram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030" start="3347" end="3357" title="Éva Tardos" label="Éva Tardos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424691" start="3430" end="3461" title="MacArthur Foundation" label="MacArthur Foundation Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q902556" start="3521" end="3537" title="Nevanlinna Prize" label="Nevanlinna Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609549" start="4103" end="4118" title="Stephen Ibaraki" label="Stephen Ibaraki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280313" wikidata="Q6021484" url="?curid=1280313" title="Indian River State College">
<text>Indian River State College (IRSC) is a public college based in Fort Pierce, Florida, United States. Serving the Treasure Coast region, it is part of the Florida College System and offers associate and bachelor&#x27;s degree programs as well as vocational certificates. It was established in 1959.

The college has grown significantly since its inception, with multiple campuses across Indian River, Martin, Okeechobee, and St. Lucie counties. IRSC is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.

==History==
The college was established in 1959 as Indian River Junior College by the Florida Legislature to serve the Treasure Coast region of Florida. Originally housed in a single building, the college relocated to its current Fort Pierce campus in 1963 following a donation of of land from the city. This move allowed the college to better accommodate its growing student body and expand its educational offerings.

In 1965, following statewide integration efforts, Indian River Junior College merged with Lincoln Junior College, extending its services to Indian River, Martin, Okeechobee, and St. Lucie counties. The institution was renamed Indian River Community College in 1970 to reflect its expanded role and growing impact in the region.

During the 1970s and 1980s, IRSC continued to develop as a regional educational hub, adding campuses in Vero Beach, Stuart, Okeechobee, and Port St. Lucie, as well as multiple educational centers. The college&#x27;s growth mirrored the increasing demand for higher education in the Treasure Coast region.

In 2007, IRSC was authorized to offer bachelor&#x27;s degrees, marking its transition to a four-year institution. This change was formalized on June 24, 2008, when the college was renamed &quot;Indian River State College&quot; to reflect its expanded academic scope. The introduction of bachelor’s programs allowed IRSC to provide more advanced educational opportunities to its students.

The college&#x27;s progress continued with the launch of IRSC Online in 2013, which expanded access to higher education through online learning. In 2019, IRSC received the Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence, recognizing its achievements in student outcomes and institutional performance.

Further recent developments include the opening of the Eastman Advanced Workforce Training Complex and the introduction of the IRSC Promise program in 2022, which offers local high school graduates tuition-free enrollment for associate degrees. Additionally, in 2020, the college received a $45 million donation from philanthropist MacKenzie Scott, further supporting its growth and development.

==Campuses==
===Main campus===

The main campus, known as the &quot;Edwin R. Massey campus&quot; (located in Fort Pierce), spans with 56 buildings dedicated to a wide range of educational and career training programs. Notable facilities include the Brown Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship, which focuses on emerging technologies and green construction, and the Kight Center for Emerging Technologies, offering advanced laboratories for manufacturing, photonics, and engineering.

The campus also features the Treasure Coast Public Safety Training Complex, providing cutting-edge training in criminal justice and emergency management. Additional facilities include the Mary L. Fields Health Science Center, Hallstrom Planetarium, and the Fine Arts Complex, fostering well-rounded student development.

The campus was named in honor of Edwin R. Massey, who retired as president of the college in 2020.

===Regional campuses===
====Chastain campus====
The Chastain campus in Stuart serves Martin County with a wide variety of academic and career training programs. Students can complete associate and bachelor&#x27;s degrees and participate in adult education programs such as the GED and English as a second language (ESL). Key facilities include the Robert Morgade Administration &amp; Student Services Center, which offers academic advising, financial aid, and career services, and the Clare &amp; Gladys Wolf High-Technology Center, which focuses on technical career preparation.

The campus is also home to the Clark Advanced Learning Center, a nationally recognized charter high school where students earn both high school and college credits.

====Dixon Hendry campus====
The Dixon Hendry campus, located in Okeechobee, provides flexible day, evening, and weekend courses leading to associate degrees. The campus offers modern technology with computer labs, an academic support center, and GED preparation. Career programs focus on the needs of the local community, including nursing, automotive technology, and welding. The Williamson Conference and Education Center hosts conferences, seminars, and community events, serving both students and local residents.

====Mueller campus====

Located in Vero Beach, the Mueller campus offers a range of degree programs, including associate and bachelor&#x27;s degrees, with flexible day, evening, and weekend classes. The campus houses the Brackett Library, a joint-use facility with Indian River County, and the Schumann Center, providing comprehensive student services like financial aid, career counseling, and textbook purchasing. The Richardson Center is home to the Culinary Institute and serves as a hub for community and business events, supporting economic development in the region.

====Pruitt campus====
The Pruitt campus in Port St. Lucie, offers a wide range of degree programs, including certifications and both two- and four-year degrees. It is home to the William and Helen Thomas STEM Center, which supports a bachelor&#x27;s degree program in biology with advanced laboratories. The campus also features the Veterans Center of Excellence, offering support and resources for veterans and their families, and the Enterprise Hub, promoting entrepreneurship and job creation.

==Academics==

IRSC offers a diverse array of associate and bachelor&#x27;s degree programs across fields such as education, nursing, business, public safety, and healthcare management. The college provides numerous pathways to higher education, including technical certificates, applied technology diplomas, and dual enrollment options for high school students.

IRSC Online, launched in 2013, supports flexible online learning opportunities. The college also operates the Clark Advanced Learning Center, a charter high school in collaboration with the Martin County School District. In 2022, IRSC introduced the Promise Program, offering eligible local high school graduates full-time, tuition-free enrollment to pursue an associate degree.

==Student life==

IRSC provides a wide range of clubs and activities. The college offers over 60 student clubs and organizations, contributing to a diverse array of social and leadership opportunities. Each year, IRSC hosts more than 1,600 student activities, fostering an engaging campus environment. The Student Government Association (SGA), which evolved from the Campus Coalition Government (CCG) in 2022, includes representatives from over 70 student groups and athletic teams, ensuring comprehensive student representation.

The River Hammock Student Housing complex provides on-campus living for IRSC students. This residence offers amenities including utilities and Wi-Fi, and features individual bedrooms, a central living area, and full kitchen facilities. On-campus resources are further supported by the River Shop bookstore, which supplies textbooks and academic materials, and the Cosmetology and Barbering Institute, where students receive discounted services performed by peers under supervision.

IRSC recognizes academic achievement and leadership through various honor societies, such as Phi Theta Kappa, Kappa Delta Pi, Sigma Beta Delta, Alpha Phi Sigma, and Eta Sigma Delta. These societies offer students opportunities to engage with professionals, participate in conferences, and compete for scholarships. The Emerging Leaders program at IRSC provides additional leadership development through events and seminars, awarding participants a certificate, leadership pin, and medallion upon completion.

===Athletics===

The athletic teams of IRSC, known as the &quot;Pioneers,&quot; compete in the Southern Conference of the Florida State College Activities Association (FSCAA). The college is best known for its swimming and diving programs, which have achieved success at the national level. As of 2024, the men&#x27;s team holds 50 consecutive National Junior College Athletic Association (NJCAA) championships, while the women&#x27;s team has won 46 national titles, marking the longest championship streak in U.S. collegiate sports history.

In addition to swimming and diving, IRSC offers competitive programs in men&#x27;s baseball and basketball, and women&#x27;s softball and volleyball, fostering both athletic and academic growth among student-athletes. However, in 2024, the college announced the discontinuation of its women&#x27;s basketball program. This decision was influenced by financial concerns and the need to reallocate resources within the athletics department. The college cited a combination of budgetary constraints and the need for strategic adjustments as reasons for this significant change.

The college’s athletic facilities have undergone significant upgrades, including the completion of a new baseball and softball complex in 2023, which reflects IRSC’s ongoing commitment to excellence in both academics and athletics.

==Media==

IRSC, through its IRSC Public Media division, owns and operates three radio stations, each serving different audiences across the region. WQCS (88.9 FM), the flagship station, has been on air since 1982 and plays a key role in public broadcasting on the Treasure Coast. It serves as the primary NPR affiliate for the area, broadcasting news, public affairs, and cultural programming, offering both national and local content. WQCP (91.1 FM) features an urban adult contemporary format, with a mix of R&amp;B, soul, and modern hits. WQJS (88.5 FM) is dedicated to classical music, providing a selection of orchestral, chamber, and solo performances.

==Notable alumni==
* Mike Bianco, head coach of the University of Mississippi baseball team
* Sion Brinn, Olympic swimmer
* Rob Cordemans, Olympic baseball player for the Netherlands
* Lacey Evans, professional wrestler
* Omar Mateen, perpetrator of the Pulse nightclub shooting
* John McCormack, college baseball coach at Florida Atlantic University
* Rusty Meacham, professional baseball player
* Breanna Myles, winner of Miss Teen USA 2021
* Ángel Pagán, professional baseball player
* Steve Pearce, professional baseball player
* Ralph Poppell, former member of the Florida House of Representatives
* Luke Scott, professional baseball player
* Cory Spangenberg, professional baseball player
* Gordon Touw Ngie Tjouw, Olympic swimmer
* Jonny Venters, professional baseball player

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6021484" start="0" end="26" title="Indian River State College" label="Indian River State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021484" start="28" end="32" title="Indian River State College" label="IRSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="39" end="53" title="public university" label="public college"/>
<link wikidata="Q584340" start="63" end="83" title="Fort Pierce, Florida" label="Fort Pierce, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920378" start="112" end="126" title="Treasure Coast" label="Treasure Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461287" start="153" end="175" title="Florida College System" label="Florida College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q488528" start="385" end="397" title="Indian River County, Florida" label="Indian River"/>
<link wikidata="Q648752" start="399" end="405" title="Martin County, Florida" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q587146" start="407" end="417" title="Okeechobee, Florida" label="Okeechobee"/>
<link wikidata="Q494564" start="423" end="432" title="St. Lucie County, Florida" label="St. Lucie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569646" start="469" end="513" title="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153125" start="965" end="976" title="School integration in the United States" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765474" start="1026" end="1048" title="Lincoln Junior College" label="Lincoln Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q457528" start="2132" end="2176" title="Aspen Institute" label="Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322797" start="2591" end="2606" title="MacKenzie Scott" label="MacKenzie Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q120208" start="2972" end="2993" title="emerging technologies" label="emerging technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="2998" end="3016" title="Green building" label="green construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="3101" end="3114" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q467054" start="3116" end="3125" title="photonics" label="photonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="3131" end="3142" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q117488" start="3256" end="3272" title="criminal justice" label="criminal justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="3277" end="3297" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q988744" start="3637" end="3643" title="Stuart, Florida" label="Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q947286" start="3843" end="3846" title="General Educational Development" label="GED"/>
<link wikidata="Q130192" start="3851" end="3879" title="English as a second or foreign language" label="English as a second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q113394961" start="4178" end="4208" title="Clark Advanced Learning Center" label="Clark Advanced Learning Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q587146" start="4377" end="4387" title="Okeechobee, Florida" label="Okeechobee"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="4645" end="4652" title="nursing" label="nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q124192" start="4654" end="4675" title="Automotive engineering" label="automotive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="4681" end="4688" title="welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q969026" start="4867" end="4877" title="Vero Beach, Florida" label="Vero Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q667749" start="5450" end="5464" title="Port St. Lucie, Florida" label="Port St. Lucie"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="5675" end="5682" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q113394961" start="6379" end="6409" title="Clark Advanced Learning Center" label="Clark Advanced Learning Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775209" start="6459" end="6488" title="Martin County School District" label="Martin County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="7323" end="7328" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181575" start="7756" end="7771" title="Phi Theta Kappa" label="Phi Theta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237807" start="7773" end="7787" title="Kappa Delta Pi" label="Kappa Delta Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22032369" start="7789" end="7805" title="Sigma Beta Delta" label="Sigma Beta Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735099" start="7807" end="7822" title="Alpha Phi Sigma" label="Alpha Phi Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688536" start="7828" end="7843" title="Eta Sigma Delta" label="Eta Sigma Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577940" start="8267" end="8286" title="Southern Conference (NJCAA)" label="Southern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095994" start="8294" end="8338" title="Florida State College Activities Association" label="Florida State College Activities Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973896" start="8516" end="8560" title="National Junior College Athletic Association" label="National Junior College Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954628" start="9674" end="9678" title="WQCS" label="WQCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="9831" end="9834" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951173" start="9962" end="9966" title="WQCP" label="WQCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900083" start="9989" end="10013" title="urban adult contemporary" label="urban adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760187" start="10068" end="10072" title="WQJS" label="WQJS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="10099" end="10114" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846042" start="10207" end="10218" title="Mike Bianco" label="Mike Bianco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="10238" end="10263" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525346" start="10280" end="10290" title="Sion Brinn" label="Sion Brinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="10292" end="10299" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815636" start="10310" end="10323" title="Rob Cordemans" label="Rob Cordemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="10353" end="10368" title="Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222842" start="10371" end="10382" title="Lacey Evans" label="Lacey Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q24567454" start="10408" end="10419" title="Omar Mateen" label="Omar Mateen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24561572" start="10440" end="10464" title="Pulse nightclub shooting" label="Pulse nightclub shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17386355" start="10467" end="10481" title="John McCormack (baseball)" label="John McCormack"/>
<link wikidata="Q429863" start="10509" end="10536" title="Florida Atlantic University" label="Florida Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382624" start="10539" end="10552" title="Rusty Meacham" label="Rusty Meacham"/>
<link wikidata="Q109774710" start="10585" end="10598" title="Breanna Myles" label="Breanna Myles"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869155" start="10610" end="10628" title="Miss Teen USA 2021" label="Miss Teen USA 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577015" start="10631" end="10642" title="Ángel Pagán" label="Ángel Pagán"/>
<link wikidata="Q902082" start="10675" end="10687" title="Steve Pearce (baseball)" label="Steve Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287972" start="10720" end="10733" title="Ralph Poppell" label="Ralph Poppell"/>
<link wikidata="Q909020" start="10756" end="10788" title="Florida House of Representatives" label="Florida House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748022" start="10791" end="10801" title="Luke Scott (baseball)" label="Luke Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q17813175" start="10834" end="10850" title="Cory Spangenberg" label="Cory Spangenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128351" start="10883" end="10905" title="Gordon Touw Ngie Tjouw" label="Gordon Touw Ngie Tjouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183614" start="10925" end="10938" title="Jonny Venters" label="Jonny Venters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280319" wikidata="Q1519999" url="?curid=1280319" title="Višnjan Observatory">
<text>Višnjan Observatory (; obs. code: 120) is an astronomical observatory located near the village of Višnjan in Croatia. It is headed by Korado Korlević, a prolific astronomer and discoverer of minor planets. In 2009, the Višnjan observatory moved to Tičan (at ) and received the obs. code L01 on 5 October 2017 ().

== Description ==
Višnjan Observatory was founded in 1992, as a public observatory. It worked in the field of astrometry and search of a new asteroids. Increasing light pollution made the observations in Višnjan difficult, and they stopped in 2001. In 2009, a new building of the observatory was opened near the village of Tičan, approximately 2.5 kilometers away.

According to the statistic on observatory&#x27;s website (Višnjan and Tičan) as of 2016, a total of 1420 asteroids and 2 comets have been discovered at the observatory, which uses 11 telescopes and has a staff of 78 members and volunteers.

The Minor Planet Center (MPC) directly credits the Višnjan Observatory with the discovery of 108 minor planets &quot;(see list below)&quot;, while 1294 discoveries are credited to Korado Korlević. (The observatory&#x27;s statistic may also include unnumbered minor planets for which the MPC does not assign a discoverer.)

The observatory is home of several summer programs for youth in astronomy, archeology, marine biology and other disciplines: Youth Science Camp, Summer School of Science and Višnjan School of Astronomy.


== List of discovered minor planets ==



== See also ==
* List of asteroid-discovering observatories
* List of astronomical observatories
* List of observatory codes

== References ==

== External links ==
* http://www.en.sci.hr/ </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1519999" start="0" end="19" title="Višnjan Observatory" label="Višnjan Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34" end="37" title="IAU code#120" label="120"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="58" end="69" title="observatory" label="observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642046" start="98" end="105" title="Višnjan" label="Višnjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="109" end="116" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q450340" start="134" end="149" title="Korado Korlević" label="Korado Korlević"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995948" start="177" end="204" title="discoverer of minor planets" label="discoverer of minor planets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="287" end="290" title="IAU code#L01" label="L01"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532203" start="378" end="396" title="public observatory" label="public observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="424" end="434" title="astrometry" label="astrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="455" end="463" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="477" end="492" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="785" end="793" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="801" end="806" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="925" end="944" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q450340" start="1101" end="1116" title="Korado Korlević" label="Korado Korlević"/>
<link wikidata="Q25044813" start="1508" end="1550" title="List of asteroid-discovering observatories" label="List of asteroid-discovering observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344875" start="1553" end="1587" title="List of astronomical observatories" label="List of astronomical observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q953917" start="1590" end="1615" title="List of observatory codes" label="List of observatory codes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280329" wikidata="Q4363141" url="?curid=1280329" title="Pioneer Square">
<text>Pioneer Square may refer to:

*Pioneer Courthouse Square, a town square in Portland, Oregon, United States
*Pioneer Square, Seattle, a neighborhood in Seattle, Washington, United States

== See also ==
*Pioneer Square station, a light rail station in Seattle, Washington, United States
*Pioneer Square South and Pioneer Square North stations, a light rail station in Portland, Oregon, United States</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4363141" start="0" end="14" title="Pioneer Square" label="Pioneer Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196678" start="31" end="56" title="Pioneer Courthouse Square" label="Pioneer Courthouse Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388921" start="108" end="131" title="Pioneer Square, Seattle" label="Pioneer Square, Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196793" start="203" end="225" title="Pioneer Square station" label="Pioneer Square station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196794" start="287" end="341" title="Pioneer Square South and Pioneer Square North stations" label="Pioneer Square South and Pioneer Square North stations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280336" wikidata="Q652956" url="?curid=1280336" title="Argyros">
<text>Argyros (, from the Greek word for &quot;silver&quot;), Latinized as Argyrus, can refer to:

* Argyros (Byzantine family), prominent Byzantine noble clan
* Argyrus (Catepan of Italy) (died 1068), Byzantine general of Lombard origin
* Isaac Argyros (born 1312), Byzantine mathematician
* Billy Argyros, Greek-Australian professional poker player
* George Argyros (born 1937), Greek-American ambassador and businessman
* The fictional character Basil Argyros

== See also ==
* Argyropoulos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652956" start="0" end="7" title="Argyros" label="Argyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="41" end="47" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q696534" start="56" end="65" title="List of Latinised names" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q652956" start="69" end="76" title="Argyros" label="Argyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559050" start="95" end="121" title="Argyros (Byzantine family)" label="Argyros (Byzantine family)"/>
<link wikidata="Q928438" start="156" end="182" title="Argyrus (Catepan of Italy)" label="Argyrus (Catepan of Italy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405591" start="234" end="247" title="Isaac Argyros" label="Isaac Argyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912114" start="287" end="300" title="Billy Argyros" label="Billy Argyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536403" start="347" end="361" title="George Argyros" label="George Argyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818216" start="443" end="456" title="Agent of Byzantium" label="Basil Argyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q21450580" start="475" end="487" title="Argyropoulos" label="Argyropoulos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280338" wikidata="Q1389097" url="?curid=1280338" title="Portneuf">
<text>Portneuf may refer to:

Canada
* Portneuf Regional County Municipality, Quebec
* Portneuf, Quebec, a town in the Portneuf Regional County Municipality
* Portneuf (provincial electoral district), in Quebec
* Portneuf—Jacques-Cartier, a federal electoral district in Quebec, formerly known as Portneuf
* Portneuf-sur-Mer, Quebec, a town in the La Haute-Côte-Nord RCM, Quebec
* Saint-Léonard-de-Portneuf, Quebec, a municipality

United States
* Portneuf, Idaho, unincorporated community in Bannock County, Idaho
* Portneuf River (Idaho), tributary of the Snake River
* Portneuf Wildlife Management Area, Bannock County, near the town of McCammon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1517350" start="33" end="78" title="Portneuf Regional County Municipality, Quebec" label="Portneuf Regional County Municipality, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q142430" start="81" end="97" title="Portneuf, Quebec" label="Portneuf, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399332" start="153" end="193" title="Portneuf (provincial electoral district)" label="Portneuf (provincial electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399336" start="207" end="231" title="Portneuf—Jacques-Cartier" label="Portneuf—Jacques-Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399330" start="302" end="326" title="Portneuf-sur-Mer, Quebec" label="Portneuf-sur-Mer, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462828" start="375" end="408" title="Saint-Léonard-de-Portneuf, Quebec" label="Saint-Léonard-de-Portneuf, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="442" end="457" title="Portneuf, Idaho" label="Portneuf, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373297" start="511" end="533" title="Portneuf River (Idaho)" label="Portneuf River (Idaho)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232135" start="566" end="599" title="Portneuf Wildlife Management Area" label="Portneuf Wildlife Management Area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280356" wikidata="Q2706969" url="?curid=1280356" title="Parnawa Voivodeship">
<text>The Parnawa Voivodeship () was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Duchy of Livonia, part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, since it was formed in 1598 until the Swedish conquest of Livonia in the 1620s. The seat of the voivode was Parnawa (Pärnu).

The voivodeship was created by King Zygmunt III Waza, and it was based on the Parnawa Presidency, created by King Stefan Batory in 1582, after the Truce of Yam-Zapolsky. It effectively ceased to exist in 1621, but officially, Parnawa Voivodeship existed until the Treaty of Oliva (1660). Its main towns were: Parnawa, Felin, Wolmar, Karkus, Salis, Lemsal, and Helme.

The title of Voivode of Parnawa, as well as other local titles, remained in use until the Partitions of Poland. It was one of the so-called fictitious titles (Polish: urzad fikcyjny).

==Titular voivodes==
The voivodes of Dorpat Voivodeship.

*1.Ernst Magnus Dönhoff
*2.Piotr Tryzna
*3.Jan Zawadzki
*4.Gothard Tyzenhaus
*5.Henryk Doenhoff

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2706969" start="4" end="23" title="Parnawa Voivodeship" label="Parnawa Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352878" start="93" end="109" title="Duchy of Livonia (1561–1621)" label="Duchy of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="123" end="153" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="193" end="200" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q739032" start="213" end="220" title="Duchy of Livonia (1629–1721)" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="251" end="258" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q102365" start="272" end="277" title="Pärnu" label="Pärnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="317" end="333" title="Zygmunt III Waza" label="Zygmunt III Waza"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="395" end="408" title="Stefan Batory" label="Stefan Batory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478267" start="428" end="449" title="Truce of Yam-Zapolsky" label="Truce of Yam-Zapolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q17335" start="545" end="560" title="Treaty of Oliva" label="Treaty of Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q102365" start="590" end="597" title="Parnawa" label="Parnawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44840" start="599" end="604" title="Viljandi" label="Felin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108037" start="606" end="612" title="Valmiera" label="Wolmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023750" start="614" end="620" title="Karksi-Nuia" label="Karkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q659665" start="622" end="627" title="Salacgrīva" label="Salis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166684" start="629" end="635" title="Lemsal" label="Lemsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054079" start="641" end="646" title="Helme, Estonia" label="Helme"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="662" end="669" title="Voivode" label="Voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="739" end="759" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q442621" start="895" end="915" title="Ernst Magnus Dönhoff" label="Ernst Magnus Dönhoff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280363" wikidata="Q1230446" url="?curid=1280363" title="Wenden Voivodeship">
<text>Wenden Voivodeship (, ) was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Duchy of Livonia, part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. It was formed in 1598 by King Sigismund III Vasa, out of Wenden Presidency (Province), which had been created in 1582 by King Stephen Báthory, after the Truce of Yam-Zapolsky. The voivodeship remained in the Commonwealth until the Swedish Empire&#x27;s conquest of Livonia in the 1620s. The unconquered remainder of Livonia was named Inflanty Voivodeship, and continued to be part of the Commonwealth until its first partition in 1772.

Officially, Wenden Voivodeship belonged to Poland–Lithuania until the Treaty of Oliva in 1660. Its capital was Wenden, where local sejmiks of the nobility (see szlachta) took place. Wenden Voivodeship elected two deputies to the Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. Even though it no longer belonged to the Commonwealth after the Swedish conquest, its voivodes continued to be named by Polish kings until the final partition of Poland (1795), as the so-called &quot;fictitious titles&quot; ().

Major cities, towns and castles of Wenden Voivodeship were: Cēsis (&quot;Kies, Wenden&quot;), Riga, Koknese (&quot;Kokenhausen&quot;), Salaspils (&quot;Kircholm&quot;), Daugavpils (&quot;Dyneburg&quot;), Rēzekne (&quot;Rzezyca, Rositten&quot;), Viļaka (&quot;Marienhausen&quot;), Gulbene (&quot;Schwanenburg&quot;), Ludza (&quot;Lucyn&quot;), Krustpils (&quot;Kreutzburg&quot;).

==Voivodes of Wenden==
The seat of the voivode was Wenden (Cēsis). The voivodes were as follow:
*1598–1602 Jürgen von Farensbach
*1602-1602 Maciej Dembiński
*1609-1619 Krzysztof Słuszka
*1620–1622 Teodor Denhoff
*1627–1641 Joachim Tarnowski
*1641–1643 Tomasz Sapieha
*1643-1659 Mikołaj Korff
*1659-1660 Aleksander Morsztyn

==References==
== Bibliography ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1230446" start="0" end="18" title="Wenden Voivodeship" label="Wenden Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352878" start="90" end="106" title="Duchy of Livonia" label="Duchy of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="120" end="150" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="182" end="200" title="Sigismund III Vasa" label="Sigismund III Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="278" end="293" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478267" start="305" end="326" title="Truce of Yam-Zapolsky" label="Truce of Yam-Zapolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="383" end="397" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q739032" start="417" end="424" title="Swedish Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464784" start="486" end="506" title="Inflanty Voivodeship" label="Inflanty Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="559" end="578" title="Partitions of Poland" label="its first partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17335" start="659" end="674" title="Treaty of Oliva" label="Treaty of Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q107582" start="700" end="706" title="Cēsis" label="Wenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="720" end="726" title="sejmik" label="sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="749" end="757" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660626" start="818" end="860" title="Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="948" end="955" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q107582" start="1151" end="1156" title="Cēsis" label="Cēsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="1185" end="1189" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q504681" start="1191" end="1198" title="Koknese" label="Koknese"/>
<link wikidata="Q732986" start="1226" end="1235" title="Salaspils" label="Salaspils"/>
<link wikidata="Q80021" start="1260" end="1270" title="Daugavpils" label="Daugavpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q180379" start="1295" end="1302" title="Rēzekne" label="Rēzekne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26441" start="1336" end="1342" title="Viļaka" label="Viļaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q753010" start="1371" end="1378" title="Gulbene" label="Gulbene"/>
<link wikidata="Q744259" start="1407" end="1412" title="Ludza" label="Ludza"/>
<link wikidata="Q191120" start="1434" end="1443" title="Krustpils" label="Krustpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="1510" end="1517" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q107582" start="1530" end="1535" title="Cēsis" label="Cēsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q468037" start="1578" end="1599" title="Jürgen von Farensbach" label="Jürgen von Farensbach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1611" end="1627" title="Maciej Dembiński" label="Maciej Dembiński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1668" end="1682" title="Teodor Denhoff" label="Teodor Denhoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1694" end="1711" title="Joachim Tarnowski" label="Joachim Tarnowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647012" start="1723" end="1737" title="Tomasz Sapieha" label="Tomasz Sapieha"/>
<link wikidata="Q96211373" start="1749" end="1762" title="Mikołaj Korff" label="Mikołaj Korff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1774" end="1793" title="Aleksander Morsztyn" label="Aleksander Morsztyn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280367" wikidata="Q1464784" url="?curid=1280367" title="Inflanty Voivodeship">
<text>The Inflanty Voivodeship (), or Livonian Voivodeship (), also known as Polish Livonia, was an administrative division and local government in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, since it was formed in the 1620s out of the Wenden Voivodeship and lasted until the First Partition of the Commonwealth in 1772. The Inflanty Voivodeship was one of the few territories of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth to be ruled jointly by Poland and Lithuania.

==Overview==
The Inflanty Voivodeship, also called the &quot;Duchy of Inflanty&quot;, due to a 1667 bill of the Sejm, was the minority remainder of the Duchy of Livonia, which had been conquered by the Swedish Empire during the Polish–Swedish War of 1621–1625. The seat of the voivode was Dyneburg (Daugavpils).

The name &quot;Inflanty&quot; is derived through Polonization of &quot;Livland&quot;, the German name for Livonia. In modern times the region is known as Latgalia in the Republic of Latvia.

Zygmunt Gloger in his monumental book &quot;Historical Geography of the Lands of Old Poland&quot; provides this description of Inflanty Voivodeship:

==Voivodes==

This is a list of the voivodes for Inflanty:

* 1677–1695 Jan Teodor Schlieben
* 1695–1696 Jan Andrzej Plater 
* 1696–1705 Otto Fryderyk Felkierzamb (von Voelkersamb)
* 1705–1707 Fabian Plater 
* 1707–1712 Stefan Karol Grothus 
* 1709–1713 Józef Kos
* 1713–1722 Piotr Jerzy Przebendowski 
* 1722–1735 Antoni Andrzej Morsztyn
* 1735–1736 Jan Ludwik Plater 
* 1737–1765 Franciszek Jakub Szembek 
* 1765–1767 Jan Andrzej Borch 
* 1767–1769 Stanisław Brzostowski 
* 1769–1775 Jozafat Zyberk (Sieberg zu Wischiing)
* 1775–1778 Jan Tadeusz Zyberg (Sieberg zu Wischiing)
* 1778–1788 Kasper Rogaliński 
* 1790–1794 Adam Ewald Felkerzamb (von Voelkersamb)

==References==
== Bibliography ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1464784" start="4" end="24" title="Inflanty Voivodeship" label="Inflanty Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464784" start="32" end="52" title="Inflanty Voivodeship" label="Livonian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464784" start="71" end="85" title="Inflanty Voivodeship" label="Polish Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="146" end="176" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230446" start="222" end="240" title="Wenden Voivodeship" label="Wenden Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="262" end="297" title="Partitions of Poland" label="First Partition of the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="424" end="430" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="435" end="444" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="559" end="563" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352878" start="599" end="615" title="Duchy of Livonia" label="Duchy of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="649" end="663" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210108" start="675" end="706" title="Polish–Swedish War (1621–1625)" label="Polish–Swedish War of 1621–1625"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="724" end="731" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q80021" start="746" end="756" title="Daugavpils" label="Daugavpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="809" end="821" title="Polonization" label="Polonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q183464" start="866" end="873" title="Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208113" start="914" end="922" title="Latgalia" label="Latgalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="942" end="948" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245332" start="951" end="965" title="Zygmunt Gloger" label="Zygmunt Gloger"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="1137" end="1145" title="voivodes" label="voivodes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1173" end="1193" title="Jan Teodor Schlieben" label="Jan Teodor Schlieben"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1206" end="1224" title="Jan Andrzej Plater" label="Jan Andrzej Plater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1238" end="1263" title="Otto Fryderyk Felkerzamb" label="Otto Fryderyk Felkierzamb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1294" end="1307" title="Fabian Plater" label="Fabian Plater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1321" end="1341" title="Stefan Karol Grothus" label="Stefan Karol Grothus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609297" start="1355" end="1364" title="Józef Kos" label="Józef Kos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1377" end="1402" title="Piotr Jerzy Przebendowski" label="Piotr Jerzy Przebendowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1416" end="1439" title="Antoni Morsztyn" label="Antoni Andrzej Morsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37396595" start="1452" end="1469" title="Jan Ludwik Plater" label="Jan Ludwik Plater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1483" end="1507" title="Franciszek Jakub Szembek" label="Franciszek Jakub Szembek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1521" end="1538" title="Jan Andrzej Borch" label="Jan Andrzej Borch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1552" end="1573" title="Stanisław Brzostowski" label="Stanisław Brzostowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1587" end="1601" title="Józefat Zyberg" label="Jozafat Zyberk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1637" end="1655" title="Jan Tadeusz Zyberg" label="Jan Tadeusz Zyberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1691" end="1708" title="Kasper Rogaliński" label="Kasper Rogaliński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1722" end="1743" title="Adam Ewald Felkerzamb" label="Adam Ewald Felkerzamb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280380" wikidata="Q7635943" url="?curid=1280380" title="Sulaco">
<text>Sulaco may refer to:

==Places==
* Sulaco, Yoro, a municipality in Honduras
** Sulaco Airport (IATA code: &quot;SCD&quot;, IATA code: &quot;MHUL&quot;), see List of airports by IATA code: S
* Sulaco River, a river in Honduras

===Fictional locations===
* Sulaco, Costaguana -- The mining town of the Joseph Conrad novel &quot;Nostromo&quot;

==Vehicles==
* SS &quot;Sulaco&quot;, a British cargo ship sunk in WWII, see List of shipwrecks in October 1940
* SS &quot;Sulaco&quot;, a cargo and passenger ship, final name of the USS Talamanca (AF-15)

===Fictional vehicles===
* U.S.S. &quot;Sulaco&quot;, a fictional spaceship shown in the movie &quot;Aliens&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7635943" start="0" end="6" title="Sulaco" label="Sulaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q727616" start="35" end="47" title="Sulaco, Yoro" label="Sulaco, Yoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="67" end="75" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="" start="157" end="189" title="List of airports by IATA code: S" label="List of airports by IATA code: S"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635944" start="192" end="204" title="Sulaco River" label="Sulaco River"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="300" end="313" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q430248" start="326" end="334" title="Nostromo" label="Nostromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639272" start="419" end="453" title="List of shipwrecks in October 1940" label="List of shipwrecks in October 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874577" start="525" end="546" title="USS Talamanca (AF-15)" label="USS Talamanca (AF-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104814" start="649" end="655" title="Aliens (film)" label="Aliens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280396" wikidata="Q2109536" url="?curid=1280396" title="Falcons (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Falcons]] are a genus of raptor (bird of prey). 

Falcons may also refer to:
==School sports teams==
* Adamson Soaring Falcons, a collegiate basketball (UAAP) team in the Philippines
* Air Force Falcons, the sports teams of the United States Air Force Academy
* Bentley Falcons, the sports teams of Bentley University in Waltham, Massachusetts
* Bowling Green Falcons, the sports teams of Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green, Ohio
* Falcon College, an independent, boarding school for boys aged 12–18 in Matebeleland South, Zimbabwe
* Friends Falcons, the sports teams of Friends University in Wichita, Kansas
* NIST International School Falcons, the sports teams of NIST International School in Bangkok, Thailand
* Seattle Pacific Falcons, the sports teams of Seattle Pacific University in Seattle, Washington
* St. Augustine&#x27;s Falcons, the sports teams of St. Augustine&#x27;s University in Raleigh, North Carolina
* UT Permian Basin Falcons, the sports teams of the University of Texas of the Permian Basin in Odessa, Texas

==Other sports teams==
* Atlanta Falcons, an NFL (American) football team
* Bata Falcons, an association football club based in Montserrat
* Detroit Falcons (disambiguation), several teams
* Falcons (rugby union), a South African rugby team who play in the Currie Cup
* Geelong Falcons, a youth Australian Rules Football club
* Gippsland Falcons SC, an Australian association football club active 1963–2001
* Kandy Falcons, a cricket team in the Lanka Premier League
* Kelowna Falcons, a baseball team in the West Coast League
* Mumbai Falcons, an Indian motorsports team
* Newcastle Falcons, a rugby team based in Newcastle, England
* Nürnberg Falcons BC, a basketball club based in Nuremberg, Germany
* RAF Falcons, a British military parachute display team
* Springfield Falcons, an American Hockey League team
* St. Catharines Falcons (1943–1947), a junior ice hockey team in St. Catharines, Ontario, active 1943–1947
* St. Catharines Falcons (1968–), a junior ice hockey team in St. Catharines, Ontario
* Team Falcons, a Saudi esports organization
* Ukrainian Falcons, the aerobatic demonstration team of the Ukrainian Air Force
* USA Falcons, a national rugby union team
* West Perth Football Club, an Australian rules football club
* Winnipeg Falcons, a Canadian ice hockey team

==Entertainment==
* The Falcons, an American rhythm and blues vocal group
* &quot;Falcons&quot; (film), a 2002 Icelandic film
* &quot;The Falcons&quot; (film), a 1970 Hungarian film

==Other uses==
* Socialist Youth of Germany – Falcons, a voluntary organisation
* Iraqi Falcons Intelligence Cell, an anti-terrorism unit

==See also==
* Falcon (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2109536" start="0" end="11" title="Falcons (disambiguation)" label="[[Falcons]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109536" start="52" end="59" title="Falcons (disambiguation)" label="Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680501" start="105" end="128" title="Adamson Soaring Falcons" label="Adamson Soaring Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147118" start="187" end="204" title="Air Force Falcons" label="Air Force Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228553" start="264" end="279" title="Bentley Falcons" label="Bentley Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064744" start="348" end="369" title="Bowling Green Falcons" label="Bowling Green Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431735" start="447" end="461" title="Falcon College" label="Falcon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504168" start="549" end="564" title="Friends Falcons" label="Friends Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262062" start="626" end="651" title="NIST International School" label="NIST International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971211" start="730" end="753" title="Seattle Pacific Falcons" label="Seattle Pacific Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q20487265" start="827" end="855" title="St. Augustine&amp;#x27;s Falcons" label="St. Augustine&amp;#x27;s Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16162078" start="938" end="962" title="UT Permian Basin Falcons" label="UT Permian Basin Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="1072" end="1087" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070755" start="1123" end="1135" title="Bata Falcons" label="Bata Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q242455" start="1188" end="1220" title="Detroit Falcons (disambiguation)" label="Detroit Falcons (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170726" start="1238" end="1259" title="Falcons (rugby union)" label="Falcons (rugby union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529838" start="1317" end="1332" title="Geelong Falcons" label="Geelong Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131360" start="1375" end="1395" title="Gippsland Falcons SC" label="Gippsland Falcons SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q104283758" start="1456" end="1469" title="Kandy Falcons" label="Kandy Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386429" start="1516" end="1531" title="Kelowna Falcons" label="Kelowna Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q108415736" start="1576" end="1590" title="Mumbai Falcons" label="Mumbai Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q910657" start="1621" end="1638" title="Newcastle Falcons" label="Newcastle Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q325847" start="1683" end="1702" title="Nürnberg Falcons BC" label="Nürnberg Falcons BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275310" start="1752" end="1763" title="RAF Falcons" label="RAF Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474509" start="1809" end="1828" title="Springfield Falcons" label="Springfield Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q106741523" start="1863" end="1897" title="St. Catharines Falcons (1943–1947)" label="St. Catharines Falcons (1943–1947)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587412" start="1971" end="2001" title="St. Catharines Falcons (1968–)" label="St. Catharines Falcons (1968–)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126595365" start="2057" end="2069" title="Team Falcons" label="Team Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593326" start="2102" end="2119" title="Ukrainian Falcons" label="Ukrainian Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924503" start="2183" end="2194" title="USA Falcons" label="USA Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986203" start="2226" end="2250" title="West Perth Football Club" label="West Perth Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308003" start="2288" end="2304" title="Winnipeg Falcons" label="Winnipeg Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733175" start="2354" end="2365" title="The Falcons" label="The Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990713" start="2410" end="2436" title="Falcons (film)" label="&amp;quot;Falcons&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475404" start="2462" end="2492" title="The Falcons (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Falcons&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q185640" start="2534" end="2570" title="Socialist Youth of Germany – Falcons" label="Socialist Youth of Germany – Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850825" start="2599" end="2630" title="Iraqi Falcons Intelligence Cell" label="Iraqi Falcons Intelligence Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q223837" start="2671" end="2694" title="Falcon (disambiguation)" label="Falcon (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280407" wikidata="Q7730121" url="?curid=1280407" title="The Dick Cavett Show">
<text>The Dick Cavett Show is the title of several talk shows hosted by Dick Cavett on various television networks, including:
* ABC daytime, (March 4, 1968 – January 24, 1969) originally titled &quot;This Morning&quot;
* ABC prime time, Tuesdays, Wednesdays &amp; Fridays (May 26 – September 19, 1969)
* ABC late night (December 29, 1969 – January 1, 1975)
* CBS prime time, Saturdays (August 16 – September 6, 1975; this version was actually more of a variety show)
* PBS, early evenings, weeknights (October 10, 1977 – October 8, 1982)
* USA Network prime time (September 30, 1985 – September 23, 1986)
* ABC late night, Tuesdays &amp; Wednesday nights (September 22 – December 30, 1986)
* CNBC (April 17, 1989 – January 26, 1996)
* TCM (2006–2007)
Cavett normally taped his programs in New York City, though occasionally he would venture elsewhere, including Los Angeles, New Orleans and London.

==Show history==
&quot;The Dick Cavett Show&quot; refers to television programs on the ABC, PBS, USA and CNBC networks hosted by comedian, comedy writer and author Dick Cavett between 1968 and 1995 in New York. The first daytime show featured Gore Vidal, Muhammad Ali and Angela Lansbury. ABC pressured Cavett to get prominent celebrities on the show, although subsequent shows without them got higher ratings and more critical acclaim.

A well-received summer replacement prime-time series that aired three times per week led to the memorable late-night talk show that ran from December 29, 1969, to January 1, 1975, opposite NBC&#x27;s &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot;. Cavett took the time slot over from &quot;The Joey Bishop Show&quot;. In addition to his usual monologue, Cavett opened each show reading selected questions written by audience members, to which he would respond with witty rejoinders. (&quot;What makes New York so crummy these days?&quot; &quot;Tourists.&quot;)

While Cavett and Carson shared many of the same guests, Cavett was receptive to rock and roll artists to a degree unusual at the time, as well as to authors, politicians and other personalities outside the entertainment field. The wide variety of guests, combined with Cavett&#x27;s literate and intelligent approach to comedy, appealed to a significant enough number of viewers to keep the show running for several years despite the competition from Carson&#x27;s show. Carson&#x27;s move to southern California in the early 1970s to focus on Hollywood celebrities also helped to minimize guest overlap.

The late-night show&#x27;s 45-minute midpoint would always be signaled by the musical piece &quot;Glitter and Be Gay&quot; from Leonard Bernstein&#x27;s &quot;Candide.&quot; The &quot;Candide&quot; snippet became Cavett&#x27;s theme song and was used as the introduction to his later PBS series, and was played by the house band on his various talk show appearances.

Typically each show had several guests, but occasionally Cavett would devote an entire show to a single guest. Among those receiving such special treatment (some more than once) were Groucho Marx, Laurence Olivier, Judy Garland, Katharine Hepburn (without an audience), Bette Davis, Orson Welles, Noël Coward (who appeared on the same show with Alfred Lunt, Lynn Fontanne, Tammy Grimes and Brian Bedford), John Lennon and Yoko Ono, Janis Joplin, Ray Charles, Alfred Hitchcock, Fred Astaire, Woody Allen, Gloria Swanson, Jerry Lewis, Lucille Ball, Zero Mostel (&quot;on some shows I&#x27;ve had just one guest, but tonight I have Zero&quot;), Bob Hope and David Bowie. These shows helped showcase Cavett&#x27;s skills as a host who could attract guests that otherwise might not do interviews, at the expense of some of the excitement that might ensue from the multiple-guest format.

In January 1973, despite a vociferous letter campaign, ratings forced the show to be cut back to occasional status, airing one week a month under the umbrella title &quot;ABC&#x27;s Wide World of Entertainment&quot;. Jack Paar, whom ABC had tried to recruit as Cavett&#x27;s successor, insisted that both he and Cavett would be given at least one week per month as a sign of respect for Cavett. By the end of 1974, Cavett&#x27;s show was airing only twice per month.

The PBS series featured single guests in a half-hour format and was produced by Christopher Porterfield, a former roommate of Cavett&#x27;s at Yale University who had coauthored the book &quot;Cavett&quot; that was published in August 1974. The show remained on the PBS lineup until affiliates voted it off the schedule in 1982.

On all three of the early ABC shows the bandleader was Bobby Rosengarden and the announcer was Fred Foy of &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot; fame. The morning show was produced by Woody Fraser. Tony Converse was the producer of the 1969 ABC prime-time show and the original producer of the ABC late-night show, succeeded by John Gilroy. Cavett&#x27;s writer was Dave Lloyd.

&quot;The Dick Cavett Show&quot; was also the name of a short-lived radio show.

===Notable moments===

====1968–69====
=====March 4, 1968: The premiere of &quot;This Morning&quot;=====
In the first broadcast of his 90-minute morning show, Cavett had as his first guest engineer, designer and futurist Buckminster Fuller. The two discussed how politicians would eventually become obsolete through technological advances, and the wide-ranging discussion included a comment from Fuller that a woman is a baby factory and that a man&#x27;s role is to simply press the right button. Later on in the program, Cavett chatted with actress Patricia Neal, who discussed her long rehabilitation from a near-fatal stroke in 1965.

=====March 27, 1968: Christine Jorgensen walks off the show=====
During an interview with Christine Jorgensen, the first widely known trans woman to have sex reassignment surgery (in this case a complete male-to-female vaginoplasty), Jorgensen walked off the show when she felt offended after Cavett asked her about the status of her romantic life with her wife; because Jorgensen was the only scheduled guest, Cavett spent the rest of that show talking about how he had not meant to offend her.

=====June 6, 1968: Robert F. Kennedy assassination=====
As a result of continuing coverage of the Robert F. Kennedy assassination that took place earlier that morning, Cavett&#x27;s show did not begin until 11 am, and was interrupted at 11:20 for 30 minutes of further updates on the unfolding tragedy. At 11:50, Cavett&#x27;s show returned for its final 10 minutes. The assassination was the only topic discussed during the 30 minutes of the show. On the following two mornings, the show began at its regular time of 10:30 am, and was once again devoted exclusively to assassination coverage, and presented without commercial interruption.

=====June 13, 1969: Groucho Marx&#x27;s one-man show=====
Because of conflicting network broadcasts, Cavett pre-taped a one-man, 60-minute episode with Groucho Marx.

=====July 7, 1969: Jimi Hendrix=====
In the July 7, 1969, interview, rock star Jimi Hendrix modestly downplayed his abilities and displayed his sense of humor. Perhaps most importantly, he revealed some of his aesthetic ideals and the purpose of his music when he discussed his concept of the &quot;Electric Church&quot;:

Hendrix then performed &quot;Hear My Train A Comin&#x27;&quot; with the house band and played the guitar with his teeth at the end of the song.

=====August 19, 1969: The Woodstock Show=====
On Tuesday, August 19, 1969, Jefferson Airplane, Joni Mitchell, David Crosby and Stephen Stills (of Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young) all appeared on the show. The episode is now often referred to as &quot;The Woodstock Show&quot;, as many of the performers, and Cavett&#x27;s audience, came directly from the concert for the taping the afternoon before the show aired. Stills pointed out the mud from the concert venue still on his pants. Jefferson Airplane&#x27;s performance of &quot;We Can Be Together&quot; marked the first time the word &quot;fuck&quot; was uttered on television in the US (the actual line is &quot;In order to survive we steal, cheat, lie, forge, fuck, hide and deal&quot;. Another line with the forbidden word was &quot;Up against the wall, Up against the wall, motherfucker&quot;.). Mitchell sang &quot;Chelsea Morning&quot;, &quot;Willy&quot; and &quot;For Free&quot;. Grace Slick purposefully called Cavett &quot;Jim&quot; and briefly talked about her school days at Finch College. Stephen Stills performed &quot;4 + 20&quot;. Joni Mitchell sang &quot;The Fiddle and the Drum&quot; a cappella. Jefferson Airplane (with Crosby) then launched into &quot;Somebody to Love&quot;. The credits rolled as the musicians, without Mitchell, engaged in an instrumental jam as the audience danced.

Jimi Hendrix was scheduled to join the others, but was unable to appear at the afternoon taping that occurred only a few hours after he had performed at the late-running festival. Mitchell&#x27;s manager, apparently fearing a similar situation that may have prevented her from appearing on the show, did not allow her to perform at Woodstock. He considered the &quot;Dick Cavett Show&quot; too important for her career for her to risk missing the taping.

Mitchell wrote the song &quot;Woodstock&quot; based on descriptions by Graham Nash and from the images she saw on television, as she could not be there in person. The most famous version of the song is by Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young, who recorded it for their &quot;Déjà Vu&quot; album (1970). It appears in the film &quot;Woodstock&quot; during the closing credits. Mitchell recorded it for &quot;Ladies of the Canyon&quot; (1970).

=====September 5, 1969: Groucho Marx=====
Groucho Marx remarked about the Musical theatre musical &quot;Hair&quot;, which had just opened and was notorious for its ground-breaking use of explicit nudity: &quot;I was going to go, but I saw myself in the mirror one morning, and I figured, why waste five and a half dollars?&quot;

=====September 9, 1969: Jimi Hendrix=====
In an interview with Jimi Hendrix, Cavett spoke about Hendrix&#x27;s performance of the &quot;Star Spangled Banner&quot; at Woodstock, and called the style &quot;unorthodox&quot;. Jimi commented that the song was &quot;not unorthodox&quot; and that what he played was beautiful. The audience clapped, and Dick blushed.

Hendrix performed &quot;Izabella&quot; &amp; &quot;Machine Gun&quot; with his band, Billy Cox, Mitch Mitchell and Juma Sultan.

====1970s====
=====February 4, 1970: Judy Collins=====
During an interview with singer Judy Collins in which Cavett and Collins discussed her experiences as a defense witness at the Chicago Seven trial, several of Collins&#x27; comments were censored at the direction of the ABC legal department. Collins wrote a protest letter to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), claiming a violation of her free-speech rights and the network license granted to ABC by the FCC. Her protest was denied, with the FCC ruling that a television network could, at its discretion, delete or edit remarks on its programs. Elton Rule, president of ABC Television, noted that in the network&#x27;s judgment, &quot;her remarks ... were not within the bounds of fair comment.&quot;

=====February 5, 1970: Eric Clapton=====
Blues guitarist Eric Clapton appeared on the show with a new group called Delaney &amp; Bonnie &amp; Friends, which was Clapton&#x27;s first attempt to break from his lead role and operate as an anonymous sideman. This was also possibly the first time Clapton had appeared on American television with a Fender Stratocaster; up to that time, he was famous for only playing Gibson guitars. Cavett briefly interviewed the band but the shy Clapton did not have much to say.

=====February 19, 1970: Noël Coward, Alfred Lunt, Lynn Fontanne, Tammy Grimes and Brian Bedford=====
To honor Noël Coward on the occasion of his knighthood, Cavett interviewed Coward and his close friends, the Lunts. Tammy Grimes and Brian Bedford, who were appearing on Broadway in a revival of Coward&#x27;s classic play &quot;Private Lives&quot;, performed a medley of Coward&#x27;s most popular songs. At one point during the interview, Cavett asked Coward, &quot;What is the word for when one has terrific, prolific qualities?&quot; to which Coward answered in a deadpan manner, &quot;Talent&quot;, drawing a great amount of laughter.

=====April 6, 1970: Mark Frechette and Daria Halprin=====
Actors Mark Frechette and Daria Halprin appeared together with movie producer Mel Brooks and movie critic Rex Reed. The interview went poorly from the outset, with Frechette giving abrupt, non-conversational answers and Halprin staying silent. Cavett apparently believed that they lived in a commune, when they in fact were followers of guru Mel Lyman. When Cavett asked about the &quot;commune&quot; where they lived, Frechette denied that it was a commune and said that &quot;The community is for one purpose, and that&#x27;s to serve Mel Lyman, who&#x27;s the leader and founder of that community.&quot; At that point, Halprin finally tried to speak, but Cavett went to commercial. When the show returned, the next guest, Dr. Aaron Stern, a Beverly Hills psychiatrist and director of the MPAA&#x27;s code and rating administration, was brought out, and Frechette and Halprin were not interviewed further.

=====July 27, 1970: Orson Welles=====
Around halfway through Cavett&#x27;s Orson Welles interview, Welles reversed the roles and began asking Cavett questions about his life and career. This impromptu interview was well received by the audience and, among other things, humorously acknowledged Cavett&#x27;s talk-show competitors such as Johnny Carson and Merv Griffin.

=====September 18, 1970: John Cassavetes, Peter Falk and Ben Gazzara=====
Director John Cassavetes and actors Peter Falk and Ben Gazzara appeared on the show to promote the movie &quot;Husbands&quot;. All three guests were highly intoxicated, and &quot;for thirty-five minutes they smoked, flopped around on the floor, and generally tormented Cavett, whose questions they&#x27;d planned to ignore.&quot; Dick Cavett pronounced it &quot;one of the most interesting evenings of my life.&quot;

=====December 18, 1970: Lester Maddox walks off the show=====
Retiring Georgia governor Lester Maddox, appearing in a panel discussion with author Truman Capote and football great Jim Brown, walked off the show in the middle of a conversation about segregation. Cavett had made a reference to the &quot;bigots&quot; who had elected Maddox. Following an exchange about how insulting the remark might have been and Maddox&#x27;s demand for an apology, Cavett finally apologized to those Georgians who had supported Maddox that might not be bigots. Not satisfied, Maddox left the studio. During the hastily called commercial break, Cavett tried to coax Maddox back to no avail. Cavett suspected that the behavior was mere showmanship and a calculated publicity stunt. The incident was reported on the news before it aired that night, increasing viewership. In Greenwood, Mississippi, the hometown of Cavett&#x27;s wife Carrie Nye, the guests at a country club dance abandoned the dance floor to watch the show on the TV in the lounge. In Atlanta, then-ABC affiliate WQXI-TV (now WXIA) led with the story on its 11 p.m. newscast, but as it was a Friday night, when the station normally aired movies and delayed Cavett&#x27;s Friday show to Sunday, Atlanta viewers had to wait until Sunday night to see the incident.

Capote, after watching Maddox walk offstage, paused and quipped, &quot;I&#x27;ve been to his restaurant and his chicken isn&#x27;t that finger lickin&#x27; good.&quot; Years later, Cavett said he got more comments about the show (including some 6,000 pieces of hate mail) than any other he had done.

Maddox later returned for another appearance, and this time Cavett walked off as a joke. Left alone on stage, Maddox cued the band and began singing &quot;I Don&#x27;t Know Why I Love You Like I Do&quot; as Cavett reappeared in the wings to join in.

The walk-off incident is mentioned at the beginning of the Randy Newman song &quot;Rednecks&quot;.

=====February 11, 1971: Salvador Dalí, Lillian Gish and Satchel Paige=====
Surrealist artist Salvador Dalí appeared on the show with silent-screen star Lillian Gish and baseball legend Satchel Paige. Dalí brought an anteater on a leash with him when he came on stage, and he tossed it in Gish&#x27;s lap, much to her consternation.

Cavett asked Dalí why he had once arrived to give a lecture at the Sorbonne in an open limousine filled with heads of cauliflower. Dalí responded with a barely coherent discourse regarding the similarity of the cauliflower head to the &quot;mathematical problem discovered by Michelangelo in the rhinoceros&#x27; horn.&quot;

Cavett interrupted him by waving his hands in Dalí&#x27;s face, exclaiming &quot;Boogie boogie!&quot; (imitating Groucho Marx in the film &quot;A Night at the Opera&quot;). The audience broke up, and Dalí appeared at a loss.

=====April 29, 1971: Robert Mitchum interview=====
Actor Robert Mitchum, known for avoiding public appearances, gave a rare interview as the sole guest. Mitchum talked about his childhood, Hollywood, his disdain for politics and politicians and his 1948 arrest. The show featured film clips from &quot;Ryan&#x27;s Daughter&quot; (1970) and &quot;The Night of the Hunter&quot; (1955).

=====June 7, 1971: J. I. Rodale&#x27;s on-stage death=====
On June 7, 1971, publisher J. I. Rodale, founder of Rodale, Inc., a health and wellness publishing conglomerate headquartered in Emmaus, Pennsylvania, died of a heart attack during the taping of a segment for the show. Cavett was speaking with journalist Pete Hamill when Rodale began to make a snoring noise. Cavett&#x27;s reaction to this is contested: he claims that both he and Hamill realized immediately that something was wrong, while other accounts have him addressing the unconscious man with &quot;Are we boring you, Mr. Rodale?&quot; The audience did not realize anything was seriously wrong until Cavett asked if there were any medical doctors present.

The program was never aired and a rerun was shown in its place. On the following night&#x27;s program, Cavett discussed the previous night&#x27;s event in depth. He has said that he is often approached by people wanting to discuss the incident, mistakenly convinced that they saw it on television. He would usually ask if the person was in the studio audience, which was the only way to witness it since the episode was never broadcast.

=====June 1971: Vietnam War debate with John Kerry=====
During a debate about the Vietnam War, Cavett had two veterans debating on the show. The anti-war side was led by a young John Kerry and the pro-war side by John E. O&#x27;Neill, later the founder of Swift Boat Veterans for Truth. It was later revealed through then-President Richard Nixon&#x27;s secret White House tapes that Nixon wanted to &quot;get rid&quot; of Cavett because of this debate.

=====August 2, 1971: Ingmar Bergman=====
Director Ingmar Bergman appeared for the first time on a US talk show, one of the few television interviews he ever granted.

=====November 24, 1971: Danny Kaye=====
Actor/singer Danny Kaye appeared for the entire show with film clips, performing and promoting UNICEF.

=====December 15, 1971: Norman Mailer vs. Gore Vidal=====
Moments before the episode with Gore Vidal, Norman Mailer and Janet Flanner, Mailer, annoyed with Vidal&#x27;s less-than-stellar review of &quot;Prisoner of Sex&quot;, headbutted Vidal and traded insults with him backstage. As the show began taping, a visibly belligerent Mailer, who admitted he had been drinking, goaded Vidal and Cavett into trading insults with him on air and continually referred to his &quot;greater intellect&quot;. He openly taunted and mocked Vidal (who responded in kind), finally earning the ire of Flanner, who announced that she had become &quot;very, very bored&quot; with the discussion, telling Mailer and Vidal &quot;You act as if you&#x27;re the only people here.&quot; Mailer moved his chair away from the other guests and Cavett joked that &quot;perhaps you&#x27;d like two more chairs to contain your giant intellect?&quot; Mailer replied &quot;I&#x27;ll take the two chairs if you&#x27;ll all accept finger bowls.&quot; As Cavett professed to not understand Mailer&#x27;s &quot;finger bowl&quot; comment and made further jokes, Mailer stated &quot;Why don&#x27;t you look at your question sheet and ask your question?&quot;, to which Cavett responded &quot;Why don&#x27;t you fold it five ways and put it where the moon don&#x27;t shine?&quot;

A long laugh by the audience ensued, after which Mailer asked Cavett if he had &quot;come up with that line himself&quot;. Cavett replied, &quot;I have to tell you a quote from Tolstoy?&quot;

The headbutting and later on-air altercation was described by Mailer in his short book &quot;Of a Small and Modest Malignancy, Wicked and Bristling with Dots&quot;, including a description that does not jibe with the videotape and which was disputed by Cavett decades later in his &quot;New York Times&quot; online column. Cavett noted that Mailer said that he received more mail about this episode than for anything else in his career.

=====1971: John Simon vs. Mort Sahl=====
Critic John Simon revealed on the air that during the most recent commercial break, fellow guest Mort Sahl had threatened to punch him in the mouth.

=====1971: The pornography episodes=====
Cavett did a two-part show on pornography; both parts were taped the same day and shown on two nights. During the first part, he discussed the depiction of oral sex in movies and made a parenthetical utterance: &quot;oral-genital sex...mouth on sex organs.&quot; A flap ensued when executives demanded that the censor cut the second phrase.

An angry Cavett described the ongoing situation at the beginning of the second part, reusing the phrase. One of the guests, legal scholar Alexander Bickel, sided with Cavett. The result was that the show aired with the phrase cut the first night but intact for the second night.

=====1972–1974 and beyond: Watergate=====
During and following the Watergate scandal, which resulted in the resignation of President Richard Nixon, Cavett&#x27;s guests included:

* Barry Goldwater, senior Republican Senator from Arizona
* G. Gordon Liddy, former FBI agent, one of the head White House Plumbers one of the original Watergate Seven 
* Richard Kleindienst, Attorney General succeeding John N. Mitchell and followed by Elliot Richardson
* Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, &quot;Washington Post&quot; metropolitan writers and Watergate investigative reporters
* Walter Cronkite, &quot;CBS Evening News&quot; anchor who aired segments on Watergate using Woodward and Bernstein&#x27;s &quot;Washington Post&quot; coverage
* John Ehrlichman, Nixon chief domestic policy advisor and one of the later Watergate Seven
* Jeb Magruder, CRP coordinator turned witness
* John Dean, Nixon White House counsel and cover-up coordinator turned star witness
* Members of the Senate Watergate Committee in charge of the Watergate hearings
** Chairman Sam Ervin (D-NC)
** Vice chairman Howard Baker (R-TN) and members Lowell Weicker (R-CT), Daniel Inouye (D-HI) and Herman Talmadge (D-GA) in the Senate Caucus Room with an audience
* Gore Vidal
* Gerald Ford, House Minority Leader, Vice President following Spiro Agnew&#x27;s resignation and President following Nixon&#x27;s resignation
* Henry Kissinger, National Security Advisor and Secretary of State

It later emerged from the Nixon White House tapes that Cavett was viewed as an enemy by Nixon and thus had staff who had taxes audited in retaliation. Cavett&#x27;s Watergate coverage and interviews were later spotlighted in a PBS documentary called &quot;Dick Cavett&#x27;s Watergate&quot; featuring Cavett, Woodward, Bernstein, Dean and former Nixon Presidential Library director Timothy Naftali.

=====March 31, 1972: Chad Everett vs. Lily Tomlin=====
During the taping of this episode, actor Chad Everett upset feminist actress/comedian Lily Tomlin. Tomlin became so enraged when Everett referred to his wife as &quot;my property&quot; that she stormed off the set and refused to return.

=====June 27, 1972: Angela Davis=====
Angela Davis, an activist who was associated with the Black Panther Party in the 1960s and 1970s, cancelled a scheduled appearance on June 27, 1972. The basis for the controversy was the continuing debate over the SST (supersonic transport) system. ABC had insisted on inviting either William F. Buckley, Jr. or William Rusher of the conservative &quot;National Review&quot; magazine to have a balanced viewpoint, but Davis declined.

=====1972: Rogers Morton=====
A show with Secretary of the Interior Rogers Morton resulted in nine animals being added to the endangered species list after Cavett commented on them.

=====June 12, 1973: Marlon Brando=====
Marlon Brando, who just months earlier had rejected his Academy Award for &quot;The Godfather&quot; to protest the plight of American Indians, appeared on the show with representatives of the Cheyenne, Paiute and Lummi tribes to promote his views. After the program ended, Brando assaulted photographer Ron Galella, who ended up in the hospital after being punched in the face.

=====October 1973: Katharine Hepburn two-hour interview=====
Having previously never appeared on television, Katharine Hepburn—for reasons still unknown—decided to visit Cavett&#x27;s studio for a tour. After critiquing the carpet and rearranging the set, Hepburn suggested they &quot;go ahead and do it now.&quot; During her two-part interview, Hepburn got up and left at the end of the first half of the interview, thinking her job was done. Cavett apologized to the audience, promising that she would be back the next evening (she was). However, this was actually staged by Cavett and Hepburn as a joke.

=====February 21, 1974: Carol Burnett interview=====
Actress Carol Burnett appeared and was interviewed for the entire 90-minute program.

=====1979: Oscar Peterson=====
Pianist Oscar Peterson expertly demonstrated the styles of Art Tatum, Erroll Garner, Nat King Cole and George Shearing. The show began with Peterson playing a solo piece and he then discussed his debut and his view on critics.

====1980s====
=====October 1980: Jean-Luc Godard =====
Filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard appeared in two 1980 episodes promoting the film &quot;Every Man for Himself&quot; and discussing his philosophy of filmmaking. These are included as supplements on the Criterion Collection&#x27;s DVD and Blu-ray releases of the film.

==Home media==
Five DVD sets have been released featuring various episodes of the series.

==Resurgence==
Global Image Works, the current owner of the footage of the show, has made a YouTube channel with clips from the show. It launched on June 7, 2018. As of February 2024, the channel has over 134 million views. News outlets have covered clips from the show, mostly because of the celebrities. HBO released a documentary called &quot;Ali and Cavett: The Tale of Tapes&quot;, which is about Muhammad Ali&#x27;s friendship with him, making the show even more popular in the 2020s.

Reruns of the show currently air weeknights on the Decades cable network, though 90-minute episodes have been cut to fit a one-hour slot, and musical performances are almost always removed, presumably for licensing reasons. However, as of March 27, 2023, it will no longer be shown on Decades as it rebrands itself as Catchy Comedy.

==In popular culture==
In a scene from the 1977 Woody Allen–directed film, &quot;Annie Hall&quot;, Allen appears on the show in character as comedian Alvy Singer, with Cavett interviewing. There is a scene in the 1994 film &quot;Forrest Gump&quot;, where Tom Hanks in the titular role, appears in the show together with John Lennon. The creation of this scene was achieved via the use of ground-breaking special visual effects. Both films wound up winning the Academy Award for Best Picture.

The Dick Cavett Show plays a prominent role in the season finale of the first season of Bojack Horseman. In the show, a young Bojack is watching a cartoon version of Cavett interview Secretariat. Cavett asks Secretariat a question from a rambling letter sent by Bojack: &quot;What do you do when you get sad? How do you not be sad?&quot; Secretariat responds by saying, in part: &quot;BoJack, when you get sad, you run straight ahead a-and you keep running forward, no matter what.&quot; In the second season of Bojack Horseman it is revealed that Bojack did not hear the Secretariat response because of a loud argument between Bojack&#x27;s parents.

The set of The Adam Friedland Show is a replica of the Dick Cavett Show set.

== See also ==
*List of late night network TV programs

==References==
==Further reading==
* Dick Cavett and Christopher Porterfield, &quot;Cavett&quot; (Bantam Books, August 1974) 

==External links==
*Dick Cavett&#x27;s blog is published by the &quot;New York Times&quot;: &quot;Talk Show: Dick Cavett Speaks Again&quot;.
* (1968–1972)
* (1975–1982)
* (1986)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375356" start="66" end="77" title="Dick Cavett" label="Dick Cavett"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="123" end="126" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243465" start="127" end="134" title="daytime television" label="daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495397" start="303" end="313" title="Late night television" label="late night"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="354" end="357" title="Columbia Broadcasting System" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="464" end="467" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="535" end="546" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="687" end="691" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="730" end="733" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="TCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="784" end="797" title="New York, New York" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q375356" start="1059" end="1070" title="Dick Cavett" label="Dick Cavett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243465" start="1116" end="1128" title="Daytime television" label="daytime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="1138" end="1148" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="1150" end="1162" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q206856" start="1167" end="1182" title="Angela Lansbury" label="Angela Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q986699" start="1439" end="1459" title="late-night talk show" label="late-night talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1522" end="1525" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="1539" end="1578" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743347" start="1628" end="1648" title="The Joey Bishop Show (talk show)" label="The Joey Bishop Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="1980" end="1993" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="2444" end="2453" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="2634" end="2651" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033015" start="2665" end="2672" title="Candide (musical)" label="Candide"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="3057" end="3069" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="3071" end="3087" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="3089" end="3101" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="3103" end="3120" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="3144" end="3155" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="3157" end="3169" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="3171" end="3182" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246683" start="3219" end="3230" title="Alfred Lunt" label="Alfred Lunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q242484" start="3232" end="3245" title="Lynn Fontanne" label="Lynn Fontanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514842" start="3247" end="3259" title="Tammy Grimes" label="Tammy Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963077" start="3264" end="3277" title="Brian Bedford" label="Brian Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="3280" end="3291" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="3296" end="3304" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514" start="3306" end="3318" title="Janis Joplin" label="Janis Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="3320" end="3331" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="3333" end="3349" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="3351" end="3363" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="3365" end="3376" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q229232" start="3378" end="3392" title="Gloria Swanson" label="Gloria Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="3394" end="3405" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="3407" end="3419" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q191952" start="3421" end="3432" title="Zero Mostel" label="Zero Mostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="3516" end="3524" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="3529" end="3540" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650035" start="3928" end="3966" title="ABC&amp;#x27;s Wide World of Entertainment" label="ABC&amp;#x27;s Wide World of Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587581" start="3974" end="3983" title="Jack Paar" label="Jack Paar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113082" start="4305" end="4328" title="Christopher Porterfield" label="Christopher Porterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="4368" end="4383" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q470277" start="4610" end="4627" title="Bobby Rosengarden" label="Bobby Rosengarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354769" start="4650" end="4658" title="Fred Foy" label="Fred Foy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588097" start="4668" end="4683" title="The Lone Ranger" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179080" start="4911" end="4921" title="David Lloyd (writer)" label="Dave Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q102289" start="5226" end="5244" title="Buckminster Fuller" label="Buckminster Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q191027" start="5556" end="5569" title="Patricia Neal" label="Patricia Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q254323" start="5734" end="5753" title="Christine Jorgensen" label="Christine Jorgensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="5778" end="5789" title="trans woman" label="trans woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="5798" end="5822" title="sex reassignment surgery" label="sex reassignment surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537534" start="5863" end="5875" title="vaginoplasty" label="vaginoplasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187550" start="6239" end="6270" title="Robert F. Kennedy assassination" label="Robert F. Kennedy assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="7029" end="7041" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691566" start="7302" end="7329" title="Hear My Train A Comin&amp;#x27;" label="Hear My Train A Comin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q488260" start="7493" end="7511" title="Jefferson Airplane" label="Jefferson Airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="7513" end="7526" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q370560" start="7528" end="7540" title="David Crosby" label="David Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="7545" end="7559" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q10461933" start="7564" end="7596" title="Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young" label="Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="7674" end="7683" title="Woodstock Festival" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q131747385" start="7951" end="7969" title="We Can Be Together" label="We Can Be Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499589" start="8230" end="8263" title="Up Against the Wall Motherfucker" label="Up against the wall, motherfucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090114" start="8293" end="8308" title="Chelsea Morning" label="Chelsea Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q229881" start="8360" end="8371" title="Grace Slick" label="Grace Slick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449817" start="8459" end="8472" title="Finch College" label="Finch College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733716" start="8544" end="8567" title="The Fiddle and the Drum" label="The Fiddle and the Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="8574" end="8584" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574701" start="8644" end="8660" title="Somebody to Love (Jefferson Airplane song)" label="Somebody to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993570" start="9265" end="9274" title="Woodstock (song)" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q357211" start="9306" end="9317" title="Graham Nash" label="Graham Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q255471" start="9506" end="9513" title="Déjà Vu (Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young album)" label="Déjà Vu"/>
<link wikidata="Q956288" start="9563" end="9572" title="Woodstock (film)" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707551" start="9638" end="9658" title="Ladies of the Canyon (album)" label="Ladies of the Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="9716" end="9728" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="9778" end="9782" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="10140" end="10160" title="Star Spangled Banner" label="Star Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q832592" start="10417" end="10428" title="Machine Gun (Jimi Hendrix song)" label="Machine Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q443613" start="10450" end="10459" title="Billy Cox" label="Billy Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q315225" start="10461" end="10475" title="Mitch Mitchell" label="Mitch Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449350" start="10480" end="10491" title="Juma Sultan" label="Juma Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="10581" end="10593" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071992" start="10676" end="10689" title="Chicago Seven" label="Chicago Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="10829" end="10862" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367876" start="11104" end="11114" title="Elton Rule" label="Elton Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="11318" end="11330" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183865" start="11376" end="11410" title="Delaney &amp;amp; Bonnie &amp;amp; Friends" label="Delaney &amp;amp; Bonnie &amp;amp; Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="11605" end="11624" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q210278" start="11674" end="11680" title="Gibson (guitar company)" label="Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="11883" end="11894" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813385" start="12102" end="12115" title="Private Lives" label="Private Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q911850" start="12479" end="12493" title="Mark Frechette" label="Mark Frechette"/>
<link wikidata="Q433695" start="12498" end="12511" title="Daria Halprin" label="Daria Halprin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104266" start="12550" end="12560" title="Mel Brooks" label="Mel Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352005" start="12578" end="12586" title="Rex Reed" label="Rex Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="12764" end="12771" title="Intentional community" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810774" start="12814" end="12823" title="Mel Lyman" label="Mel Lyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="13263" end="13267" title="Motion Picture Association of America" label="MPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="13275" end="13305" title="Motion Picture Association of America film rating system" label="code and rating administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="13456" end="13468" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="13719" end="13732" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q598344" start="13737" end="13749" title="Merv Griffin" label="Merv Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="13835" end="13850" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="13862" end="13872" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q296287" start="13877" end="13888" title="Ben Gazzara" label="Ben Gazzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721763" start="13937" end="13945" title="Husbands (film)" label="Husbands"/>
<link wikidata="Q885384" start="14332" end="14345" title="Lester Maddox" label="Lester Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q134180" start="14391" end="14404" title="Truman Capote" label="Truman Capote"/>
<link wikidata="Q927916" start="14424" end="14433" title="Jim Brown" label="Jim Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="14493" end="14504" title="Racial segregation" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999003" start="14992" end="15007" title="publicity stunt" label="publicity stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q986376" start="15101" end="15123" title="Greenwood, Mississippi" label="Greenwood, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940244" start="15160" end="15170" title="Carrie Nye" label="Carrie Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137210" start="15188" end="15200" title="country club" label="country club"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="15279" end="15286" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957641" start="15320" end="15324" title="WXIA" label="WXIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="15693" end="15717" title="KFC" label="finger lickin&amp;#x27; good"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794113" start="15818" end="15827" title="hate mail" label="hate mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q318475" start="16168" end="16180" title="Randy Newman" label="Randy Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306164" start="16192" end="16200" title="Rednecks (song)" label="Rednecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="16302" end="16315" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q104183" start="16361" end="16373" title="Lillian Gish" label="Lillian Gish"/>
<link wikidata="Q555730" start="16394" end="16407" title="Satchel Paige" label="Satchel Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="16609" end="16617" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="16818" end="16830" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="16981" end="16993" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q943992" start="17012" end="17032" title="A Night at the Opera (film)" label="A Night at the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16472" start="17151" end="17165" title="Robert Mitchum" label="Robert Mitchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423795" start="17396" end="17416" title="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132629" start="17440" end="17463" title="The Night of the Hunter (film)" label="The Night of the Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687744" start="17565" end="17577" title="J. I. Rodale" label="J. I. Rodale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356442" start="17590" end="17602" title="Rodale, Inc." label="Rodale, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q680643" start="17667" end="17687" title="Emmaus, Pennsylvania" label="Emmaus, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172000" start="17793" end="17804" title="Pete Hamill" label="Pete Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="18820" end="18830" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250987" start="18855" end="18875" title="John E. O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="John E. O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372717" start="18898" end="18927" title="Swift Vets and POWs for Truth" label="Swift Boat Veterans for Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="18974" end="18987" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="19002" end="19013" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="19146" end="19160" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="19316" end="19326" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="19398" end="19404" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="19497" end="19507" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180962" start="19509" end="19522" title="Norman Mailer" label="Norman Mailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q453384" start="19527" end="19540" title="Janet Flanner" label="Janet Flanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640078" start="20403" end="20414" title="finger bowl" label="finger bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="20925" end="20932" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21228" end="21242" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257894" start="21427" end="21437" title="John Simon (critic)" label="John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324468" start="21517" end="21526" title="Mort Sahl" label="Mort Sahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718358" start="22091" end="22107" title="Alexander Bickel" label="Alexander Bickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="22260" end="22269" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="22366" end="22379" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="22415" end="22430" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q952688" start="22473" end="22488" title="G. Gordon Liddy" label="G. Gordon Liddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994906" start="22524" end="22544" title="White House Plumbers" label="White House Plumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974115" start="22565" end="22580" title="Watergate Seven" label="Watergate Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q521427" start="22584" end="22603" title="Richard Kleindienst" label="Richard Kleindienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347566" start="22633" end="22649" title="John N. Mitchell" label="John N. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q719808" start="22666" end="22683" title="Elliot Richardson" label="Elliot Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312782" start="22686" end="22698" title="Bob Woodward" label="Bob Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q319967" start="22703" end="22717" title="Carl Bernstein" label="Carl Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="22725" end="22740" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q31073" start="22808" end="22823" title="Walter Cronkite" label="Walter Cronkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q700402" start="22831" end="22847" title="CBS Evening News" label="CBS Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699957" start="22968" end="22983" title="John Ehrlichman" label="John Ehrlichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974115" start="23042" end="23057" title="Watergate Seven" label="Watergate Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569782" start="23060" end="23072" title="Jeb Magruder" label="Jeb Magruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630448" start="23107" end="23116" title="John Dean" label="John Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459168" start="23206" end="23232" title="Senate Watergate Committee" label="Senate Watergate Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459168" start="23250" end="23268" title="Watergate hearings" label="Watergate hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q322911" start="23281" end="23290" title="Sam Ervin" label="Sam Ervin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337643" start="23315" end="23327" title="Howard Baker" label="Howard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q881318" start="23347" end="23361" title="Lowell Weicker" label="Lowell Weicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q312845" start="23370" end="23383" title="Daniel Inouye" label="Daniel Inouye"/>
<link wikidata="Q356029" start="23395" end="23410" title="Herman Talmadge" label="Herman Talmadge"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="23463" end="23473" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="23476" end="23487" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="23537" end="23548" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="23619" end="23634" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041997" start="23712" end="23735" title="Nixon White House tapes" label="Nixon White House tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807415" start="24068" end="24083" title="Timothy Naftali" label="Timothy Naftali"/>
<link wikidata="Q969844" start="24182" end="24194" title="Chad Everett" label="Chad Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="24201" end="24209" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q229271" start="24227" end="24238" title="Lily Tomlin" label="Lily Tomlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160456" start="24417" end="24429" title="Angela Davis" label="Angela Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="24471" end="24490" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239346" start="24636" end="24656" title="supersonic transport" label="supersonic transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q378098" start="24702" end="24725" title="William F. Buckley, Jr." label="William F. Buckley, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4391336" start="24729" end="24743" title="William Rusher" label="William Rusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="24770" end="24785" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="24894" end="24919" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q942318" start="24920" end="24933" title="Rogers Morton" label="Rogers Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="25074" end="25087" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="25199" end="25215" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="25266" end="25274" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642162" start="25276" end="25282" title="Northern Paiute" label="Paiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q125701207" start="25287" end="25292" title="Lummi people" label="Lummi"/>
<link wikidata="Q331364" start="25377" end="25388" title="Ron Galella" label="Ron Galella"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="25562" end="25579" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105349" start="26239" end="26253" title="Oscar Peterson" label="Oscar Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q109053" start="26290" end="26299" title="Art Tatum" label="Art Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q433912" start="26301" end="26314" title="Erroll Garner" label="Erroll Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="26316" end="26329" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q349346" start="26334" end="26349" title="George Shearing" label="George Shearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="26524" end="26539" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q972787" start="26595" end="26616" title="Every Man for Himself (1980 film)" label="Every Man for Himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="26709" end="26729" title="Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="27173" end="27176" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350875" start="27410" end="27417" title="Decades (TV network)" label="Decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350875" start="27677" end="27690" title="Catchy Comedy" label="Catchy Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="27741" end="27752" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q233464" start="27774" end="27784" title="Annie Hall" label="Annie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="27922" end="27934" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="27948" end="27957" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246821" start="27965" end="27977" title="titular role" label="titular role"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="28013" end="28024" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8317" start="28105" end="28119" title="visual effects" label="visual effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="28153" end="28183" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17733404" start="28274" end="28289" title="Bojack Horseman" label="Bojack Horseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q120135612" start="28849" end="28872" title="The Adam Friedland Show" label="The Adam Friedland Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q986699" start="28932" end="28970" title="List of late night network TV programs" label="List of late night network TV programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="29169" end="29183" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280409" wikidata="Q16061743" url="?curid=1280409" title="Pie in the Sky">
<text>Pie in the Sky may refer to:

*&quot;Pie in the Sky&quot; (TV series), a UK television series about a police officer turned restaurateur
*&quot;Pie in the Sky&quot; (1964 film), a 1964 American film
*&quot;Pie in the Sky&quot; (1996 film), a 1996 romantic comedy starring Josh Charles and Anne Heche
*&quot;Pie in the Sky&quot; (&quot;2 Stupid Dogs&quot;), a 1993 episode of &quot;2 Stupid Dogs&quot;
*Pie in the Sky (game engine), a 3D video game engine and game creation system
*&quot;Pie in the Sky&quot;, a song by The Supernaturals from the album &quot;It Doesn&#x27;t Matter Anymore&quot;
*&quot;Pie in the Sky&quot;, a song by Simon Townshend from the album &quot;Animal Soup&quot;
*A colloquialism for superior quadrantanopia, a visual field defect

==See also==
*&quot;The Preacher and the Slave&quot;, a song written by Joe Hill in 1911 (as a parody of the hymn &quot;In the Sweet Bye and Bye&quot;), in which he coined the phrase &quot;pie in the sky&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16061743" start="0" end="14" title="Pie in the Sky" label="Pie in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440393" start="31" end="69" title="Pie in the Sky (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Pie in the Sky&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191337" start="138" end="176" title="Pie in the Sky (1964 film)" label="&amp;quot;Pie in the Sky&amp;quot; (1964 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191339" start="200" end="238" title="Pie in the Sky (1996 film)" label="&amp;quot;Pie in the Sky&amp;quot; (1996 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q657305" start="301" end="355" title="Pie in the Sky (2 Stupid Dogs)" label="&amp;quot;Pie in the Sky&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;2 Stupid Dogs&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191340" start="402" end="430" title="Pie in the Sky (game engine)" label="Pie in the Sky (game engine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6091706" start="558" end="588" title="It Doesn&amp;#x27;t Matter Anymore (album)" label="It Doesn&amp;#x27;t Matter Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242346" start="671" end="682" title="Animal Soup" label="Animal Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121869" start="719" end="733" title="quadrantanopia" label="quadrantanopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758026" start="778" end="804" title="The Preacher and the Slave" label="The Preacher and the Slave"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280426" wikidata="Q5360857" url="?curid=1280426" title="Elihu Palmer">
<text>Elihu Palmer (1764 – April 7, 1806) was an author and advocate of deism in the early days of the United States.

==Life==
Elihu Palmer was born in Canterbury, Connecticut in 1764. He studied to be a Presbyterian minister at Dartmouth College, where he graduated in 1787. Soon after his graduation, however, he became a deist. After rejecting the Calvinist doctrine of Presbyterianism, Palmer became a physical, spiritual, and intellectual wanderer, ultimately making his way to New York City, where he formed the Deistical Society of New York in 1796.

He resided for a time in Augusta, Georgia, where he collected materials for Jedediah Morse&#x27;s &quot;Geography&quot;, and subsequently lived in Philadelphia and New York City. In 1793 he became totally blind from an attack of yellow fever but continued as a public speaker.

Palmer kept writing until the end of his life and published a number of different written works including &quot;A Fourth of July Oration&quot; (1797), and was also the author of &quot;The Principles of Nature, or A Development of the Moral Causes of Happiness and Misery among the Human Species&quot;. He also founded two newspapers, &quot;The Temple of Reason&quot; in 1800 and &quot;Prospect, or View of the Moral World&quot; in 1803.

==Works==
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5360857" start="0" end="12" title="Elihu Palmer" label="Elihu Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="66" end="71" title="deism" label="deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="97" end="110" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446069" start="147" end="157" title="Canterbury, Connecticut" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="159" end="170" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="199" end="211" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="224" end="241" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="478" end="491" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="513" end="542" title="Deistical Society of New York" label="Deistical Society of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="578" end="585" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="587" end="594" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686158" start="629" end="643" title="Jedediah Morse" label="Jedediah Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="700" end="712" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="717" end="730" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245192" start="1015" end="1125" title="Principles of Nature" label="The Principles of Nature, or A Development of the Moral Causes of Happiness and Misery among the Human Species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1171" end="1191" title="The Temple of Reason" label="The Temple of Reason"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1216" end="1252" title="Prospect, or View of the Moral World" label="Prospect, or View of the Moral World"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280430" wikidata="Q8029721" url="?curid=1280430" title="Wolcott Gibbs">
<text>Wolcott Gibbs (March 15, 1902 – August 16, 1958) was an American editor, humorist, theatre critic, playwright and writer of short stories, who worked for &quot;The New Yorker&quot; magazine from 1927 until his death. He is notable for his 1936 parody of &quot;Time&quot; magazine, which skewered the magazine&#x27;s inverted narrative structure. Gibbs wrote, &quot;Backward ran sentences until reeled the mind&quot;; he concluded the piece, &quot;Where it all will end, knows God!&quot; He also wrote a comedy, &quot;Season in the Sun&quot;, which ran on Broadway for 10 months in 1950–51 and was based on a series of stories that originally appeared in &quot;The New Yorker.&quot;

He was a friend and frequent editor of John O&#x27;Hara, who named his fictional town of &quot;Gibbsville, Pa.&quot; for him.

==Early life==
Gibbs was born in New York City on March 15, 1902. He was the son of Lucius Tuckerman Gibbs (1869–1909) and Angelica Singleton (née Duer) Gibbs, who married in 1901. His father was a Cornell-educated mechanical and electrical engineer who variously worked for Otis Elevators, American Rheostat and obtained patents for motors, running gears and heating systems. His sister Angelica was born in 1908 and his father died of lobar pneumonia in 1909.

His paternal grandparents were Francis Sarason Gibbs and Eliza Gay (née Hosmer) Gibbs and his maternal grandparents were Edward Alexander Duer and Sarah Anna (née Vanderpoel) Duer. He was a descendant of mineralogist George Gibbs and the great-nephew of the chemist Oliver Wolcott Gibbs with whom he shared all three names. The younger Gibbs, however, disdained the &quot;Oliver&quot; and never used it. Through his maternal grandfather, he was a descendant of William Duer, a member of the Continental Congress and signer of the United States Articles of Confederation, and through his maternal grandmother, he was a direct descendant of U.S. President Martin Van Buren. He was also a direct descendant of Oliver Wolcott Sr., signer of the Declaration of Independence, and Secretary of the Treasury under George Washington and John Adams. He also descended from the Livingston family and the Schuyler family.

After the death of his father and his mother&#x27;s alcoholism, Gibbs and his sister were sent to live with his uncle and aunt, John Van Buren and Aline Duer. He attended various schools, including Horace Mann School, Riverdale Country Day School, The Hill School in Pottstown, Pennsylvania, and the Roxbury School. but he rebelled and was kicked out of nearly all of them.

==Career==
After failing his school exams, Gibbs began a series of dead-end jobs including working as a timekeeper, a chauffeur, a draftsman, and four years on the freight crew of the Long Island Railroad, which his uncle was affiliated with. Realizing he was unhappy and unfulfilled in his work, his cousin, Alice Duer Miller, set him up working as an editor for their cousin through marriage, Lloyd Carpenter Griscom. Griscom made Gibbs the associate editor of the &quot;East Norwich Enterprise&quot; and, eventually, reporter and editor for the &quot;North Hempstead Record&quot;, both Long Island newspapers. Gibbs succeeded and eventually went to &quot;The New Yorker&quot; in 1927 as a copy reader. Ten years later, when E. B. White temporarily left the magazine, he took over the &quot;Talk of the Town&quot; section.

Although not a regular member of the Algonquin Round Table, Gibbs was closely associated with many of its leading names, inheriting the job of theatre critic at &quot;The New Yorker&quot; from Robert Benchley in 1938. Because his years at the magazine largely overlapped with those of the better-known Alexander Woollcott, many people have confused them or assumed they were related. In fact, Gibbs was a cousin of Alice Duer Miller – yet another member of the Algonquin set – but he was not a relative of Woollcott&#x27;s. On numerous occasions, in print and in person, Gibbs expressed an intense dislike for Woollcott as both an author and as a person. In a letter to James Thurber, in fact, Gibbs wrote that he thought Woollcott was &quot;one of the most dreadful writers who ever existed.&quot; Thomas Kunkel asserts in his biography of &quot;New Yorker&quot; founder Harold Ross, &quot;Genius in Disguise&quot;, that a profile of Alexander Woollcott written by Gibbs sparked the disassociation of Woollcott and the magazine.

For many years, Gibbs was also the editor and publisher of &quot;The Fire Islander&quot; a weekly newspaper on Fire Island, where he had a vacation home.

==Personal life==
Gibbs was married three times. His first marriage was on July 24, 1926, to Helen Marguerite Galpin, the daughter of William Galpin (an English butler who worked for Mortimer Schiff). His second wife was Elizabeth Ada Crawford, whom he married in August 1929, a Detroit native who worked as a writer in &quot;The New Yorker&quot;&#x27;s promotion department. Less than a year after their marriage, Elizabeth committed suicide by plunging to her death from the window of their apartment on the seventeenth floor of 45 Prospect Place in Tudor City, New York on March 31, 1930.

After Elizabeth&#x27;s death, he began a nearly three-year relationship with writer Nancy Hale, who was then married to Taylor Scott Hardin. Hale refused to leave Hardin for Gibbs (although she did eventually divorce Hardin and married Charles Wertenbaker and, later, Fredson Bowers). He then met his third, and final, wife, whom he married in 1933; Elinor Mead Sherwin (1903–1963), daughter of architect Harold Sherwin of the Sherwin-Williams paint family. Together, they were the parents of two children:

* Wolcott Gibbs Jr. (b. 1935), known as &quot;Tony,&quot; who married Elizabeth Villa in 1958. He has written extensively about yachting and was an editor at &quot;The New Yorker&quot; for several years in the 1980s.
* Janet Gibbs, who married James Ward.

An alcoholic and heavy smoker, he died of a heart attack while reading proofs of his upcoming book, &quot;More in Sorrow&quot;, on August 16, 1958, at his home on Ocean Beach, Fire Island. He was buried at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York. His widow died on July 30, 1963, of burns she received in a fire at her New York home, 352 East 50th Street.

===Legacy===
On October 11, 2011, Bloomsbury USA released the anthology &quot;Backward Ran Sentences: The Best of Wolcott Gibbs of The New Yorker&quot; (), with a foreword by P.J. O&#x27;Rourke.

==Bibliography==
===Articles===
* 
* 
* 

===Fiction===
* 

==References==
==Further reading==

*James Thurber, &quot;The Years With Ross&quot;, 1959
*Brendan Gill, &quot;Here at The New Yorker&quot;, 1975
*Thomas Kunkel, &quot;Genius in Disguise: Harold Ross and The New Yorker&quot;, 1994
*&quot;Whirlwind Gibbs&quot; by Thomas Vinciguerra, &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot;.
*&quot;The Gibbs Family of Rhode Island&quot;, by George Gibbs V, NY 1933</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8029721" start="0" end="13" title="Wolcott Gibbs" label="Wolcott Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430706" start="83" end="97" title="drama critic" label="theatre critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="124" end="137" title="short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="160" end="174" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="260" end="264" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q548345" start="722" end="738" title="John O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="John O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="953" end="956" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="1008" end="1015" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134069" start="1085" end="1098" title="Otis Elevator" label="Otis Elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663548" start="1247" end="1262" title="lobar pneumonia" label="lobar pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539685" start="1490" end="1502" title="George Gibbs (mineralogist)" label="George Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q369422" start="1539" end="1559" title="Oliver Wolcott Gibbs" label="Oliver Wolcott Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691329" start="1734" end="1746" title="William Duer (Continental Congress)" label="William Duer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="1764" end="1784" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="1817" end="1842" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="1927" end="1943" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q731813" start="1980" end="1994" title="Oliver Wolcott" label="Oliver Wolcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="2014" end="2041" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="2047" end="2072" title="Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2079" end="2096" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="2101" end="2111" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065305" start="2140" end="2157" title="Livingston family" label="Livingston family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433084" start="2166" end="2181" title="Schuyler family" label="Schuyler family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901972" start="2382" end="2400" title="Horace Mann School" label="Horace Mann School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338137" start="2402" end="2430" title="Riverdale Country Day School" label="Riverdale Country Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739685" start="2432" end="2447" title="The Hill School" label="The Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185890" start="2451" end="2474" title="Pottstown, Pennsylvania" label="Pottstown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092939" start="2484" end="2498" title="Cheshire Academy" label="Roxbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="2743" end="2763" title="Long Island Railroad" label="Long Island Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q533042" start="2868" end="2885" title="Alice Duer Miller" label="Alice Duer Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662316" start="2954" end="2977" title="Lloyd Carpenter Griscom" label="Lloyd Carpenter Griscom"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="3217" end="3231" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="3286" end="3297" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376047" start="3422" end="3443" title="Algonquin Round Table" label="Algonquin Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790472" start="3578" end="3593" title="Robert Benchley" label="Robert Benchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q361859" start="3687" end="3706" title="Alexander Woollcott" label="Alexander Woollcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q533042" start="3800" end="3817" title="Alice Duer Miller" label="Alice Duer Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q124527" start="4055" end="4068" title="James Thurber" label="James Thurber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585917" start="4257" end="4268" title="Harold Ross" label="Harold Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493716" start="4754" end="4769" title="Mortimer Schiff" label="Mortimer Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q549206" start="5123" end="5133" title="Tudor City" label="Tudor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q29372160" start="5248" end="5258" title="Nancy Hale" label="Nancy Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083449" start="5400" end="5419" title="Charles Wertenbaker" label="Charles Wertenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499578" start="5432" end="5446" title="Fredson Bowers" label="Fredson Bowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48881" start="5591" end="5607" title="Sherwin-Williams" label="Sherwin-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="5836" end="5850" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458137" start="6092" end="6103" title="Ocean Beach, New York" label="Ocean Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418789" start="6105" end="6116" title="Fire Island" label="Fire Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771319" start="6135" end="6153" title="Ferncliff Cemetery" label="Ferncliff Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9002176" start="6157" end="6176" title="Hartsdale, New York" label="Hartsdale, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639969" start="6269" end="6285" title="50th Street (Manhattan)" label="East 50th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q730017" start="6463" end="6481" title="P.J. O&amp;#x27;Rourke" label="P.J. O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q124527" start="6581" end="6594" title="James Thurber" label="James Thurber"/>
<link wikidata="Q908693" start="6635" end="6647" title="Brendan Gill" label="Brendan Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737653" start="6655" end="6677" title="Here at The New Yorker" label="Here at The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585917" start="6732" end="6743" title="Harold Ross" label="Harold Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q22061094" start="6807" end="6825" title="Thomas Vinciguerra" label="Thomas Vinciguerra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280433" wikidata="Q1076873" url="?curid=1280433" title="Green hermit">
<text>The green hermit (Phaethornis guy) is a large hummingbird that is a resident breeder from southern Central America (Costa Rica and Panama) south to northern South America (north-eastern Venezuela and Trinidad, and the northern Andes of eastern Peru)

==Description==
It is long and weighs . The male is mainly dark green with a blue-green rump. It has a dark mask through the eye, with buff stripes above and below this, and down the centre of the throat. The central feathers of the tapered tail are—for large hermit—relatively short and white-tipped, and are wiggled in display at the communal leks. The reddish bill is long and decurved. The female is sooty gray (rather than green) below, with an even longer bill and a much longer tail. The call of this species is a loud &quot;zurk&quot;, and the males&#x27; lekking &quot;song&quot; is a repeated &quot;swark&quot;.

==Distribution and habitat==
The nominate subspecies &quot;Phaethornis guy guy&quot; is found in Venezuela and Trinidad. The western &quot;P. g. apicalis&quot; of the American Cordillera is slightly smaller and the sexes more similar.

This hermit inhabits forest undergrowth, usually near water, and prefers hilly areas. It seems to favor primary rainforest and wet premontane forest, and though it tolerates some amount of habitat destruction (e.g. subsistence farmland) it will try to avoid secondary forest as long as better habitat is available. In the Colombian Cordillera Oriental, it has been recorded at altitudes from ASL. Habitat there usually has a canopy height of around and is dominated by trees such as &quot;Elaeagia&quot; (Rubiaceae) or palms; there is usually plentiful undergrowth and/or epiphytes and hemiepiphytes (e.g. Clusiaceae).

==Behaviour==
===Feeding===
The food of this species is nectar, taken from a wide variety of flowers, and some small insects; it prefers flowers 30–50 mm long by 2–7 mm wide, though it will occasionally visit flowers up to 75 mm long and 20 mm wide or as short as 15 mm. At Monteverde (Costa Rica), preferred foodplants include yellow jacobinia (&quot;Justicia umbrosa&quot;) and &quot;Razisea spicata&quot; (Acanthaceae), &quot;Pitcairnia brittoniana&quot; (Bromeliaceae), spiral ginger (&quot;Costus barbatus&quot;, Costaceae), &quot;Drymonia conchocalyx&quot; and &quot;D. rubra&quot; (Gesneriaceae), &quot;Heliconia tortuosa&quot; (Heliconiaceae), and &quot;Malvaviscus palmanus&quot; (Malvaceae). Less commonly visited flowers were mostly Gesneriaceae, Heliconiaceae (such as &quot;Heliconia bihai&quot;), Acanthaceae (such as &quot;Pachystachys coccinea&quot;) and Zingiberales, but also certain Bromeliaceae (such as &quot;Tillandsia fasciculata&quot;) Campanulaceae (such as &quot;Centropogon surinamensis&quot;), Ericaceae and Rubiaceae.

===Breeding===
As noted above, males assemble at leks for courtship. In the Colombian Cordillera Oriental, active leks were observed between September and November, but neither in August nor in December, indicating a distinct breeding season. The green hermit lays one egg in a conical nest suspended under a large leaf, usually over water. Incubation is 17–18 days, and fledging another 21 to 23 days.

==References==

===Notes===
===Sources===
* ffrench, Richard; O&#x27;Neill, John Patton &amp; Eckelberry, Don R. (1991): &quot;A guide to the birds of Trinidad and Tobago&quot; (2nd edition). Comstock Publishing, Ithaca, N.Y.. 
* Hilty, Steven L. (2003): &quot;Birds of Venezuela&quot;. Christopher Helm, London. 
* Salaman, Paul G.W.; Stiles, F. Gary; Bohórquez, Clara Isabel; Álvarez-R., Mauricio; Umaña, Ana María; Donegan, Thomas M. &amp; Cuervo, Andrés M. (2002): New and noteworthy bird records from the east slope of the Andes of Colombia. &quot;Caldasia&quot; 24(1): 157–189. PDF fulltext
* Temeles, E.J.; Linhart, Y.B.; Masonjones, M. &amp; Masonjones, H.D. (2002): The role of flower width in hummingbird bill length-flower length relationships. &quot;Biotropica&quot; 34(1): 68–80. PDF fulltext

==External links==
* Green Hermit videos
* Green Hermit Photo Article
* (for Trinidad and Tobago) with range map
* Green Hermit photo gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1076873" start="4" end="16" title="Green hermit" label="green hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="46" end="57" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="99" end="114" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="116" end="126" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="131" end="137" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="157" end="170" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="186" end="195" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="200" end="208" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="227" end="232" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="244" end="248" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816486" start="596" end="599" title="Lek (animal behavior)" label="lek"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="907" end="926" title="nominate subspecies" label="nominate subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q605761" start="1041" end="1060" title="American Cordillera" label="American Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q741604" start="1115" end="1121" title="hermit (hummingbird)" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="1214" end="1221" title="primary forest" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="1222" end="1232" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1241" end="1258" title="premontane forest" label="premontane forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="1299" end="1318" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="1325" end="1345" title="subsistence farming" label="subsistence farmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140056" start="1368" end="1384" title="secondary forest" label="secondary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="1432" end="1440" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q143014" start="1442" end="1461" title="Cordillera Oriental (Colombia)" label="Cordillera Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="1502" end="1505" title="Above mean sea level" label="ASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="1535" end="1541" title="Canopy (ecology)" label="canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647900" start="1599" end="1607" title="Elaeagia" label="Elaeagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156569" start="1615" end="1624" title="Rubiaceae" label="Rubiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="1629" end="1633" title="Palm tree" label="palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q422666" start="1663" end="1674" title="undergrowth" label="undergrowth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="1682" end="1690" title="epiphyte" label="epiphyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371101" start="1696" end="1708" title="hemiepiphyte" label="hemiepiphyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q132429" start="1716" end="1726" title="Clusiaceae" label="Clusiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444555" start="2004" end="2014" title="Monteverde" label="Monteverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012770" start="2058" end="2074" title="yellow jacobinia" label="yellow jacobinia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2116" end="2131" title="Razisea spicata" label="Razisea spicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q53475" start="2139" end="2150" title="Acanthaceae" label="Acanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15296961" start="2159" end="2181" title="Pitcairnia brittoniana" label="Pitcairnia brittoniana"/>
<link wikidata="Q156529" start="2189" end="2201" title="Bromeliaceae" label="Bromeliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998490" start="2225" end="2240" title="Costus barbatus" label="Costus barbatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131356" start="2248" end="2257" title="Costaceae" label="Costaceae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2266" end="2286" title="Drymonia conchocalyx" label="Drymonia conchocalyx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2303" end="2311" title="Drymonia rubra" label="D. rubra"/>
<link wikidata="Q156686" start="2319" end="2331" title="Gesneriaceae" label="Gesneriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926650" start="2340" end="2358" title="Heliconia tortuosa" label="Heliconia tortuosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q624242" start="2366" end="2379" title="Heliconiaceae" label="Heliconiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745036" start="2392" end="2412" title="Malvaviscus palmanus" label="Malvaviscus palmanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156551" start="2420" end="2429" title="Malvaceae" label="Malvaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727878" start="2517" end="2532" title="Heliconia bihai" label="Heliconia bihai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360157" start="2568" end="2589" title="Pachystachys coccinea" label="Pachystachys coccinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q203779" start="2601" end="2613" title="Zingiberales" label="Zingiberales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802527" start="2660" end="2682" title="Tillandsia fasciculata" label="Tillandsia fasciculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q155802" start="2690" end="2703" title="Campanulaceae" label="Campanulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946204" start="2719" end="2730" title="Centropogon" label="Centropogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q975872" start="2752" end="2761" title="Ericaceae" label="Ericaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156569" start="2766" end="2775" title="Rubiaceae" label="Rubiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816486" start="2827" end="2830" title="Lek (animal behavior)" label="lek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5709203" start="3469" end="3485" title="Helm Identification Guides" label="Christopher Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="4066" end="4085" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280440" wikidata="Q697131" url="?curid=1280440" title="Arnon Milchan">
<text>Arnon Milchan (; December 6, 1944) is an Israeli billionaire businessman, film producer and former spy. He has been involved in over 130 full-length motion pictures and is the founder of production company Regency Enterprises. Regency&#x27;s film credits include &quot;12 Years a Slave,&quot; &quot;JFK&quot;, &quot;Heat&quot;, &quot;Fight Club&quot;, and &quot;Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith&quot;. Milchan has earned two nominations for the Academy Award for Best Picture, for &quot;L.A. Confidential&quot; and &quot;The Revenant&quot;; he also produced Best Picture nominees &quot;The Big Short&quot;, &quot;12 Years a Slave&quot;, and &quot;Birdman&quot;, with the latter two winning the award in consecutive years. Milchan was also an Israeli intelligence operative from the mid-1960s to the mid-1980s.

As of January 2024, &quot;Forbes&quot; estimated Milchan&#x27;s net worth at US$3.3 billion, ranked 937th worldwide and 13th wealthiest in Israel.

== Early life ==
Milchan was born in Rehovot, Mandatory Palestine, to a Jewish family. He has a sister named Dalia. His mother was descended from European Jewish disciples of the rabbi Vilna Gaon who came to the region of Palestine in the early 19th century, and he is the eighth generation of his family in the country.

== Business career ==
His father owned a fertilizer company, which Milchan inherited at the age of 21 upon his father&#x27;s sudden death. Over the years, Milchan turned the company into a successful chemical business. He also earned a degree from the London School of Economics, before he and his company (Milchan Brothers Ltd.) were recruited to Lekem, a secret Israeli intelligence organization responsible for obtaining technology and material for Israel&#x27;s nuclear program, and other highly secretive programs.

== Film production career==

Milchan became involved in the movie business in 1977, after an introduction to American producer Elliot Kastner. In 1981 he partnered with Sydney Pollack on the US miniseries &quot;Masada&quot; Most notable among Milchan&#x27;s film collaborations was his early work with Martin Scorsese. He developed close friendships with Robert De Niro, and directors Roman Polanski, Sergio Leone, Terry Gilliam and Oliver Stone. Milchan started his own production company in 1991 called New Regency Productions. Through his company Regency, in partnership with Warner Bros., and later with Rupert Murdoch at 20th Century Fox, and other business ventures, such as Puma AG, Milchan acquired a net worth estimated at $5.1 billion .

Milchan has produced over 130 films, such as &quot;Noah&quot; (2014), &quot;12 Years a Slave&quot; (2013), &quot;Once Upon a Time in America&quot; (1984) (in which he also makes a cameo appearance as the chauffeur), &quot;Brazil&quot; (1985), &quot;Pretty Woman&quot; (1990), &quot;JFK&quot; (1991), &quot;Under Siege&quot; (1992), &quot;Natural Born Killers&quot; (1994), &quot;Boys on the Side&quot; (1995), &quot;Heat&quot; (1995), &quot;L.A. Confidential&quot; (1997), &quot;Fight Club&quot; (1999), &quot;Unfaithful&quot; (2002), &quot;Mr. and Mrs. Smith&quot; (2005), and &quot;Knight and Day&quot; (2010), among others, to his credit. He was a producer on two more recent Oscar-winners for Best Picture, &quot;12 Years a Slave&quot; in 2014 and &quot;Birdman&quot; in 2015, but he was not listed as a producer in the nominees list.

Milchan is also the owner of the WTA broadcasting rights. He was married to model Brigitte Genmaire. He is now married to former South African tennis professional Amanda Coetzer. He is owner of the network which transmits Israeli television programming to the United States and Canada. He is also a part owner of Israel&#x27;s TV Channel 10, and a former owner of Puma, the international sportswear line.

== Intelligence career ==
Speculation about Milchan&#x27;s involvement in arms dealing and intelligence activities was sparked after the indictment in 1985 of Dr. Richard Kelly Smyth, an aerospace executive and scientist who had made illegal shipments of Krytrons, which could be used as nuclear weapon triggers, through one of Milchan&#x27;s companies. This remained largely in the category of rumor until biographers Meir Doron and Joseph Gelman wrote a controversial unauthorized biography of Milchan that was published in July 2011. The biography &quot;Confidential&quot;, which is largely sympathetic to Milchan, revealed in detail how he involved himself in espionage, big-ticket arms-dealing, and obtaining sensitive technology and materials for Israel&#x27;s nuclear weapons program. The research in &quot;Confidential – The Life Of Secret Agent Turned Hollywood Tycoon&quot; established that &quot;at least through the mid-1980s [Milchan] was a full-fledged operative for Israel&#x27;s top-secret intelligence agency, Lekem. His activities included &quot;buying components to build and maintain Israel&#x27;s nuclear arsenal&quot; and supervising &quot;government-backed accounts and front companies that financed the special needs of the entirety of Israel&#x27;s intelligence operations outside the country&quot;. Interviewed regarding Milchan&#x27;s intelligence activities, Israeli President Shimon Peres stated:
Two years later, on November 25, 2013, on the Channel 2 documentary program Uvda, Milchan confirmed on camera the central claims in the book &quot;Confidential&quot; that had been released earlier. The announcement caused international interest in the story and was covered widely.

Peres, the architect of Israel&#x27;s secret nuclear weapons program in the 1960s, stated that in the 1960s he recruited Milchan to work for the Israeli Bureau of Scientific Relations (LEKEM or LAKAM), a secret intelligence organization tasked with obtaining military technology and science espionage. Milchan acknowledged that he was a secret arms dealer for the Israeli government and claimed to have used his connections to promote the apartheid regime in South Africa in exchange for it helping Israel to acquire uranium for its nuclear program.

In June 2023, Milchan provided some details about the friendship he developed with future Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu during his time as an intelligence officer, with the two having gone from being simple acquaintances to knowing each other &quot;like brothers.&quot;

== Controversy ==
In February 2018, Israeli Police recommended that Arnon Milchan, alongside Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, be charged with bribery. The recommendation in the case, nicknamed &quot;Case 1000&quot;, relates to alleged bribes Milchan provided to Netanyahu in exchange for special tax exemption legislation believed to benefit Milchan in his homeland of Israel. The proposed legislation, nicknamed &quot;Milchan&#x27;s Law&quot;, dates back to 2013 and was an alleged ploy to extend Milchan&#x27;s status as a returning resident to allow him to take advantage of tax breaks. According to the police, the gifts from Milchan were worth more than 1 million shekels. Milchan had held fundraisers for Netanyahu, which included a 2014 event at a residence on Carbon Beach in Malibu that controversially inconvenienced residents and commuters with hours of unexpected lane blockages on Pacific Coast Highway, despite being a private event. Portions of Milchan&#x27;s interrogation by the Israeli police were covered in the 2024 political documentary The Bibi Files.

On June 25, 2023, Milchan began his first day of testimony as a prosecution witness in Case 1000 and acknowledged that he gave the Netanyahu family numerous gifts and used code names for the gifts which were exchanged as well. However, Milchan also claimed he never thought the gifts would qualify as legal issues, as they were requests which were related to his friendship with the Netanyahus and not demands. Due to his health, Milchan did not appear in-person at the Jerusalem courthouse and gave video testimony from a courthouse in Brighton, United Kingdom.

== Personal life ==
Milchan was first married to French model Brigitte Genmaire and later divorced. The couple had three children, Elinor, Alexandra, and Yariv. Elinor Milchan is a professional photographer and Alexandra is a film producer. He later married South African retired professional tennis player Amanda Coetzer and had two children with her (Shimon and Olivia).

Allegedly, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu asked U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry three times in 2014 to arrange a long-term visa for Milchan to live in the United States, but the bribery charges against Netanyahu have since been called into question. Milchan does not live in Israel and has not been there since 2016.

=== Art collecting ===
Milchan is an art collector, and in April 2015, CNBC ranked him at No. 3 in their list of &quot;Hollywood&#x27;s top 10 art collectors&quot; with a collection valued at $600 million, equal with George Lucas, ranked No. 2, but some way behind David Geffen at No. 1, with a collection valued at $2.3 billion.

== Production companies ==
* Embassy International Pictures N.V. (1982–1989)
* Regency International Pictures (1989–1991)
* Alcor Films (1991–1995)
* Regency Enterprises (1991–)
* New Regency Productions (1991–)

== Filmography ==
===20th Century Fox===
====Producer====
====Executive producer====
===Fox Searchlight Pictures===

Executive producer
Producer

===20th Century Studios===
===Warner Bros.===
====Producer====
====Executive producer====
===TriStar Pictures===
===Others===
Producer
Executive producer
Miscellaneous crew
Actor
Special thanks
* &quot;The Killing Floor&quot; (2007)

=== Television ===
Executive producer

* &quot;Free Willy&quot; (1994)
* &quot;The Client&quot; (1995−96)
* &quot;Michael Hayes&quot; (1997)
* &quot;&quot; (2000) (TV movie)
* &quot;L.A. Confidential&quot; (2019) (TV pilot)
* &quot;The Beast Must Die&quot; (2020−21) (Co-executive producer)
* &quot;The Edge of Sleep&quot; (2024)

Producer

* &quot;Masada&quot; (1981) (Supervising producer)
* &quot;The Hunt for the Unicorn Killer&quot; (1999) (TV movie)
== See also ==

* List of billionaires

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Doron, Meir; Gelman, Joseph (2011) &quot;Confidential The Life of Secret Agent Turned Hollywood Tycoon – Arnon Milchan&quot; Gefen Books, New York. 

== External links ==
* Forbes.com: Forbes World&#x27;s Richest People</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q697131" start="0" end="13" title="Arnon Milchan" label="Arnon Milchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466459" start="206" end="225" title="Regency Enterprises" label="Regency Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023357" start="269" end="285" title="12 Years a Slave (film)" label="12 Years a Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q741823" start="299" end="302" title="JFK (film)" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q42198" start="316" end="320" title="Heat (1995 film)" label="Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="334" end="344" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q191040" start="362" end="382" title="Mr. &amp;amp; Mrs. Smith (2005 film)" label="Mr. &amp;amp; Mrs. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="433" end="463" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q339876" start="475" end="492" title="L.A. Confidential (film)" label="L.A. Confidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q18002795" start="509" end="521" title="The Revenant (2015 film)" label="The Revenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19850715" start="574" end="587" title="The Big Short (film)" label="The Big Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q13255497" start="635" end="642" title="Birdman (film)" label="Birdman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="825" end="831" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207350" start="984" end="991" title="Rehovot" label="Rehovot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="993" end="1012" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q279359" start="1132" end="1142" title="Vilna Gaon" label="Vilna Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="1159" end="1178" title="Palestine (region)" label="region of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="1521" end="1547" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800834" start="1617" end="1622" title="Lekem" label="Lekem"/>
<link wikidata="Q65455964" start="1721" end="1750" title="Israel&amp;#x27;s nuclear program" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s nuclear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q475223" start="1917" end="1931" title="Elliot Kastner" label="Elliot Kastner"/>
<link wikidata="Q51522" start="1959" end="1973" title="Sydney Pollack" label="Sydney Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568835" start="2001" end="2007" title="Masada (miniseries)" label="Masada"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="2092" end="2107" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="2145" end="2159" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="2175" end="2189" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q164562" start="2191" end="2203" title="Sergio Leone" label="Sergio Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="2205" end="2218" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="2223" end="2235" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q466459" start="2295" end="2318" title="New Regency Productions" label="New Regency Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="2369" end="2381" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="2398" end="2412" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="2416" end="2432" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q157064" start="2471" end="2478" title="Puma AG" label="Puma AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933764" start="2499" end="2508" title="net worth" label="net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q286868" start="2589" end="2593" title="Noah (2014 film)" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023357" start="2614" end="2630" title="12 Years a Slave (film)" label="12 Years a Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q206388" start="2651" end="2678" title="Once Upon a Time in America" label="Once Upon a Time in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="2718" end="2734" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q216541" start="2742" end="2751" title="chauffeur" label="chauffeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057" start="2760" end="2766" title="Brazil (1985 film)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q207954" start="2787" end="2799" title="Pretty Woman" label="Pretty Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q741823" start="2820" end="2823" title="JFK (film)" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q385798" start="2844" end="2855" title="Under Siege" label="Under Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q748986" start="2876" end="2896" title="Natural Born Killers" label="Natural Born Killers"/>
<link wikidata="Q620099" start="2917" end="2933" title="Boys on the Side" label="Boys on the Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q42198" start="2954" end="2958" title="Heat (1995 film)" label="Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q339876" start="2979" end="2996" title="L.A. Confidential (film)" label="L.A. Confidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="3017" end="3027" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q970089" start="3048" end="3058" title="Unfaithful (2002 film)" label="Unfaithful"/>
<link wikidata="Q191040" start="3079" end="3097" title="Mr. and Mrs. Smith (2005 film)" label="Mr. and Mrs. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q679918" start="3122" end="3136" title="Knight and Day" label="Knight and Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q13255497" start="3296" end="3303" title="Birdman (film)" label="Birdman"/>
<link wikidata="Q948442" start="3411" end="3414" title="WTA (tennis)" label="WTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q233339" start="3541" end="3555" title="Amanda Coetzer" label="Amanda Coetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151568" start="3708" end="3718" title="Channel 10 (Israel)" label="Channel 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582139" start="3947" end="3966" title="Richard Kelly Smyth" label="Richard Kelly Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323342" start="4039" end="4046" title="Krytron" label="Krytron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810228" start="4203" end="4213" title="Meir Doron" label="Meir Doron"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067294" start="4254" end="4276" title="unauthorized biography" label="unauthorized biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q65455964" start="4537" end="4574" title="Israel&amp;#x27;s nuclear weapons program" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800834" start="4811" end="4816" title="Lekem" label="Lekem"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="5189" end="5201" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532517" start="5256" end="5265" title="Channel 2 (Israel)" label="Channel 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410227" start="5286" end="5290" title="Uvda (TV program)" label="Uvda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800834" start="5646" end="5676" title="Bureau of Scientific Relations" label="Bureau of Scientific Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="5932" end="5941" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="6010" end="6017" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65455964" start="6026" end="6041" title="Nuclear weapons and Israel" label="nuclear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="6157" end="6175" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="6444" end="6462" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404428" start="7007" end="7013" title="shekel" label="shekel"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="7122" end="7128" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q550419" start="7232" end="7253" title="California State Route 1" label="Pacific Coast Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q130266010" start="7396" end="7410" title="The Bibi Files" label="The Bibi Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="7950" end="7974" title="Brighton, United Kingdom" label="Brighton, United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q116289295" start="8116" end="8125" title="Alexandra Milchan" label="Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q233339" start="8284" end="8298" title="Amanda Coetzer" label="Amanda Coetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="8385" end="8403" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8434" end="8444" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="8754" end="8758" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="8900" end="8912" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q115055" start="8948" end="8960" title="David Geffen" label="David Geffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q466459" start="9043" end="9078" title="Regency Enterprises" label="Embassy International Pictures N.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q466459" start="9093" end="9123" title="Regency Enterprises" label="Regency International Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q466459" start="9138" end="9149" title="Regency Enterprises" label="Alcor Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q466459" start="9164" end="9183" title="Regency Enterprises" label="Regency Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q466459" start="9194" end="9217" title="Regency Enterprises" label="New Regency Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="9248" end="9264" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q953040" start="9315" end="9339" title="Searchlight Pictures" label="Fox Searchlight Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="9376" end="9396" title="20th Century Studios" label="20th Century Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="9403" end="9415" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q651454" start="9466" end="9482" title="TriStar Pictures" label="TriStar Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987811" start="9575" end="9592" title="The Killing Floor (2007 film)" label="The Killing Floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616788" start="9654" end="9664" title="Free Willy (TV series)" label="Free Willy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793477" start="9686" end="9696" title="The Client (TV series)" label="The Client"/>
<link wikidata="Q617020" start="9721" end="9734" title="Michael Hayes (TV series)" label="Michael Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9789" end="9806" title="L.A. Confidential#Television" label="L.A. Confidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q107449566" start="9839" end="9857" title="The Beast Must Die (TV series)" label="The Beast Must Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q117815222" start="9906" end="9923" title="The_Edge_of_Sleep (TV series)" label="The Edge of Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568835" start="9956" end="9962" title="Masada (miniseries)" label="Masada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741059" start="10007" end="10038" title="The Hunt for the Unicorn Killer" label="The Hunt for the Unicorn Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q493078" start="10081" end="10101" title="List of billionaires" label="List of billionaires"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280444" wikidata="Q2239750" url="?curid=1280444" title="Hawaii Route 61">
<text>Hawaii Route 61, often called the Pali Highway, is in Honolulu County, Hawaii, United States, that is the main highway connecting downtown Honolulu with the windward side of Oahu island. From downtown, it traverses up Nuuanu Valley and the residential neighborhood of Nuuanu, passes through the Nuuanu Pali Tunnels, and descends to the major windward communities of Kāneohe (reached by Kamehameha Highway, State Route 83) and Kailua.

==History==
The current Pali Highway is actually the third roadway to be built here. The original Pali &quot;highway&quot; went along much of the same route and portions of the old road still exist, although closed to vehicular traffic. When the current Pali Highway and its tunnels opened, the original roadway was closed and is now used by hikers. The &quot;Old Pali Highway&quot;, as it is now called, is noted in the popular culture of Hawaii for being a place with strong spiritual connections. Many ghost stories have settings along this old highway. A large portion of the old highway was built over the ancient Hawaiian foot paths that traversed the famous Pali pass, which was the most easily accessible route to take from the Windward to Honolulu side. This was because much of the Koolau range on the Windward side has steep cliffs that make it nearly impossible to traverse over safely. &quot;Pali&quot; is the Hawaiian word for precipice.

The highway was mentioned as an &quot;awe-inspiring drive&quot; in &quot;Car and Driver&quot;&#x27;s &quot;10 Best Drivers&#x27; Cities.&quot;

==Points of interest==
The lower mouth of Nuuanu valley is the site of historic Oahu Cemetery, founded in 1844. Over time it was expanded with the Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii in 1863, and the Kyoto Gardens of Honolulu Memorial Park. A few blocks to the east is the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific.

Hawaii Route 61 has several free scenic lookouts, including the Pali Lookout. The Queen Emma Summer Palace is also on the Pali (2913 Pali Hwy). The following foreign consulates are located on the Pali:
* Consulate General of Korea, 2756 Pali Hwy
* Consulate General of the Philippines, 2433 Pali Hwy
* Taipei Economic and Cultural Office, 2746 Pali Hwy
The Pali is also the site of the following houses of worship and religious originations:
* Bentenshu Hawaii Kyokai, 3871 Old Pali Rd
* Saint Stephen Diocesan Center (Roman Catholic), 6301 Pali Hwy
* First Unitarian Church of Honolulu, 2500 Pali Hwy
* Hawaii Conference of Seventh-day Adventists, 2728 Pali Hwy
* Honmon Butsuryushu Hawaii Mission, 3001 Pali Hwy
* Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawai&#x27;i Betsuin, 1727 Pali Hwy.
* Nuuanu Congregational Church, Pali Hwy
* St. Stephen Church (Roman Catholic), 2747 Pali Hwy
* Soka Gakkai Intl-USA, 2729 Pali Hwy
* Temple Emanu-El (reform), 2550 Pali Hwy
* Tenrikyo Hawaii Dendocho, 2920 Pali Hwy

==Names of State Route 61==
* &quot;Fort Street&quot; (at the intersection of Vineyard Boulevard)
* &quot;Pali Highway&quot; (from downtown Honolulu to Castle Junction near Maunawili)
* &quot;Kalanianaole Highway&quot; (from Castle Junction to Castle Medical Center in Kailua)
* &quot;Kailua Road&quot; (from Castle Medical Center to central Kailua)

==Major intersections==





==See also==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2239750" start="0" end="15" title="Hawaii Route 61" label="Hawaii Route 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239750" start="34" end="46" title="Hawaii Route 61" label="Pali Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q487704" start="54" end="69" title="Honolulu County, Hawaii" label="Honolulu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="71" end="77" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303462" start="130" end="147" title="downtown Honolulu" label="downtown Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="174" end="178" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070712" start="295" end="314" title="Nuuanu Pali Tunnels" label="Nuuanu Pali Tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484530" start="366" end="373" title="Kaneohe, Hawaii" label="Kāneohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240249" start="386" end="404" title="Kamehameha Highway" label="Kamehameha Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q532459" start="426" end="432" title="Kailua, Honolulu County, Hawaii" label="Kailua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="940" end="953" title="Nu‘uanu Pali#Superstition" label="ghost stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701927" start="1227" end="1238" title="Koolau Range" label="Koolau rang"/>
<link wikidata="Q858319" start="1461" end="1475" title="Car and Driver" label="Car and Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073404" start="1612" end="1625" title="Oahu Cemetery" label="Oahu Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574219" start="1679" end="1704" title="Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii" label="Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452148" start="1722" end="1761" title="Kyoto Gardens of Honolulu Memorial Park" label="Kyoto Gardens of Honolulu Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891136" start="1795" end="1836" title="National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific" label="National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070711" start="1903" end="1915" title="Nuuanu Pali" label="Pali Lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965060" start="1921" end="1945" title="Hanaiakamalama" label="Queen Emma Summer Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q114364551" start="2087" end="2123" title="Consulate General of the Philippines, Honolulu" label="Consulate General of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453948" start="2391" end="2425" title="First Unitarian Church of Honolulu" label="First Unitarian Church of Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897245" start="2555" end="2594" title="Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawai&amp;#x27;i" label="Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawai&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698520" start="2753" end="2777" title="Temple Emanu-El (Honolulu, Hawaii)" label="Temple Emanu-El (reform)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477478" start="3009" end="3018" title="Maunawili, Hawaii" label="Maunawili"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280450" wikidata="Q5566325" url="?curid=1280450" title="Gladstone Branch">
<text>The Gladstone Branch (also known as the Gladstone Line) is a commuter rail line operated by NJ Transit in the U.S. state of New Jersey, one of two branches of the Morris &amp; Essex Lines. Gladstone Line trains operate between Gladstone station and either Hoboken Terminal or New York Penn Station.

The Gladstone Branch itself runs from Gladstone to a junction with the Morris &amp; Essex at Summit. It is single-tracked with passing sidings at Murray Hill, Stirling, Bernardsville and west of Far Hills.

At Summit, the Gladstone Branch joins with the Morristown Line. East of Newark Broad Street station, Gladstone Line trains may either continue to Hoboken Terminal, where PATH trains or NY Waterway ferries allow connection to New York, or use the Kearny Connection to diverge to New York Penn Station; two peak-hour trains from Gladstone offer direct trips to/from New York Penn Station.

On weekdays during rush hours, the line operates in two zones: all stops from Hoboken to Summit; or express from Hoboken to Short Hills (one station east of Summit), and then local to Gladstone. All weekend and off-peak service is local across the entire line.

The Gladstone Branch proper, the part of the Gladstone Line west of the junction with the Morris &amp; Essex at Summit, is The line primarily operates in the eastbound direction weekday peak hours, except for a small number of reverse peak trains. On weekends the line operates Gladstone-Summit service hourly along the branch. Until August 13, 2006 all trains continued to Hoboken. On that date, service between Hoboken and Summit was cut back to once every two hours on weekends. On May 11, 2008, off-peak weekday Hoboken-Dover trains (600 Series) were cut. In addition, weekend Gladstone trains were cut back to Summit, and a shuttle train operated every two hours between Newark Broad Street and Hoboken Terminal. (This shuttle train was later extended to provide bihourly service to Bay Street on the Montclair-Boonton Line). Passengers for Penn Station connect at Summit to/from a Dover/Penn Station train.

The line is colored pale green on system maps and its symbol is a horse, a reference to the Grand National Hurdle Stakes steeplechase race held in the area.

==History==
The only part of the New Jersey West Line Railroad that was completed was from Summit west to Bernardsville. The New Jersey West Line Railroad was dissolved in 1878 and the assets were sold off. The Summit to Bernardsville line was then purchased by the Passaic and Delaware Railroad. The Delaware Lackawanna and Western Railroad (DL&amp;W) leased the line on November 1, 1882 as a branch of the Morris and Essex. The Passaic and Delaware Extension Railroad was chartered in 1890 and opened later that year, extending the line to its current terminus in Gladstone, New Jersey. The DL&amp;W continued to operate this line throughout its lifespan as the Passaic and Delaware Branch, later becoming labelled the Gladstone Branch. In 1960, the DL&amp;W merged with the Erie Railroad to form the Erie Lackawanna Railway, who took over the branch line. In 1983, New Jersey Transit assumed control of the line, and continues to operate it to this day.

The branch received severe damage from Hurricane Sandy on October 29–30, 2012, especially to the catenary and signal system, causing a suspension of service for one month. High winds brought down five tall catenary poles (whose replacements had to be custom-made), approximately five miles of catenary, and 49 trees across the tracks. Gladstone service resumed on Monday, December 3 with electric Midtown Direct trains to Penn Station and diesel-powered trains to Hoboken; full electric operation was impractical until substation damage near Hoboken was repaired in early 2013.

==Description==
Gladstone Line trains begin at Hoboken Terminal, with the exception of two weekday trains which run in and out of New York Penn Station. Gladstone Line trains run over the Morris &amp; Essex from Hoboken or New York to Summit. At Summit, schedules are timed for most Morristown trains and Gladstone trains, permitting easy transfers across the platform or one right after the other.

The Gladstone Branch parallels the Amtrak Northeast Corridor and PATH lines and Interstate 280 (I-280) for a short distance here. The Waterfront Connection is just prior to the overpass at Meadows interlocking. It allows selected North Jersey Coast Line and Raritan Valley Line trains to reach Hoboken from the Northeast Corridor Line.

The line begins its journey by following I-280 and crosses a two-track swing bridge over the Passaic River. It enters the newly renovated Newark Broad Street station, which features two high platforms serving all three tracks. Within the city limits of Newark, the line runs in a trench, passing beneath numerous streets, I-280, and the Newark City Subway. At the site of the former Roseville Avenue station, now known as the Roseville interlocking, the Montclair-Boonton Line diverges to the right. The section of the track extending westward from the Passaic River to just east of Millburn station is composed of triple tracks, while the remainder of the route to Lake Hopatcong station is a double-track railway.

After passing the abandoned station at Grove Street, now the location of Green interlocking, the line crosses the Garden State Parkway and reaches East Orange, which is situated on a viaduct. Subsequent elevated stations include Brick Church and Orange. The line then curves southward over Interstate 280, passing past Highland Avenue and Mountain Station. The next station is South Orange, an elevated structure with two platforms and three tracks, near Seton Hall University. Maplewood follows, with a side platform and a center platform serving all westbound and some eastbound trains. Beyond Maplewood, the line narrows to two tracks at Millburn interlocking. Millburn and Short Hills stations each have two side platforms serving two tracks.

Just west of Summit, the Morristown Line separates. The Gladstone Branch curves left at the Summit substation before entering New Providence. After New Providence, the line passes its first grade crossing at a 4-way intersection of Central Avenue and Livingston Avenue. This crossing is one of the few 4-way crossings along NJ Transit rail lines. The line then continues, crossing Foley Place and entering Murray Hill station. At Murray Hill, the track splits in two to allow eastbound trains and westbound to pass each other, since most of the line is single tracked. There is a wooden plank at Murray Hill to allow passengers on westbound trains to get off before the eastbound train arrives on the track closest to the station platform. Schedules are timed for a convenient meetup at Murray Hill. After Murray Hill, the line passes three more grade crossings: at Warner Field Path, at Union Avenue, and at Snyder Avenue. There used to be a siding for the General Chemical Company plant just west of the Snyder Avenue crossing, but this was removed between 2018 and 2019.

The line crosses Plainfield Avenue and enters Berkeley Heights station, which also contains a siding for parking equipment. The line then continues and crosses the Passaic River a second time and enters Morris County.

There are three stations in Long Hill Township. The first is Gillette station. After Gillette, the line crosses Morristown Road and enters Stirling station. At Stirling, the track splits in two, again to allow eastbound and westbound trains to pass each other. The line also crosses Central Avenue at the station. Continuing westward, the line crosses Northfield Road by Millington Elementary School before curving right, crossing Division Avenue, and entering Millington station. At Millington, there used to be another gateless crossing on the other side of the platform, where the line will cross River Road, a small connection road between Commerce Street and Long Hill Road, but this crossing was closed off sometime around 2014-2015.

The line continues westward, crossing the Passaic River a third time before entering Somerset County and Bernards Township and crossing Pond Hill Road. After this crossing, the Millington quarry can be seen on the left (going westbound). Here, there is a short passing siding; although trains going opposite directions can also pass each other here, this area is not usually used for that. Lyons station is the next stop. The line enters the station after crossing a bridge over South Finley Avenue. After another crossing at Lake Road near Ridge High School and another bridge over West Oak Street, the line enters Basking Ridge station at the crossing at Ridge Street. Until recently, the original semaphore signal from the DL&amp;W years used to sit atop the Basking Ridge station over the platform, one of the last vestiges of the previous operator of the line.

Afterwards, the line crosses over Interstate 287 before curving left and entering Bernardsville station after crossing under Mount Airy Road. At Bernardsville, the track splits in two, again to allow trains to pass each other if necessary, and the line crosses Depot Place. Continuing westward, the line parallels U.S. Route 202 and crosses Old Quarry Road, Meeker Road, and Whitenack Road. At Whitenack Road is the site of the former Mine Brook station, a flag stop in the line&#x27;s DL&amp;W years. Mine Brook is the only station that was never rebuilt or even acquired by New Jersey Transit. Today, all that is left of the station is gravel where the platform used to be and a small gravel road where the parking used to be. The line then crosses Route 202 and enters Far Hills station, which has a station depot and a freight house to the west. Just west of the station near the freight house, the track splits in two again to allow eastbound and westbound trains to pass each other.

After Far Hills, the line snakes through the Far Hills area before entering the borough of Peapack and Gladstone while crossing over the North Branch Raritan River and under Peapack Road. Peapack station is next at the crossing at Holland Avenue. The line then crosses a walkway in Liberty Park before entering Gladstone yard. At Gladstone yard, the track splits into 5 to allow for parking of trains. One of the tracks switches back to condense into one or can act as a siding, while the other 4 tracks condense back into one. West of the yard, the tracks enter Gladstone station and its freight house. One track leads to the freight house, while two lead to the station.

The timetables are arranged so that most of the trains meet at Far Hills and Murray Hill. While Bernardsville and Stirling each have two tracks at the station, the second track at those two stations is less commonly used unless a train is running late.

==Freight service==
At the time of NJT acquisition, freight service was operated by Conrail. Upon the breakup of that company, the Norfolk Southern Railway inherited the business. Customers on the line dwindled, and the last customer, the Reheis Chemical Company, was bought out by the General Chemical Company and planned to close down in 2008. The apparent last freight train made its run on November 7, 2008; however, seven months later the facility began receiving shipments again, on June 19, 2009. Although this industry is east of the Berkeley Heights station, the freight trains actually operate as far west as Stirling, where the engine uses the siding to run around the train to reverse direction. In 2019, the Dover and Delaware River Railroad took over freight service along the line.

==Electrification==
Like the Morristown Line, the Gladstone Branch is electrified using overhead catenary at 25 kV 60 Hz. Traction power comes from the NJT substation at Summit, which also powers much of the Morristown Line. The Summit substation is located north of New Providence on the Morristown Line, between the Summit and Chatham stations, and receives power from the nearby Summit Utility substation. In addition to the NJT Summit traction substation, three other switching facilities are located along the line.

==Stations==

==Bibliography==
*

==References==
==External links==
*Morris &amp; Essex Line timetables </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5566325" start="4" end="20" title="Gladstone Branch" label="Gladstone Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566325" start="40" end="54" title="Gladstone Branch" label="Gladstone Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="61" end="74" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="92" end="102" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="124" end="134" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913575" start="163" end="187" title="Morris &amp;amp; Essex Lines" label="Morris &amp;amp; Essex Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566317" start="227" end="244" title="Gladstone station (NJ Transit)" label="Gladstone station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128305" start="256" end="272" title="Hoboken Terminal" label="Hoboken Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54451" start="276" end="297" title="Pennsylvania Station (New York City)" label="New York Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705780" start="446" end="457" title="Murray Hill (NJT station)" label="Murray Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617555" start="459" end="467" title="Stirling (NJT station)" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893995" start="469" end="482" title="Bernardsville station" label="Bernardsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434580" start="495" end="504" title="Far Hills (NJT station)" label="Far Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637756" start="510" end="516" title="Summit station (NJ Transit)" label="Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948559" start="554" end="569" title="Morristown Line" label="Morristown Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016633" start="579" end="606" title="Newark Broad Street station" label="Newark Broad Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="677" end="681" title="PATH (rail system)" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956135" start="692" end="703" title="NY Waterway" label="NY Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382222" start="753" end="770" title="Kearny Connection" label="Kearny Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501799" start="1019" end="1030" title="Short Hills station" label="Short Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016633" start="1833" end="1852" title="Newark Broad Street Station" label="Newark Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128305" start="1857" end="1873" title="Hoboken Terminal" label="Hoboken Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874122" start="1945" end="1955" title="Bay Street station" label="Bay Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904583" start="1963" end="1985" title="Montclair-Boonton Line" label="Montclair-Boonton Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960238" start="2163" end="2191" title="Grand National Hurdle Stakes" label="Grand National Hurdle Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300237" start="2192" end="2204" title="steeplechase (horse racing)" label="steeplechase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009530" start="2262" end="2291" title="New Jersey West Line Railroad" label="New Jersey West Line Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183933" start="2530" end="2570" title="Delaware Lackawanna and Western Railroad" label="Delaware Lackawanna and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476628" start="2795" end="2816" title="Gladstone, New Jersey" label="Gladstone, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353770" start="3006" end="3019" title="Erie Railroad" label="Erie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q444183" start="3032" end="3055" title="Erie Lackawanna Railway" label="Erie Lackawanna Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="3226" end="3241" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="3284" end="3292" title="Overhead line" label="catenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="3626" end="3640" title="Diesel locomotive" label="diesel-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128305" start="3813" end="3829" title="Hoboken Terminal" label="Hoboken Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54451" start="3896" end="3917" title="New York Penn Station" label="New York Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637756" start="4001" end="4007" title="Summit station (NJ Transit)" label="Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="4231" end="4235" title="Port Authority Trans-Hudson" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q811249" start="4246" end="4260" title="Interstate 280 (New Jersey)" label="Interstate 280"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974074" start="4300" end="4321" title="Waterfront Connection" label="Waterfront Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055732" start="4396" end="4419" title="North Jersey Coast Line" label="North Jersey Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294577" start="4424" end="4443" title="Raritan Valley Line" label="Raritan Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629132" start="4574" end="4586" title="Morristown Line Bridge" label="swing bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="4596" end="4609" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016633" start="4641" end="4668" title="Newark Broad Street station" label="Newark Broad Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078283" start="4840" end="4858" title="Newark City Subway" label="Newark City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368726" start="4886" end="4902" title="Roseville Avenue (NJT station)" label="Roseville Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904583" start="4957" end="4979" title="Montclair-Boonton Line" label="Montclair-Boonton Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476210" start="5169" end="5191" title="Lake Hopatcong station" label="Lake Hopatcong station"/>
<link wikidata="Q962977" start="5197" end="5217" title="double-track railway" label="double-track railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q811493" start="5334" end="5354" title="Garden State Parkway" label="Garden State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329078" start="5367" end="5378" title="East Orange (NJT station)" label="East Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705452" start="5449" end="5461" title="Brick Church (NJT station)" label="Brick Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099498" start="5466" end="5472" title="Orange (NJT station)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758657" start="5539" end="5554" title="Highland Avenue (NJT station)" label="Highland Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925239" start="5559" end="5575" title="Mountain Station (NJT station)" label="Mountain Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568073" start="5597" end="5609" title="South Orange (NJT station)" label="South Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q585828" start="5675" end="5696" title="Seton Hall University" label="Seton Hall University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705728" start="5698" end="5707" title="Maplewood (NJT station)" label="Maplewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705747" start="5884" end="5892" title="Millburn (NJT station)" label="Millburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501799" start="5897" end="5908" title="Short Hills (NJT station)" label="Short Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011089" start="6094" end="6108" title="New Providence station" label="New Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705780" start="6374" end="6393" title="Murray Hill station (NJ Transit)" label="Murray Hill station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892027" start="7089" end="7113" title="Berkeley Heights station" label="Berkeley Heights station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="7207" end="7220" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073957" start="7290" end="7308" title="Long Hill Township, New Jersey" label="Long Hill Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562144" start="7323" end="7339" title="Gillette station" label="Gillette station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617555" start="7401" end="7417" title="Stirling station (NJ Transit)" label="Stirling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859689" start="7723" end="7741" title="Millington station" label="Millington station"/>
<link wikidata="Q367314" start="8108" end="8125" title="Bernards Township, New Jersey" label="Bernards Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709768" start="8393" end="8406" title="Lyons station" label="Lyons station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867775" start="8619" end="8640" title="Basking Ridge station" label="Basking Ridge station"/>
<link wikidata="Q811258" start="8904" end="8918" title="Interstate 287" label="Interstate 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893995" start="8952" end="8973" title="Bernardsville station" label="Bernardsville station"/>
<link wikidata="Q811458" start="9184" end="9198" title="U.S. Route 202 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084597" start="9951" end="9972" title="Peapack-Gladstone, New Jersey" label="Peapack and Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054258" start="9997" end="10023" title="North Branch Raritan River" label="North Branch Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157954" start="10048" end="10063" title="Peapack station" label="Peapack station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566317" start="10423" end="10440" title="Gladstone station (NJ Transit)" label="Gladstone station"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="10872" end="10879" title="Consolidated Rail Corporation" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="10919" end="10943" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892027" start="11330" end="11354" title="Berkeley Heights station" label="Berkeley Heights station"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757540" start="11509" end="11542" title="Dover and Delaware River Railroad" label="Dover and Delaware River Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948559" start="11615" end="11630" title="Morristown Line" label="Morristown Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="11683" end="11691" title="overhead lines" label="catenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000642" start="11756" end="11762" title="Summit, New Jersey" label="Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021568" start="11853" end="11867" title="New Providence, New Jersey" label="New Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637756" start="11904" end="11910" title="Summit (NJT station)" label="Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087624" start="11915" end="11922" title="Chatham (NJT station)" label="Chatham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280458" wikidata="Q841032" url="?curid=1280458" title="Marginal revenue">
<text>Marginal revenue (or marginal benefit) is a central concept in microeconomics that describes the additional total revenue generated by increasing product sales by 1 unit. Marginal revenue is the increase in revenue from the sale of one additional unit of product, i.e., the revenue from the sale of the last unit of product. It can be positive or negative. Marginal revenue is an important concept in vendor analysis. To derive the value of marginal revenue, it is required to examine the difference between the aggregate benefits a firm received from the quantity of a good and service produced last period and the current period with one extra unit increase in the rate of production. Marginal revenue is a fundamental tool for economic decision making within a firm&#x27;s setting, together with marginal cost to be considered.

In a perfectly competitive market, the incremental revenue generated by selling an additional unit of a good is equal to the price the firm is able to charge the buyer of the good. This is because a firm in a competitive market will always get the same price for every unit it sells regardless of the number of units the firm sells since the firm&#x27;s sales can never impact the industry&#x27;s price. Therefore, in a perfectly competitive market, firms set the price level equal to their marginal revenue formula_1.

In imperfect competition, a monopoly firm is a large producer in the market and changes in its output levels impact market prices, determining the whole industry&#x27;s sales. Therefore, a monopoly firm lowers its price on all units sold in order to increase output (quantity) by 1 unit. Since a reduction in price leads to a decline in revenue on each good sold by the firm, the marginal revenue generated is always lower than the price level charged formula_2. The marginal revenue (the increase in total revenue) is the price the firm gets on the additional unit sold, less the revenue lost by reducing the price on all other units that were sold prior to the decrease in price. Marginal revenue is the concept of a firm sacrificing the opportunity to sell the current output at a certain price, in order to sell a higher quantity at a reduced price.

Profit maximization occurs at the point where marginal revenue (MR) equals marginal cost (MC). If formula_3 then a profit-maximizing firm will increase output to generate more profit, while if formula_4 then the firm will decrease output to gain additional profit. Thus the firm will choose the profit-maximizing level of output for which formula_5.

== Definition ==
Marginal revenue is equal to the ratio of the change in revenue for some change in quantity sold to that change in quantity sold. This can be formulated as:

formula_6

This can also be represented as a derivative when the change in quantity sold becomes arbitrarily small. Define the revenue function to be
:formula_7

where &quot;Q&quot; is output and &quot;P&quot;(&quot;Q&quot;) is the inverse demand function of customers. By the product rule, marginal revenue is then given by
:formula_8

where the prime sign indicates a derivative. For a firm facing perfect competition, price does not change with quantity sold so marginal revenue is equal to price. For a monopoly, the price decreases with quantity sold so marginal revenue is less than price for positive formula_9 (see Example 1).

Example 1: If a firm sells 20 units of books (quantity) for $50 each (price), this earns total revenue: P*Q = $50*20 = $1000

Then if the firm increases quantity sold to 21 units of books at $49 each, this earns total revenue: P*Q = $49*21 = $1029

Therefore, using the marginal revenue formula (MR) = formula_10

Example 2: If a firm&#x27;s total revenue function is written as formula_7

formula_12

formula_13

Then, by first order derivation, marginal revenue would be expressed as

formula_14

Therefore, if Q = 40,

MR = 200 − 2(40) = $120

==Marginal revenue curve==
The marginal revenue curve is affected by the same factors as the demand curve – changes in income, changes in the prices of complements and substitutes, changes in populations, etc. These factors can cause the MR curve to shift and rotate. Marginal revenue curve differs under perfect competition and imperfect competition (monopoly).
Under perfect competition, there are multiple firms present in the market. Changes in the supply level of a single firm does not have an impact on the total price in the market. Firms follow the price determined by market equilibrium of supply and demand and are price takers. The marginal revenue curve is a horizontal line at the market price, implying perfectly elastic demand and is equal to the demand curve.

Under monopoly, one firm is a sole seller in the market with a differentiated product. The supply level (output) and price is determined by the monopolist in order to maximise profits, making a monopolist a price maker. The marginal revenue for a monopolist is the private gain of selling an additional unit of output. The marginal revenue curve is downward sloping and below the demand curve and the additional gain from increasing the quantity sold is lower than the chosen market price. Under monopoly, the price of all units lowers each time a firm increases its output sold, this causes the firm to face a diminishing marginal revenue.

==Marginal revenue curve and marginal cost curve==
A company will stop producing a product/service when marginal revenue (money the company earns from each additional sale) equals marginal cost (the cost the company costs to produce an additional unit). Therefore, a company is making money when MR is greater than marginal cost (MC). And when MC = MR, it is called profit maximization. After this point; the company can no longer make a profit. Therefore, it is in their interest to stop production.

==Relationship between marginal revenue and elasticity==
The relationship between marginal revenue and the elasticity of demand by the firm&#x27;s customers can be derived as follows:

:formula_15
:Taking the first order derivative of total revenue: 
:formula_16

:formula_17

where &quot;R&quot; is total revenue, &quot;P&quot;(&quot;Q&quot;) is the inverse of the demand function, and &quot;e&quot; &lt; 0 is the price elasticity of demand written as formula_18.

Monopolist firm, as a price maker in the market, has the incentives to lower prices to boost quantities sold. The price effects occur when a firm raises its products&#x27; prices and increased revenue on each unit sold. The quantity effect, on the other hand, describes the stage when prices increased and consumers quantity demanded reduce. Firms&#x27; pricing decision, therefore, is based on the tradeoff between the two outcomes by considering elasticity.

When a monopolist firm is facing an Inelastic demand curve (e&lt;1), it implies that a percentage change in quantity is less than the percentage change in price. By increasing quantity sold, the firm is forced to accept a reduction of price for all the current and previous production units, resulting in a negative marginal revenue (MR). As such, as consumers are less sensitive and responsive to lower prices movement and so the expected product sales boost is highly unlikely and firms lose more profits due to reduction in marginal revenue. A rational firm will have to maintain its current price levels instead or increase the price for profit expansion.

Increases in consumer&#x27;s responsiveness to small changes in prices leads represents an elastic demand curve (e&gt;1), resulting in a positive marginal revenue (MR) under monopoly competition. This signifies that a percentage change in quantity outweighs the percentage change in price. Firms in the imperfect competition market that lower prices by a small portion benefit from a large percentage increase in quantity sold and this generates greater marginal revenue. With that, a rational firm will recognize the value of price effects under an elastic demand function for its products and would avoid increasing prices as the quantity (demand) lost would be amplified due to the elastic demand curve.

If the firm is a perfect competitor, where quantity produced and sold has no effect on the market price, then the price elasticity of demand is negative infinity and marginal revenue simply equals the (market-determined) price formula_1.

Therefore, it is essential to be aware of the elasticity of demand. A monopolist prefers to be on the more elastic end of the demand curve in order to gain a positive marginal revenue. This shows that a monopolist reduces output produced up to the point where marginal revenue is positive. 

==Marginal revenue and Marginal benefit==
Example 1: Suppose consumers want to buy an additional lipstick. If the consumer is willing to pay $50 for this extra lipstick, the marginal income of the purchase is $50. However, the more lipsticks consumers have, the less they pay for the next lipstick. This is because as consumers accumulate more and more lipsticks, the benefits of having an additional lipstick will be reduced.

Example 2: Suppose customers are considering buying 10 computers. If the marginal income of the 11th computer is $2, and the computer company is willing to sell the 11th component to maximize its consumer interest, the company&#x27;s marginal income is $2 and consumers&#x27; marginal income is $2.

==Law of diminishing marginal returns==
In microeconomics, for every unit of input added to a firm, the return received decreases.
When a variable factor of production is put into a firm at a constant level of technology, the initial increase in this factor of production will increase output, but when it exceeds a certain limit, the increased output will diminish and will eventually reduce output in absolute terms.

==Law of increasing marginal returns==
In contrast to the law of diminishing marginal returns, in a knowledge-dependent economy, as knowledge and technological inputs increase, the output increases and the producer&#x27;s returns tend to increase. This is an example of increasing marginal revenue; suppose a company produces toy airplanes. After some production, the company spends $10 in materials and labor to build the 1st toy airplane. The 1st toy airplane sells for $15, which means the profit on that toy is $5. Now, suppose that the 2nd toy airplane also costs $10, but this time it can be sold for $17. The profit on the 2nd toy airplane is $12 greater than the profit on the 1st toy airplane.

==Marginal revenue and markup pricing==
Profit maximization requires that a firm produces where marginal revenue equals marginal costs. Firm managers are unlikely to have complete information concerning their marginal revenue function or their marginal costs. However, the profit maximization conditions can be expressed in a “more easily applicable form”:

:MR = MC,
:MR = P(1 + 1/e),
:MC = P(1 + 1/e),
:MC = P + P/e,
:(P − MC)/ P = −1/e.

Markup is the difference between price and marginal cost. The formula states that markup as a percentage of price equals the negative (and hence the absolute value) of the inverse of the elasticity of demand. A lower elasticity of demand implies a higher markup at the profit maximising equilibrium.

(P − MC)/ P = −1/e is called the Lerner index after economist Abba Lerner. The Lerner index is a measure of market power — the ability of a firm to charge a price that exceeds marginal cost. The index varies from zero (when demand is infinitely elastic (a perfectly competitive market) to 1 (when demand has an elasticity of −1). The closer the index value is to 1, the greater is the difference between price and marginal cost. The Lerner index increases as demand becomes less elastic.

Alternatively, the relationship can be expressed as:
:P = MC/(1 + 1/e).

Thus, for example, if &quot;e&quot; is −2 and MC is $5.00 then price is $10.00.

Example
If a company can sell 10 units at $20 each or 11 units at $19 each, then the marginal revenue from the eleventh unit is (11 × 19) − (10 × 20) = $9.

==See also==

* Cost curve
* Profit maximization

==Notes==
==References==
* Landsburg, S 2002 Price Theory &amp; Applications, 5th ed. South-Western.
* Perloff, J., 2008, Microeconomics: Theory &amp; Applications with Calculus, Pearson. 
* Pindyck, R &amp; Rubinfeld, D 2001: Microeconomics 5th ed. Page Prentice-Hall. 
* Samuelson &amp; Marks, 2003 Managerial Economics 4th ed. Wiley
* O&#x27;Sullivan, Arthur; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003). Economics: Principles in Action. Pearson Prentice Hall. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q841032" start="0" end="16" title="Marginal revenue" label="Marginal revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="63" end="77" title="microeconomics" label="microeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="114" end="121" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="799" end="812" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q183384" start="837" end="858" title="perfect competition" label="perfectly competitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q183384" start="1041" end="1059" title="perfect competition" label="competitive market"/>
<link wikidata="Q281682" start="1355" end="1376" title="imperfect competition" label="imperfect competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="1380" end="1388" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377422" start="2207" end="2226" title="Profit maximization" label="Profit maximization"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="2282" end="2295" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376545" start="2973" end="2988" title="demand function" label="demand function"/>
<link wikidata="Q466720" start="3010" end="3022" title="product rule" label="product rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="3240" end="3248" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q183384" start="4285" end="4304" title="perfect competition" label="perfect competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274157" start="4542" end="4554" title="price takers" label="price takers"/>
<link wikidata="Q379579" start="4700" end="4708" title="Monopolistic competition" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274157" start="4901" end="4912" title="price maker" label="price maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194154" start="5945" end="5965" title="price elasticity of demand" label="elasticity of demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194154" start="6253" end="6279" title="price elasticity of demand" label="price elasticity of demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194154" start="6801" end="6817" title="Inelastic demand" label="Inelastic demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="9436" end="9450" title="microeconomics" label="microeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q305781" start="11321" end="11332" title="Abba Lerner" label="Abba Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q380262" start="12075" end="12085" title="Cost curve" label="Cost curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377422" start="12088" end="12107" title="Profit maximization" label="Profit maximization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280462" wikidata="Q1871368" url="?curid=1280462" title="Louie Crew">
<text>Erman Louie Clay (né Erman Louie Crew Jr.) (1936–2019) was an American professor emeritus of English at Rutgers University. He was best known for his long and increasingly successful campaign for the acceptance of gay and lesbian people by Christians in general, and the Episcopal Church in particular.

==Biography==
Louie Crew was born December 9, 1936, in Anniston, Alabama. He has written about &quot;Growing Up Gay in Dixie&quot;

Crew graduated from The McCallie School (1954), and received a B.A. from Baylor University (1958) a M.A. from Auburn University (1959) and a Ph.D. from the University of Alabama (1971).

Crew taught at Auburn University, Darlington School, St. Andrew&#x27;s School (Delaware), Penge Secondary Modern School, London, University of Alabama, Experiment in International Living, Claflin University, Fort Valley State University, University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point, Beijing International Studies University, Chinese University of Hong Kong and Rutgers University.

Louie Crew Clay died on November 27, 2019, 12 days shy of his 83rd birthday.

==Activism==

While teaching at Fort Valley State University, Crew founded Integrity USA, a gay-acceptance group within the Episcopal Church (1974). With Julia Penelope, Crew co-founded the LGBT caucus of the National Council of Teachers of English (1975). He served on the board of directors of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force from 1976 to 1978. After he moved to Wisconsin, he served on the Wisconsin Governor&#x27;s Council on Lesbian and Gay Issues in 1983.

When Crew first began working for the inclusion of LGBT people in the Episcopal church, he was widely denounced and dismissed, but today the Episcopal Church has come to agree with many of his views, while some churches and dioceses are strongly opposed.

Crew sat on the Episcopal Church&#x27;s executive council (2000–2006). He was elected by the Episcopal Diocese of Newark to serve as a deputy to six triennial national General Conventions (1994, 1997, 2000, 2003, 2006, 2009). He was a devoted Anglo-Catholic and for many years a member of Grace Church in Newark.

Crew maintained a comprehensive Web site with information about the Episcopal Church and the Anglican Communion. Professor Ed Rodman at the Episcopal Divinity School says that Crew&#x27;s first and foremost contribution was that &quot;he brought internet literacy to the church&quot;.

==Marriage==
Louie Crew married Flora Mae Friedrich on May 25, 1968. She was his freshman English student in the spring of 1967. The marriage ended 5 years later in divorce.

Louie Crew married Ernest Clay on February 2, 1974, although at the time their marriage had no legal standing. They married legally on August 22, 2013 and Crew took on his husband&#x27;s last name. The two are featured together in &quot;Not That Kind of Christian&quot;, an 80-minute documentary film by Andrew Grossman, which premiered at the Breckenridge Film Festival in 2007.

==Queer Poet and Writer==

Editors have published more than 2,638 of Crew&#x27;s manuscripts, including his most recent book &quot;Letters from Samaria: The Prose &amp; Poetry of Louie Crew Clay&quot; edited by Max Niedzwiecki (Morehouse, New York, 2015) plus four poetry volumes: &quot;Sunspots&quot; (Lotus Press, Detroit, 1976) &quot;Midnight Lessons&quot; (Samisdat, 1987), &quot;Lutibelle&#x27;s Pew&quot; (Dragon Disks, 1990), and &quot;Queers! for Christ&#x27;s Sake!&quot; (Dragon Disks, 2003) Crew sometimes uses the noms de plume Li Min Hua, Quean Lutibelle, and Dr. Ddungo. YouTube has numerous videos of Crew reading his own poems.

Crew wrote the first openly LGBT materials ever published by &quot;Christianity &amp; Crisis&quot;, &quot;Change Magazine&quot; &quot;Chronicle of Higher Education&quot;, &quot;FOR&quot; (Fellowship of Reconciliation), &quot;The Living Church&quot; and &quot;Southern Exposure&quot;. With Rictor Norton, Crew co-edited a special issue of &quot;College English&quot; on &quot;The Homosexual Imagination&quot; (November 1974). He served on the editorial board of the &quot;Journal of Homosexuality&quot; (1978–83; 1989-2012). He edited the 1978 book &quot;The Gay Academic&quot;, the book &quot;Telling Our Stories&quot; and the book &quot;101 Reasons to Be Episcopalian&quot;.

Crew&#x27;s papers are deposited in The Labadie Collection at the University of Michigan.

==Recognition==
* Crew received honorary Doctor of Divinity degrees from Episcopal Divinity School in 1999 and from General Theological Seminary in 2003, and an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree from the Church Divinity School of the Pacific in 2004.
* He had been a Fellow for the National Endowment for the Humanities three times: University of California, Berkeley 1974, University of Texas at Austin 1977, and University of Chicago, 1981.
* He was a poet in residence at Helene Wurlitzer Foundation of New Mexico (1963) and at Ragdale (1988)
* Episcopal Divinity School established scholarship under his name.
* He was the recipient of the Bishop&#x27;s Cross from the Rt. Rev. John Shelby Spong, Diocese of Newark, in 2000.

==References==
==External links==
*Louie Crew on Facebook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1871368" start="0" end="16" title="Louie Crew" label="Erman Louie Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871368" start="21" end="41" title="Louie Crew" label="Erman Louie Crew Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q211830" start="81" end="89" title="emeritus" label="emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="93" end="100" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="104" end="122" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="214" end="217" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="222" end="229" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="240" end="250" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="271" end="287" title="Episcopal Church in the United States of America" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q79474" start="359" end="376" title="Anniston, Alabama" label="Anniston, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750751" start="456" end="475" title="The McCallie School" label="The McCallie School"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="509" end="526" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="546" end="563" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="592" end="613" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="638" end="655" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224002" start="657" end="674" title="Darlington School" label="Darlington School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802429" start="676" end="711" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s School (Delaware)" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s School (Delaware)"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="752" end="773" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384358" start="775" end="809" title="Experiment in International Living" label="Experiment in International Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125034" start="811" end="829" title="Claflin University" label="Claflin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472214" start="831" end="859" title="Fort Valley State University" label="Fort Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687782" start="861" end="898" title="University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point" label="University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q233300" start="900" end="940" title="Beijing International Studies University" label="Beijing International Studies University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15570" start="942" end="973" title="Chinese University of Hong Kong" label="Chinese University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="978" end="996" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472214" start="1109" end="1137" title="Fort Valley State University" label="Fort Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847883" start="1152" end="1165" title="Integrity USA" label="Integrity USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306647" start="1231" end="1245" title="Julia Penelope" label="Julia Penelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314867" start="1377" end="1412" title="National Gay and Lesbian Task Force" label="National Gay and Lesbian Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="1599" end="1603" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591041" start="2093" end="2115" title="Grace Church (Newark)" label="Grace Church in Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="2211" end="2229" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383462" start="2258" end="2283" title="Episcopal Divinity School" label="Episcopal Divinity School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476" start="2652" end="2688" title="Same-sex marriage in the United States" label="their marriage had no legal standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="3486" end="3499" title="noms de plume" label="noms de plume"/>
<link wikidata="Q73617" start="3739" end="3768" title="Chronicle of Higher Education" label="Chronicle of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442541" start="3793" end="3821" title="Fellowship of Reconciliation" label="Fellowship of Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747831" start="3830" end="3847" title="The Living Church" label="The Living Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039653" start="3864" end="3881" title="Southern Exposure (magazine)" label="Southern Exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546221" start="3894" end="3907" title="Rictor Norton" label="Rictor Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146365" start="3949" end="3964" title="College English" label="College English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514304" start="4076" end="4100" title="Journal of Homosexuality" label="Journal of Homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466704" start="4322" end="4340" title="Labadie Collection" label="Labadie Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="4348" end="4370" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383462" start="4446" end="4471" title="Episcopal Divinity School" label="Episcopal Divinity School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501676" start="4489" end="4517" title="General Theological Seminary" label="General Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116581" start="4584" end="4621" title="Church Divinity School of the Pacific" label="Church Divinity School of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="4662" end="4699" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4713" end="4747" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="4754" end="4783" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="4794" end="4815" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282832" start="4911" end="4918" title="Ragdale" label="Ragdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383462" start="4928" end="4953" title="Episcopal Divinity School" label="Episcopal Divinity School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196186" start="5062" end="5079" title="John Shelby Spong" label="John Shelby Spong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280478" wikidata="Q2723897" url="?curid=1280478" title="Schrader valve">
<text>The Schrader valve (also called American valve) is a type of pneumatic tire valve used on virtually every motor vehicle in the world today. The original Schrader valve design was invented in 1891 and patented in the United States in 1893.

The Schrader valve consists of a valve stem into which a valve core is threaded. The valve core is a poppet valve assisted by a spring. A small rubber seal located on the core keeps the fluid from escaping through the threads. Using the appropriate tools, a faulty valve core can be immediately extracted from the valve stem and replaced with a new one.

== History ==
August Schrader was a German-American inventor and businessman. In 1844, he opened the Schrader company, a shop dealing in rubber products in Manhattan, New York City. In 1845, he began supplying fittings and valves for rubber products made by the Goodyear brothers, including air pillows and life preservers. In addition, he also worked on an apparatus for making daguerreotypes, diving helmets, and an air pump for use in diving.

Around 1890, after reports of English cyclists&#x27; success using pneumatic tires, August Schrader saw the need for a bicycle tire valve. Working with his son George Schrader, in 1891 they produced the Schrader valve, which was patented in the U.S. in 1893. Two years later George patented the valve cap for protecting the valve from the elements, and in 1898 the design was improved with the introduction of a replaceable valve core. The valve became popular in the early 1900&#x27;s in tires for automobiles, trucks, airplanes, and other vehicles.

==Uses==
The Schrader valve is used on virtually all automobile tires and motorcycle tires and most wider-rimmed bicycle tires. In addition to tube and tubeless tires, Schrader valves of varying diameters are used on many refrigeration and air conditioning systems to allow servicing, including recharging with refrigerant; by plumbers conducting leak-down pressure tests on pipe installations; as a bleeding and test port on the fuel rail of some fuel injected engines; on bicycle air shock absorbers to allow adjustment of air pressure according to the rider&#x27;s weight; for medical gas outlets within hospitals and some medical vehicles; and in the buoyancy compensator (BC) inflators of SCUBA systems where the ability to easily disconnect an air hose (even underwater) without the loss of tank air is critical. Schrader valves are also widely used in high-pressure hydraulic systems on aircraft.

Many domestic fire extinguishers use an internal valve identical to a Schrader valve, but with a lever on top to enable quick release of the pressurized content. It is also the same thread specification used on the shutter button of some old Leica, Yashica, and also Nikon F and F2 cameras.

== Valve ==

A Schrader valve consists of an externally threaded hollow cylindrical metal tube, typically nickel-plated brass. In the center of the exterior end is a metal pin aligned with the long axis of the tube; the pin&#x27;s end is approximately flush with the end of the valve body.

All Schrader valves used on tires have threads and bodies of a single standard size at the exterior end, so caps and tools generally are universal for the valves on all common applications. The core of the valve can be removed or tightened with a tool.

Industrial Schrader valves are available in different diameters and valve core variants and are used in refrigeration, propane, and a variety of other uses.

With the advent of miniature electronics, Schrader valve stems with integrated transmitters for tire pressure monitoring systems (TPMS) became available.

== Cap ==
A valve cap on a Schrader valve prevents the entry of contaminants that may interfere with the sealing surfaces and cause leakage.

Metal, and some hard plastic valve caps, have a rubber washer or O-ring inside, both to prevent the cap from loosening and falling off due to vibration. These caps also serve as a mechanical seal or hermetic seal to prevent air from leaking from a faulty valve core. Simple caps without a seal do not reliably prevent leaks. Some metal caps are equipped with prongs to enable removing and replacing valve cores, thereby serving two functions: seal and emergency tool.

In refrigeration and air conditioning applications, the valve cap is considered to be the primary seal, with the Schrader valve only being used for service access.

==Schrader versus other valve types==


There are three valves used on tires worldwide: Schrader valves, Presta valves, and Dunlop valves. Each goes by multiple names. Schrader valves are also known as American valves or car valves. Presta valves are also known as French valves, Sclaverand valves, and road bike valves. Dunlop valves are also known as German valves, English valves, Holland valves, Woods valves, flash valves, and alligator valves.

Schrader valves are almost universal on car, truck, and motorcycle tires worldwide. Presta and Dunlop valves are mostly found on bicycle tubes. Both the Schrader and the Presta types are effective for sealing high pressures. Their chief differences are that Schrader valves are larger and have springs that close the valve except when the pin is depressed. Schrader valves are used in a wide variety of compressed gas and pressurized liquid applications such as small torch and grill cylinders, and air shocks. Schrader valves are also viewed as more complex (requiring two seals over one). They weigh more than Presta valves.

Schrader and Dunlop valve stems are 8 mm in diameter, whereas Presta valve stems are 6 mm, allowing Prestas to be used on narrower, high-performance rims as on road racing bicycles. Another disadvantage of the Schrader is that debris may be introduced into its spring-loaded pin, impairing inflation, whereas the Presta valve relies only on air pressure and a small knurled nut to keep it shut.

Inflating a bicycle tire equipped with a Presta or Dunlop valve at an automobile filling station requires an adaptor, while a Schrader-valved tube does not. Inflating at home or on the road requires either 6mm air chuck for Presta and Dunlop valves, or an 8mm chuck for Schrader valves. An important advantage of Schrader valves relative to Presta is that Schrader valves allow for quick air pressure checks. Some chucks have dual orifices to inflate all three.

== Dimensions ==
* External 8V1 thread: x 32 TPI ( pitch; tap size 8v1-32)
* Internal 5V1 thread: x 36 TPI ( pitch; tap size 5v1-36)

==See also==
* Inner tube
* Valve stem

==References==
== External links ==

*Schrader-Bridgeport International (North American English version)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2723897" start="4" end="18" title="Schrader valve" label="Schrader valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723897" start="32" end="46" title="Schrader valve" label="American valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206759" start="71" end="81" title="Valve stem" label="tire valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206759" start="273" end="283" title="valve stem" label="valve stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224368" start="341" end="353" title="poppet valve" label="poppet valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q102836" start="368" end="374" title="spring (device)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q100209" start="609" end="624" title="August Schrader" label="August Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="751" end="760" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="762" end="775" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="857" end="865" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="974" end="988" title="Daguerreotype" label="daguerreotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1072" end="1079" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="1080" end="1094" title="Cyclist" label="cyclists&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q211500" start="1109" end="1118" title="pneumatic" label="pneumatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="1119" end="1124" title="tires" label="tires"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="1647" end="1663" title="tire" label="automobile tires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949973" start="1668" end="1683" title="motorcycle tire" label="motorcycle tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q771452" start="1707" end="1719" title="bicycle tire" label="bicycle tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="1816" end="1829" title="refrigerator" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="1834" end="1850" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q266790" start="1905" end="1916" title="refrigerant" label="refrigerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="2042" end="2055" title="fuel injected" label="fuel injected"/>
<link wikidata="Q44167" start="2056" end="2062" title="engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455572" start="2249" end="2269" title="Buoyancy compensator (diving)" label="buoyancy compensator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="2288" end="2293" title="Scuba diving" label="SCUBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="2488" end="2496" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q190672" start="2513" end="2530" title="fire extinguisher" label="fire extinguisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505674" start="2714" end="2728" title="shutter button" label="shutter button"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="2911" end="2916" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="3440" end="3453" title="refrigeration" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="3455" end="3462" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946072" start="3590" end="3621" title="tire pressure monitoring system" label="tire pressure monitoring system"/>
<link wikidata="Q637321" start="3846" end="3852" title="washer (hardware)" label="washer"/>
<link wikidata="Q942417" start="3856" end="3862" title="O-ring" label="O-ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004810" start="3971" end="3986" title="seal (mechanical)" label="mechanical seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475577" start="3990" end="4003" title="hermetic seal" label="hermetic seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723915" start="4530" end="4542" title="Presta valve" label="Presta valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966452" start="4549" end="4561" title="Dunlop valve" label="Dunlop valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q948482" start="5669" end="5683" title="racing bicycle" label="racing bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205495" start="5981" end="5996" title="filling station" label="filling station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6408" end="6411" title="Screw thread#Lead, pitch, and starts" label="TPI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6414" end="6419" title="Screw thread#Lead, pitch, and starts" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141634" start="6512" end="6522" title="Inner tube" label="Inner tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206759" start="6525" end="6535" title="Valve stem" label="Valve stem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280481" wikidata="Q307844" url="?curid=1280481" title="C6H6">
<text>The molecular formula C6H6 (molar mass: 78.114)

* Benzene
* Benzvalene
* Bicyclopropenyl
* 1,2,3-Cyclohexatriene
* Dewar benzene
* Fulvene
* Prismane
* [3]Radialene
* 3-Methylidenepent-1-en-4-yne
* Hexadiyne
** 1,3-Hexadiyne
** 1,4-Hexadiyne
** 1,5-Hexadiyne
** 2,4-Hexadiyne
*Hexadienyne
**1,2-Hexadien-4-yne
**1,2-Hexadien-5-yne
**1,3-Hexadien-5-yne
**1,5-Hexadien-3-yne (Basavraj)
**2,3-Hexadien-5-yne

Historical and hypothetical compounds:
* Claus&#x27; benzene

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="4" end="21" title="molecular formula" label="molecular formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q307844" start="22" end="26" title="C6H6" label="C6H6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="51" end="58" title="Benzene" label="Benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q416723" start="61" end="71" title="Benzvalene" label="Benzvalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083122" start="74" end="89" title="Bicyclopropenyl" label="Bicyclopropenyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q82526818" start="92" end="113" title="1,2,3-Cyclohexatriene" label="1,2,3-Cyclohexatriene"/>
<link wikidata="Q425101" start="116" end="129" title="Dewar benzene" label="Dewar benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q417595" start="132" end="139" title="Fulvene" label="Fulvene"/>
<link wikidata="Q425090" start="142" end="150" title="Prismane" label="Prismane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416460" start="153" end="165" title="Radialene" label="[3]Radialene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="168" end="196" title="3-Methylidenepent-1-en-4-yne" label="3-Methylidenepent-1-en-4-yne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="199" end="208" title="Hexadiyne" label="Hexadiyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="212" end="225" title="1,3-Hexadiyne" label="1,3-Hexadiyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="229" end="242" title="1,4-Hexadiyne" label="1,4-Hexadiyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="246" end="259" title="1,5-Hexadiyne" label="1,5-Hexadiyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="263" end="276" title="2,4-Hexadiyne" label="2,4-Hexadiyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="278" end="289" title="Hexadienyne" label="Hexadienyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="292" end="310" title="1,2-Hexadien-4-yne" label="1,2-Hexadien-4-yne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="313" end="331" title="1,2-Hexadien-5-yne" label="1,2-Hexadien-5-yne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="334" end="352" title="1,3-Hexadien-5-yne" label="1,3-Hexadien-5-yne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="355" end="373" title="1,5-Hexadien-3-yne" label="1,5-Hexadien-3-yne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="387" end="405" title="2,3-Hexadien-5-yne" label="2,3-Hexadien-5-yne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709622" start="448" end="467" title="Claus&amp;#x27; benzene" label="Claus&amp;#x27; benzene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280493" wikidata="Q17030785" url="?curid=1280493" title="Video 5 8 6">
<text>&quot;Video 5 8 6&quot;, originally titled &quot;Prime 5 8 6&quot;, is an electronic instrumental piece and twenty-fourth single written and produced in 1982 by the British group New Order. In December 1982, the track was initially released in two sections in Touch Music&#x27;s first cassette magazine, &quot;Feature Mist&quot;. Touch re-released the entire track as a CD single in 1997.

Composed primarily by Bernard Sumner and Stephen Morris, &quot;Prime 5 8 6&quot;/&quot;Video 5 8 6&quot; was an early version of &quot;5 8 6&quot; (from &quot;Power, Corruption &amp; Lies&quot;), which contained rhythm elements that would later surface on &quot;Ultraviolence&quot; and the 1983 hit &quot;Blue Monday&quot;. After Factory Records&#x27; Tony Wilson asked New Order for twenty minutes of &quot;pap&quot;, it was first played in public during the opening of The Haçienda on 21 May 1982.

On release it reached #86 on the main British singles chart and #19 on the British indie chart. Bassist Peter Hook has said the key to the title &quot;5 8 6&quot; can be found in another of the group&#x27;s songs, &quot;Ecstasy&quot;; 5, 8 then 6 is the song&#x27;s bar structure.

A video was released for the song called Primitive 586 on the FACT 56, IKON 3 VHS and BETA tape &#x27;A Factory Video&#x27;, the footage is mostly primitive 80s computer graphics.

==Legacy==
Dave Simpson of &quot;The Guardian&quot;, including &quot;Video 5 8 6&quot; in a list of ten of New Order&#x27;s best tracks, called it a &quot;motorik electronic odyssey&quot; and added: &quot;Eventually released as a CD single in 1997, this combination of endlessly repetitive groove and electro bassline is as hypnotic as anything they recorded.&quot;

==Track listing==
==Chart positions==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17030785" start="6" end="17" title="Video 5 8 6" label="Video 5 8 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030785" start="49" end="60" title="Video 5 8 6" label="Prime 5 8 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="74" end="84" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="85" end="97" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="179" end="188" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828614" start="260" end="271" title="Touch Music" label="Touch Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049323" start="285" end="302" title="cassette magazine" label="cassette magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q438885" start="412" end="426" title="Bernard Sumner" label="Bernard Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q539897" start="431" end="445" title="Stephen Paul David Morris" label="Stephen Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930135" start="549" end="577" title="Power, Corruption &amp;amp; Lies" label="Power, Corruption &amp;amp; Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q885777" start="695" end="706" title="Blue Monday (New Order song)" label="Blue Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q578943" start="720" end="735" title="Factory Records" label="Factory Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q478601" start="742" end="753" title="Tony Wilson" label="Tony Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390959" start="861" end="873" title="Fac 51 Haçienda" label="The Haçienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="974" end="979" title="indie (music)" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q584301" start="987" end="994" title="Bassist" label="Bassist"/>
<link wikidata="Q431244" start="995" end="1005" title="Peter Hook" label="Peter Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="1157" end="1160" title="bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428778" start="1235" end="1250" title="Factory Records discography" label="FACT 56, IKON 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="1387" end="1399" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949856" start="1509" end="1516" title="motorik" label="motorik"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280496" wikidata="Q3273893" url="?curid=1280496" title="P. C. Sorcar">
<text>Protul Chandra Sorcar (23 February 1913 – 6 January 1971) was an Indian magician. He was an internationally active magician throughout the 1950s and 1960s, performing his &quot;Indrajal&quot; show before live audiences and on television. Sorcar died of a heart attack at the age of 57 in Asahikawa, Hokkaidō, Japan, on 6 January 1971, as he left the stage at the end of a performance. P.C. Sorcar is known also as P.C. Sorcar Senior (as his son P.C. Sorcar Jr. also performs under the same name), is renowned as &quot;Father of Modern Indian Magic&quot;.

==Career==
At the age of 21, Sorcar decided to give up formal education (he was likely to study to become an engineer), and decided to become a conjuror despite the profession&#x27;s low esteem in India.

Sorcar became famous in the mid-1930s, when he performed shows in Kolkata and also in Japan and several other countries. Among other routines, he performed a Floating Lady routine featuring aerial suspension in 1964. Ganapati Chakraborty was his mentor.

In 1956, he performed the sawing a woman in half illusion on the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Panorama&quot; program. When he performed it on live television, it draw huge attention in the United Kingdom because the climax made it appear as though the women had actually been cut in half and died, which caused a public panic.

His self-appointed title was &quot;The World&#x27;s Greatest Magician&quot;.

Sorcar died in Japan in 1971, suffering a massive heart attack while exiting the stage at the end of a performance.

==Personal life==
Sorcar was married to Basanti Devi. They were the parents of the animator, director and laserist Manick Sorcar and magicians P. C. Sorcar Jr. and P. C. Sorcar, Young.

==Awards==

* &quot;Jadusamrat P.C. Sorcar Sarani&quot; The Government of India has named a major street in Calcutta after him
* Padma Shri (the Lotus), awarded by the President of India on 26 January 1964
* &quot;The Sphinx&quot; (Oscar of Magic), US, 1946 and 1954
* &quot;The Royal Medallion&quot;, German Magic Circle

==Postage stamp==

On 23 February 2010, India Post issued a commemorative stamp to honour him.

==Publications==

*&quot;Magic for You&quot; (1966)
*&quot;More Magic for You&quot; (1965)
*&quot;History of Magic&quot; (1970)
*&quot;Indian Magic&quot; (1983)

==See also==
*Indian magicians

==References==
==External links==
* P.C. Sorcar International Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3273893" start="0" end="21" title="P. C. Sorcar" label="Protul Chandra Sorcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="115" end="123" title="Magic (illusion)" label="magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="255" end="267" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q200740" start="288" end="297" title="Asahikawa" label="Asahikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="299" end="307" title="Hokkaidō" label="Hokkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="309" end="314" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117165" start="445" end="460" title="P. C. Sorcar Jr." label="P.C. Sorcar Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="827" end="834" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="847" end="852" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001952" start="951" end="968" title="Aerial suspension (illusion)" label="aerial suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665768" start="978" end="998" title="Ganapati Chakraborty" label="Ganapati Chakraborty"/>
<link wikidata="Q196750" start="1042" end="1064" title="sawing a woman in half" label="sawing a woman in half"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1081" end="1084" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247810" start="1098" end="1106" title="Panorama (British TV programme)" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q266569" start="1610" end="1618" title="animator" label="animator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="1620" end="1628" title="Film director" label="director"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749489" start="1642" end="1655" title="Manick Sorcar" label="Manick Sorcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117165" start="1670" end="1686" title="P. C. Sorcar Jr." label="P. C. Sorcar Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q20685616" start="1691" end="1710" title="P. C. Sorcar, Young" label="P. C. Sorcar, Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="1842" end="1852" title="Padma Shri" label="Padma Shri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519720" start="2076" end="2086" title="India Post" label="India Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022629" start="2308" end="2324" title="Indian magicians" label="Indian magicians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280509" wikidata="Q1062351" url="?curid=1280509" title="Chanson d'Antioche">
<text>The Chanson d&#x27;Antioche is a &quot;chanson de geste&quot; in 9000 lines of in stanzas called &quot;laisses&quot;, now known in a version composed about 1180 for a courtly French audience and embedded in a quasi-historical cycle of epic poems inspired by the events of 1097–99, the climax of the First Crusade: the conquest of Antioch and of Jerusalem and the origins of the Crusader states. The &quot;Chanson&quot; was later reworked and incorporated in an extended Crusade cycle, of the 14th century, which was far more fabulous and embroidered, more distinctly romance than epic.

The subject is the preaching of the First Crusade, the preparations for departure, the tearful goodbyes, the arrival at Constantinople and the siege of Antioch of 1097–1098.

The lost original poem was said to have been composed by an eye-witness, Richard le Pèlerin, (Richard the Pilgrim), a North French or Flemish &quot;jongleur,&quot; who began it partly on the spot, during the eight-month siege of Antioch. The oldest version now known was recast by Graindor de Douai, a contemporary of Louis VII of France. Graindor borrowed details from the chroniclers to make his work more lively and more accurate, for his object from the start was to tell the true praiseworthy tale, not cozen his listeners of their coin:

:&quot;Seignor, oïés canchon, qui moult fait à loer&quot;
:&quot;Par itel convenant la vos puis-je conter...&quot;
:&quot;Je ne vous vorrai mie mensonges raconter&quot;
:&quot;Ne fables, ne paroles pour vos deniers embler&quot;
:&quot;Ains vous dirai canchon où il n&#x27;a hamender&quot;
:&quot;Del barnage de Franche qui tant fait à loer!&quot;
Such claims of truth-telling are part of the poet&#x27;s epic repertory. Hyperbole and epic lists are other major features in this &quot;chanson&quot;: the poet takes care to mention every knightly name that would cause a rustle of recognition among his hearers, in a tradition as old as Homer, with the result that the &quot;Chanson d&#x27;Antioche&quot; was taken as history by heralds and genealogists of a later generation. In some of its details it has won the admiration of modern historians (see links).

Crusade cycles had a wide medieval audience: free translations and versions of the &quot;Chanson d&#x27;Antioche&quot; appeared in Old Occitan, Spanish, English, Dutch, and German.

The &quot;Chanson d&#x27;Antioche&quot; was forgotten, until it was printed and published in 1848 by Alexis Paulin Paris, at the height of the Romantic Gothic Revival. The most recent edition is &quot;The Chanson d&#x27;Antioch: An Old French Account of the French Crusade,&quot; translated by Susan Eddington and Carol Sweetenham. New York: Routledge, 2011.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Susan B. Edgington, &quot;Albert of Aachen and the Chansons de Geste&quot; in &quot;The Crusades and their sources: essays presented to Bernard Hamilton&quot; ed. John France, William G. Zajac (Aldershot: Ashgate, 1998) pp. 23–37.
*Susan B. Edgington, Carol Sweetenham, translators, &quot;The Chanson d&#x27;Antioche: an Old French account of the First Crusade&quot;. Farnham: Ashgate, 2011. .
*Lewis A. M. Sumberg, &quot;La chanson d&#x27;Antioche&quot;, Paris, Picard, 1968.
*&quot;Sont cou ore les fems que jo voi la venir&quot;? Women in the Chanson d&#x27;Antioche. By Susan B. Edgington. In &quot;Gendering the Crusades&quot;. Edgington, Susan, and Lambert, Sarah. Columbia University Press, 2002.
*Siege of Antioch Project. Fordham University Center for Medieval Studies (2021).

==External links==
*Levine, &quot;The Betrayal and Capture of Antioch&quot;, &quot;laisses&quot; ccxxx – cclxv (in English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q651019" start="39" end="55" title="chanson de geste" label="chanson de geste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093702" start="103" end="109" title="laisse" label="laisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179723" start="226" end="245" title="Crusade cycle" label="cycle of epic poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="299" end="312" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="330" end="337" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="345" end="354" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="378" end="392" title="Crusader state" label="Crusader state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179723" start="470" end="483" title="Crusade cycle" label="Crusade cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="707" end="721" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q741098" start="730" end="746" title="siege of Antioch" label="siege of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="1080" end="1099" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1941" end="1946" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779185" start="2296" end="2307" title="Old Occitan" label="Old Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q510072" start="2448" end="2467" title="Alexis Paulin Paris" label="Alexis Paulin Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="2499" end="2513" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280520" wikidata="Q1197804" url="?curid=1280520" title="SASE">
<text>SASE may refer to:

* Society for the Advancement of Socio-Economics, an academic association based in the US, founded in 1989 by Amitai Etzioni. 
* Sarajevo Stock Exchange, in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Secure access service edge, a networking and security technology
* Self-addressed stamped envelope, used for expediting a reply via mail
* Self-amplified spontaneous emission, a process by which a laser beam is created
* Snow and Avalanche Study Establishment, a laboratory of the India Defence Research &amp; Development Organization
* Specific application service element, in the OSI computer networking model

==See also==
* Sase (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1197804" start="0" end="4" title="SASE" label="SASE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22" end="68" title="Society for the Advancement of Socio-Economics" label="Society for the Advancement of Socio-Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q213652" start="130" end="144" title="Amitai Etzioni" label="Amitai Etzioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q47057" start="149" end="172" title="Sarajevo Stock Exchange" label="Sarajevo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800206" start="202" end="228" title="Secure access service edge" label="Secure access service edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q616854" start="269" end="300" title="Self-addressed stamped envelope" label="Self-addressed stamped envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815645" start="341" end="376" title="Self-amplified spontaneous emission" label="Self-amplified spontaneous emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548369" start="423" end="461" title="Snow and Avalanche Study Establishment" label="Snow and Avalanche Study Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q189768" start="539" end="575" title="Specific application service element" label="Specific application service element"/>
<link wikidata="Q55412106" start="630" end="651" title="Sase (disambiguation)" label="Sase (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280521" wikidata="Q5443409" url="?curid=1280521" title="Feng Yun (Go player)">
<text>Feng Yun (; born October 2, 1966) is a professional Go player. She is the second woman after Rui Naiwei to ever attain the level of 9-dan professional.

==Biography==
Feng Yun was born in Chong Qing, China. She started learning Go in Henan province when she was nine years old. She began her professional career in 1979 at the age of 12. In 1982 she was selected for the Chinese National Go Team where she trained for 18 years. In 1997, Feng Yun reached the top rank of professional Go players and ascended to 9-dan professional. She was the second woman in the world ever (after Rui Naiwei) to reach 9 dan. She has lived in New Jersey, U.S., with her family since 2000. The Feng Yun Go School, with four locations in New Jersey, has produced many strong players. Her book, &quot;The Best Play&quot;, analyzes two amateur games played on the internet.

==Professional accomplishments==
*Feng Yun was a finalist in the first four Bohae Cups, winning on the second occasion (1995), but lost to Rui Naiwei on the other three occasions, finishing 2nd in 1994, 1996 and 1997. 
*1979 Promoted a professional Go player of the Henan Provincial Team 
*1982 Promoted to 4 dan professional
*1983 Promoted to 5 dan professional, won her first title: National Women&#x27;s Championship 
*1987 Promoted to 6 dan professional 
*1990 Finished second in National Individual Go Tournament (China)
*1991 Finished second in National Individual Go Tournament (China)
*1992 Promoted to 7 dan professional 
*1995 Promoted to 8 dan professional 
*1997 Advanced to 9 dan professional, one of the only three women 9p in the world 
*1998 Won Kuerle Cup champion
*2002 Founded first 9-dan school in North America, was the in the 2002 North American Masters Tournament
*2004 Won Ing Pro Tournament held at the 20th AGA Go Congress in Rochester, New York
*2008 Won Ing Pro Tournament held at the 24th AGA Go Congress in Portland, Oregon

==External links==
*Feng Yun Go School Official Site
*GoBase.org Information on Feng Yun + her replayable games</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5443409" start="0" end="8" title="Feng Yun (Go player)" label="Feng Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="52" end="54" title="Go (board game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065199" start="55" end="61" title="Go players" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q439481" start="93" end="103" title="Rui Naiwei" label="Rui Naiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361620" start="132" end="137" title="Go ranks and ratings" label="9-dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="188" end="198" title="Chong Qing" label="Chong Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="234" end="239" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q439481" start="580" end="590" title="Rui Naiwei" label="Rui Naiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="625" end="635" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="929" end="938" title="Bohae Cup" label="Bohae Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1671" end="1684" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="1805" end="1824" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1890" end="1906" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280528" wikidata="Q5444291" url="?curid=1280528" title="Feria">
<text>In the liturgy of the Catholic Church, a feria is a day of the week other than Sunday.

In more recent official liturgical texts in English, the term &quot;weekday&quot; is used instead of &quot;feria&quot;.

If the feast day of a saint falls on such a day, the liturgy celebrated may be that of the saint, not that of the &quot;feria&quot; (the weekday liturgy). Accordingly, in actual liturgical practice a feria or ferial day is &quot;a weekday on which no special ecclesiastical feast is to be celebrated&quot;.

== Etymology ==

The &quot;Harvard Dictionary of Music&quot; explains the etymology &quot;feria&quot; as &quot;the reverse of the original meaning of L. &quot;feria&quot;, i.e., festival day. The reversal came about by extending the use of the word from Sunday to the other days, Sunday being named &quot;feria prima&quot;, Monday &quot;feria secunda&quot;, Tuesday &quot;feria tertia&quot;, etc.&quot;

Since in ecclesiastical Latin the names of Sunday and Saturday do not contain the word &quot;feria&quot; and are called respectively &quot;dominica&quot; and &quot;sabbatum&quot;, some use the term &quot;feria&quot; &quot;to denote the days of the week with the exception of Sunday and Saturday&quot;, in spite of the official definition given above and the actual usage in official liturgical books.

The Galician and Portuguese languages uses the same terminology as ecclesiastical Latin for the days of the week, calling the days from Monday to Friday &quot;segunda-feira&quot;, &quot;terça-feira&quot; (literally, &quot;second weekday&quot;, &quot;third weekday&quot;), etc., but calling Saturday &quot;sábado&quot; and Sunday &quot;domingo&quot; (see Numbered days of the week).

== Classification ==

The Roman Rite no longer distinguishes different classes of ferias (weekdays) as in the 1960 Code of Rubrics of Pope John XXIII, but it attributes different positions to them in ranking liturgical days. In the &quot;Table of Liturgical Days according to their order of precedence&quot;, attached to the &quot;Universal Norms on the Liturgical Year and the Calendar&quot;, Ash Wednesday and weekdays of Holy Week from Monday up to and including Thursday are outranked only by the Paschal Triduum, the four solemnities of Christmas, Epiphany, Ascension and Pentecost, and the Sundays of Advent, Lent, and Easter. Weekdays of Advent from 17 December up to and including 24 December and weekdays of Lent rank above memorials. Other liturgical weekdays (ferias) come last in the ranking.

The Code of Rubrics of 1960 introduced a newly invented division of ferias into four classes:
* First-class ferias, outranking all feasts: Ash Wednesday and all the weekdays of Holy Week;
* Second-class ferias, outranking local second-class feasts and, if impeded, requiring to be commemorated: ferias of Advent from 17 December to 23 December, and Ember Days of Advent, Lent and September;
* Third-class ferias: ferias in Lent from Thursday after Ash Wednesday to Saturday before the Second Sunday of the Passion (Palm Sunday) except Ember Days (these outranked third-class feasts), and ferias in Advent up to 16 December except Ember Days (these were outranked by third-class feasts);
* Fourth-class ferias: all other ferias (weekday liturgies).

Before 1960, the Roman Rite knew a simpler distinction between major and minor ferias. The major ferias were those of Advent and Lent, the Ember days, and the Monday of Rogation week. These had to be commemorated even on the highest feasts. All the others were minor ferias (liturgical weekdays). In addition, the major ferias of Ash Wednesday and Holy Week were privileged: these liturgies were to be celebrated no matter what feast happened to occur on those days.

== See also ==
*Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite
*Solemnity
*Memorial
*Ember Days
*Octave
*General Roman Calendar
*Liturgical year
*Calendar of saints
*Commemoration in the Catholic liturgy
*Ordinary Time

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="7" end="14" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="22" end="37" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444291" start="41" end="46" title="Feria" label="feria"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="79" end="85" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="216" end="225" title="Calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="667" end="669" title="Latin" label="L."/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="797" end="803" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q105" start="841" end="847" title="Monday" label="Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q127" start="875" end="882" title="Tuesday" label="Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247932" start="930" end="950" title="ecclesiastical Latin" label="ecclesiastical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131" start="1207" end="1215" title="Saturday" label="Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1327" end="1335" title=" Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1340" end="1359" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1677" end="1702" title="Names of the days of the week#Numbered days of the week" label="Numbered days of the week"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="1732" end="1742" title="Roman Rite" label="Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q968450" start="1821" end="1836" title="Code of Rubrics" label="Code of Rubrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="1840" end="1855" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979926" start="1906" end="1929" title="ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite" label="ranking liturgical days"/>
<link wikidata="Q123542" start="2100" end="2113" title="Ash Wednesday" label="Ash Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="2130" end="2139" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q665944" start="2207" end="2222" title="Paschal Triduum" label="Paschal Triduum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621783" start="2233" end="2244" title="solemnity" label="solemnities"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="2259" end="2267" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q51638" start="2269" end="2278" title="Feast of the Ascension" label="Ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="2283" end="2292" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417046" start="2439" end="2448" title="memorial (liturgy)" label="memorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q525356" start="2793" end="2805" title="Commemoration (liturgy)" label="commemorated"/>
<link wikidata="Q142954" start="2861" end="2871" title="Ember Days" label="Ember Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q879080" start="3430" end="3443" title="Rogation days" label="Rogation week"/>
<link wikidata="Q525356" start="3461" end="3473" title="Commemoration (liturgy)" label="commemorated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979926" start="3745" end="3789" title="Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite" label="Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621783" start="3791" end="3800" title="Solemnity" label="Solemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417046" start="3802" end="3810" title="Memorial (liturgy)" label="Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q142954" start="3812" end="3822" title="Ember Days" label="Ember Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896500" start="3824" end="3830" title="Octave (liturgical)" label="Octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="3832" end="3854" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="3856" end="3871" title="Liturgical year" label="Liturgical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="3873" end="3891" title="Calendar of saints" label="Calendar of saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q525356" start="3893" end="3930" title="Commemoration in the Catholic liturgy" label="Commemoration in the Catholic liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153387" start="3932" end="3945" title="Ordinary Time" label="Ordinary Time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280531" wikidata="Q1100856" url="?curid=1280531" title="Mort &amp; Phil">
<text>Mort &amp; Phil () is a Spanish comic series, published in more than two dozen languages. It appeared for the first time in 1958 in the children&#x27;s comic-book magazine drawn by Francisco Ibáñez. The series features Mort (), the tall, bald master of disguise named after mortadella sausage, and his bossy partner, the shorter, pudgier Phil () Pi, named after fillet. Initially, they were private detectives operating as , but now both serve as secret agents in the T.I.A. (a spoof on CIA), the (Aeroterrestrial Investigation Technicians). is the Spanish word for &quot;aunt&quot;.

The series frequently uses slapstick humour whereby the characters constantly suffer mishaps - such as falls from heights, explosions, and being crushed by heavy objects. Thanks to cartoon physics, the effects rarely last more than one panel.

==Overview==
Mort and Phil are a pair of idiots, and no matter what kind of mission they are assigned they always manage to get it wrong. The results are almost invariably extremely violent, and most often directed towards Phil. At the T.I.A. (Spanish for &quot;aunt&quot;, a parody of the CIA), which combats &quot;enemy organisations&quot; like (&quot;frog&quot;) or (&quot;grandmother&quot;), they interact with their boss, the bad-tempered &quot;Superintendente Vicente&quot;; with &quot;Professor Bacterio&quot;, a black-bearded, disastrous scientist parodying James Bond&#x27;s Q; and with the fat, blonde secretary &quot;Ofelia&quot;, a parody of Moneypenny, whose attempts at seducing Mort or Phil always fail.

Outside Spain, the series is especially popular in Germany as &quot;Clever &amp; Smart&quot;. After the 1980s, the albums have featured current news, like computer sabotage, the AVE, Islamic terrorism, Spanish and European politics, and specials for the Olympic Games and the football World Cup.

Ibáñez liked to introduce whimsies unrelated to the action, especially in front covers. Examples have included a water tap sprouting from a tree, two mice chatting, and a vase containing a foot or an eggplant. In the final page of the album (1993), featured a New York scene with an aeroplane crashing into the World Trade Center. This attracted attention after the 9/11 attacks of 2001.

Prior to his death in 2023, Ibáñez would issue several albums a year. One animated series and some animated films were also produced. There are two live-action movies based on the series, one of them made in 2003 in Spain titled (&quot;Mort &amp; Phil: The Big Adventure&quot;). A second movie was released in 2008, (&quot;Mort &amp; Phil. Mission: Save Earth&quot;), marking the 50th anniversary of the series.

== Characters ==

===Mort (Mortadelo)=== 
Mort is a bald detective with pebble glasses and a long nose who usually wears a black frock coat. He is always fighting with Phil, his partner and boss, mostly because he tends to mess things up, usually to Phil&#x27;s discomfort: his profound lack of skills to make his disguises believable and common sense have often made him a danger to everyone around him. His favourite hobby is wearing all sorts of (sometimes outrageous) disguises - professional and historical clothes and gear, animals, inanimate objects, even small-sized vehicles like miniature blimps and mopeds - which he mostly dons for special tasks or when he is on the run from Phil or his boss, and which all include his signature collar which obscures part of his mouth. He holds a grudge against Bacterio because he used to have lush hair until Bacterio offered him a supposed medicine against baldness, which actually made his hair fall out. His real name, &quot;Mortadelo&quot;, comes from , a kind of sausage.

===Phil Pi ()/===
Mort&#x27;s partner and boss. He only has two hairs on his head and wears a white shirt with a black bowtie and red trousers. He usually insults Mort because Mort is quite clumsy, but is often at the receiving end of any mishaps which come their way, mostly in the shape of their outraged boss. Mortadelo habitually addresses him as (Spanish for &quot;chief&quot; or &quot;boss&quot;). He&#x27;s also incredibly accident-prone, capable of being injured in comical and painful ways.

As the leader of the two-man team, Phil is an educated man and an expert in a variety of fields. In the movies, however, Filemón is shown to be just as ditzy as Mortadelo (especially in the animated movie &quot;Mortadelo and Filemon: Mission Implausible&quot;).

===Vicente / ===
Called for short or just , Vicente is Mort and Phil&#x27;s boss. While he, as the head of the organisation, lives in splendour, indulging himself in expensive beverages and Cuban cigars, he keeps the T.I.A.&#x27;s operatives on an extremely tight budget. Vicente is bald and has a dense moustache, which makes him the object of mocking abuse by his underlings as a human walrus. He is very short-tempered and usually gets angry with Mort and Phil because they fail in their missions, making a mess of everything - occasionally at the expense of his own possessions. Just as often, however, he ends up as the one being chased by his underlings, as his frequently short-sighted assignments, and his habitual failure to properly introduce them, cause them no end of grief.

===Professor Bacterio===
The T.I.A.&#x27;s black-bearded scientist and chief inventor. Mort blames him for his baldness (he had tried a new hair-strengthening concoction on Mort&#x27;s then-lush mane, which made the hair fall out instead) and therefore the doctor is the unwilling prime recipient of Mort&#x27;s practical jokes and revenge acts. His inventions, which are intended to assist Mort and Phil in their assignments, often fail quite spectacularly, mostly because they either achieve the opposite of what they are supposed to do, or work perfectly but fail at the most inconvenient moment. His name comes from bacteria.

===Ofelia===
The fat and vain secretary of Superintendente Vicente. She is still single and would like to become involved with someone (usually with Mort), but so far her attempts have been in vain. She is quite touchy about her lack of luck with a relationship and being called fat; she reacts with corresponding violence when either of topics are brought up; and with her considerable weight, this is nothing to be ignored. She was the first female character created for the series.

===Irma=== 
The bombshell secretary of El Súper. Both Mort and Phil have a huge crush on her (much to Ofelia&#x27;s chagrin), but she is not interested. This character disappeared from the series after only 24 volumes.

===F. Ibañez===
The creator of the series himself has a number of cameo appearances, either by name or in cartoon form. Mostly he is portrayed as the bald and bespectacled &quot;Artist of the Nation&quot;, in perhaps the same league as Pablo Picasso. On several occasions, the series&#x27; characters often long to be &quot;as rich as Ibáñez&quot;.

===Rompetechos===
Rompetechos is a small man in a black suit, with an oversized head, receding black hair and a small moustache. He is always put in as a comic relief character; his short-sightedness causes him to react in ways which causes some inconvenience to Mort and Phil if they happen to cross his path. He has his own comic series (little known outside Spain) and makes cameo appearances in Ibañez&#x27;s other works.

===The Minister===
Vicente&#x27;s boss (and the only person who he ever shows deference to). His appearance changes constantly throughout the series. In recent appearances has been replaced by a caricature of the President of the Government of Spain at the time.

===Señora Superintendente===
The wife of Vicente (also with an ever-changing face). She is in charge of their household.

===Bestiájez=== 
The giant agent of the T.I.A. He usually has to hunt down Mort and Phil because they do not want to do their missions. A rather minor character, his face has changed many times in the past. Many other agents appear, most of them having descriptive surnames ending in &quot;-ez&quot; (&quot;Bestiájez&quot; comes from &quot;bestia&quot;, beast/brute).

===Tete Cohete===
Tete Cohete (lit. &quot;Tete Rocket&quot;) is a preteen boy who is an enthusiastic amateur mechanic and inventor. He habitually tinkers with mechanical devices, turning many of them into rocket-powered (hence his name) or hazardous contraptions, and because he neglects to warn other people about his modifications, often causes a lot of grief to any adults in his vicinity.

Tete Cohete was the main protagonist for another Ibáñez comic series which ran from 1981 to 1986. He makes infrequent cameos in other Ibáñez titles, particularly &quot;Mortadelo y Filemón&quot; and &quot;El botones Sacarino&quot;.

===Parody characters===
There are also parodies of numerous celebrities and political personalities such as Ronald Reagan, José María Aznar or (in three albums in 2017) Donald Trump.

==Albums==
In order of publication:

===Between 1969 and 1971===

*El sulfato atómico
*Contra el &quot;gang&quot; del Chicharrón
*Safari callejero
*Valor y... ¡al toro!
*El caso del bacalao
*Chapeau el &quot;esmirriau&quot;
*La máquina del cambiazo
*La caja de los diez cerrojos
*¡Magín &quot;el mago&quot;!
*¡A la caza del cuadro!
===Between 1972 and 1974===

*Los inventos del profesor Bacterio
*Gatolandia 76
*Operación: ¡Bomba!
*Los diamantes de la gran duquesa
*El otro &quot;yo&quot; del profesor Bacterio
*Los monstruos
*El elixir de la vida
*El circo
*El antídoto
*Los invasores
*Los cacharros majaretas
*¡A las armas!
*El plano de Alí-Gusa-No
===Between 1975 and 1976===

*¡Pánico en el zoo!
*Concurso-oposición
*Los mercenarios
*Misión de perros
*Los secuestradores
*La gallina de los huevos de oro
*El caso del calcetín
===Between 1977 and 1979===

*El brujo
*¡Soborno!
*Los guardaespaldas
*Mundial 78
*Los gamberros
*Contrabando
*La máquina de copiar gente
*Los &quot;bomberos&quot;
*El transformador metabólico
*¡A por el niño!
*La gente de Vicente
*Secuestro aéreo
===Between 1980 and 1981===

*Olimpiada 1980
*La elasticina
*Kilociclos asesinos
*Ladrones de coches
*Lo que el viento se dejó
*La brigada bichera
*Tete Cohete
*En marcha el mundial 82
*El caso de los señores pequeñitos
===Between 1982 and 1983===

*En Alemania
*Queda inaugurado el mundial 82
*El balón catastrófico
*Billy &quot;El Horrendo&quot;
*¡Hay un traidor en la T.I.A.!
*El bacilón
*El ascenso
===Between 1984 and 1985===

*La estatua de la libertad
*Testigo de cargo
*Los Ángeles 84
*El cacao espacial
*El preboste de seguridad
*El cochecito leré
===Between 1986 and 1987===

*¡Terroristas!
*El huerto siniestro
*El estropicio metereológico
*Los que volvieron de &quot;allá&quot;
*Seúl 88
===Between 1988 and 1989===

*La perra de las galaxias
*Los sobrinetes
*Los superpoderes
*Las tacillas volantes
*La cochinadita nuclear
*Armas con bicho
*La maldición gitana
*El candidato
*La Gomeztroika
*El ansia de poder
*¡...Va la T.I.A. y se pone al día!
===Between 1990 and 1992===

*El profeta Jeremías
*El premio No-Vel
*El rescate botarate
*El gran sarao
*Los espantajomanes
*El inspector general
*El atasco de incluencias
*La crisis del golfo
*Barcelona 92
*El caso del señor-probeta
*La tergiversicina
*Las embajadas chifladas
*El racista
*El quinto centenario
*El S.O.E.
*El 35 aniversario
===Between 1993 and 1994===

*El señor todoquisque
*Maastricht ¡...Jesús!
*El nuevo &quot;cate&quot;
*Robots bestiajos
*Clínicas antibirria
*Dinosaurios
*La ruta del yerbajo
*Mundial 94
*El pinchazo telefónico
*¡Pesadillaaa...!
*Corrupción a mogollón
===Between 1995 and 1996===

*¡Timazo al canto!
*Animalada
*20.000 leguas de viaje sibilino
*¡Silencio, se rueda!
*El disfraz, cosa falaz...
*La prensa cardiovascular
*El jurado popular
*El ángel de la guarda
*Atlanta 96
*100 años de cómic
*Expediente J
*El trastomóvil
===Between 1997 and 1998===

*¡Desastre!
*Bye bye, Hong-Kong!
*Esos kilitos malditos
*Los verdes
*Las vacas chaladas
*Mundial 98
*La banda de los guiris
*Su vida privada
*¡Deportes de espanto!
*El espeluznante doctor Bíchez
===Between 1999 and 2000===

*El óscar del moro
*La maldita maquinita
*El tirano
*La M.I.E.R.
*Impeachment!
*De los ochenta p´arriba...
*Siglo XX, ¡qué progreso!
*Sydney 2000
*La vuelta
*La sirenita
*Fórmula uno
===Between 2001 and 2003===

*La rehabilitación esa
*Los vikingos
*¡Llegó el euro!
*El ordenador... ¡qué horror!
*¡Okupas!
*Mundial 2002
*¡Misión triunfo!
*¡El estrellato!
*¡Mascotas!
*Parque de atracciones
*El UVA (Ultraloca Velocidad Automotora)
===Between 2004 and 2008===

*¡Rapto tremendo!
*Atenas 2004
*El señor de los ladrillos
*Mortadelo de la Mancha
*Prohibido fumar
*¡El carnet al punto!
*El kamikaze Regúlez
*Mundial 2006
*¡Bajo el bramido del trueno!
*El dopaje...¡qué potaje!
*Euro Basket 2007
*¡...Y van 50 tacos!
*¡Venganza cincuentona!
*¡El dos de mayo!
*Pekín 2008
*Gasolina... ¡la ruina!
===Between 2009 and 2017===

*¡En la Luna!
*¡Por Isis, llegó la crisis!
*Nuestro antepasado, El Mico
*La gripe &quot;U&quot;
*Mundial 2010
*Marrullería en la Alcaldía
*Chernobil... ¡Qué cuchitril!
*¡A reciclar se ha dicho!
*Jubilación... ¡a los noventa!
*La bombilla... ¡chao, chiquilla!
*Londres 2012
*¡Espías!
*El coche eléctrico
*¡Brommm!
*La litrona...¡vaya mona!
*Mundial 2014
*¡Tijeretazo!
*Contra Jimmy el Cachondo
*El Tesorero
*¡Elecciones!
*Río 2016
*¡El capo se escapa!
*Sueldecitos más bien bajitos
*Drones Matones
*¡Miseria, La Bacteria!
*El 60 Aniversario
===Between 2018 and 2020===

*Mundial 2018
*Por el Olimpo ese
*Urgencias del Hospital... ¡Fatal!
*Da Vinci, el Pintamona... Lisa
*Mundial de Baloncesto 2019
*¡Felices Fiestaaas!
*Tokio 2020
*Misterio en el Hipermercado
==Animated series==

There was an animated series in 1994 titled &quot;Mortadelo y Filemón&quot; with Spanish voice actors. It also had an English dub that only released in the United Kingdom.

==Film adaptations==
Between 1965 and 1970, Rafael Vara directed 16 short animated films which were united in two films (&quot;Festival de Mortadelo y Filemón&quot; and &quot;Segundo festival de Mortadelo y Filemón&quot;). In 1970, he made a proper feature film, &quot;El armario del tiempo&quot;.

There are two live action films based on the comic: &quot;Mortadelo &amp; Filemon: The Big Adventure&quot; by Javier Fesser (2003) and &quot;Mort &amp; Phil. Mission: Save Earth&quot; by Miguel Bardem (2008).

Javier Fesser directed the 3D animated film &quot;Mortadelo and Filemon: Mission Implausible&quot; (2014).

==Video game adaptation==
A video game based on &quot;Mort &amp; Phil&quot;, entitled &quot;El sulfato atómico&quot;, was developed by the Spanish company Alcachofa Soft, creator of &quot;&quot;. It sold above 40,000 units. According to its lead designer, it was developed on a small budget.

==In other languages==
*Afrikaans: &quot;Rommel en Drommel&quot;
*Arabic: &quot;شاطر و ماكر&quot; (&quot;Smart and Cunning&quot;)
*Catalan: &quot;Mortadel·lo i Filemó&quot;
*Chinese: &quot;特工二人组&quot;
*Czech: &quot;Clever &amp; Smart&quot;
*Danish: &quot;Flip og Flop&quot;
*Dutch: &quot;Paling en Ko&quot;
*French: &quot;Mortadel et Filémon&quot; (formerly also &quot;Futt et Fil&quot;)
* Galician: &quot;Mortadelo e Filemón&quot;
*German: &quot;Clever &amp; Smart&quot; (formerly also &quot;Flip &amp; Flap&quot;)
*Greek: &quot;Αντιρίξ και Συμφωνίξ&quot; (Antirix kai Symfonix; Antirix &quot;He who disagrees&quot;, Symfonix &quot;He who agrees&quot;)
*Hungarian: &quot;Mortadelo és Filemón&quot;
*Italian: &quot;Mortadello e Polpetta&quot;
*Japanese: &quot;モートとフィル&quot;
*Norwegian: &quot;Flipp og Flopp&quot; (earliest pocket editions), &quot;Clever &amp; Smart&quot;
*Polish: &quot;Mortadelo i Filemon&quot;
*Portuguese: &quot;Mortadelo e Salaminho&quot; (Brazil), &quot;Mortadela e Salamão&quot; (Portugal)
*Romanian: &quot;Mortadelo și Filemon&quot;
*Russian: &quot;Морт и Фил (Мортадело и Филемон)&quot; (Mort i Fil (Mortadelo i Filemon))
*Slovak: &quot;Clever &amp; Smart&quot;
*Slovene: &quot;Mortadelc pa File&quot;
*Swedish: &quot;Flink &amp; Fummel&quot;
*Turkish: &quot;Dörtgöz ile Dazlak&quot;
*Finnish: &quot;Älli ja Tälli&quot; (earlier &quot;Nopsa ja Näpsä&quot;)
*Serbo-Croatian: &quot;Zriki Švargla i Šule Globus&quot;

==See also==
*Spanish comics
*&quot;Spy vs. Spy&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2882235" start="24" end="37" title="Spanish comics" label="Spanish comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q981460" start="181" end="197" title="Francisco Ibáñez Talavera" label="Francisco Ibáñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q169757" start="274" end="284" title="mortadella" label="mortadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q289005" start="362" end="368" title="Fillet (cut)" label="fillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="399" end="408" title="detective" label="detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="447" end="459" title="secret agent" label="secret agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="487" end="490" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="612" end="621" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108221" start="766" end="781" title="cartoon physics" label="cartoon physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="1119" end="1122" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q287297" start="1413" end="1414" title="Q (James Bond)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q211414" start="1483" end="1493" title="Moneypenny" label="Moneypenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q433671" start="1727" end="1730" title="AVE" label="AVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q847731" start="1732" end="1749" title="Islamic terrorism" label="Islamic terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q855336" start="1751" end="1758" title="Spanish politics" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192040" start="1763" end="1780" title="European politics" label="European politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="1803" end="1816" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="1834" end="1843" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="2157" end="2175" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="2212" end="2224" title="9/11 attacks" label="9/11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062856" start="2620" end="2631" title="anniversary" label="anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q386621" start="2777" end="2787" title="frock coat" label="frock coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324545" start="3247" end="3252" title="non-rigid airship" label="blimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q201783" start="3258" end="3263" title="moped" label="moped"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4387" end="4429" title="Mortadelo and Filemon: Mission Implausible" label="Mortadelo and Filemon: Mission Implausible"/>
<link wikidata="Q108471343" start="4629" end="4640" title="Cuban cigar" label="Cuban cigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="4827" end="4833" title="walrus" label="walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="5847" end="5855" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="6630" end="6646" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="6800" end="6813" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889786" start="6932" end="6943" title="Rompetechos" label="Rompetechos"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="7554" end="7590" title="President of the Government of Spain" label="President of the Government of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q259614" start="8017" end="8020" title="Spanish names" label="-ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143585" start="8114" end="8125" title="Tete Cohete" label="Tete Cohete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440160" start="8694" end="8713" title="El botones Sacarino" label="El botones Sacarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="8830" end="8843" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637" start="8845" end="8861" title="José María Aznar" label="José María Aznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="8891" end="8903" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729233" start="8973" end="8991" title="El sulfato atómico" label="El sulfato atómico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8993" end="9034" title="Contra el &amp;quot;gang&amp;quot; del Chicharrón" label="Contra el &amp;quot;gang&amp;quot; del Chicharrón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9036" end="9052" title="Safari callejero" label="Safari callejero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9054" end="9074" title="Valor y... ¡al toro!" label="Valor y... ¡al toro!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9076" end="9095" title="El caso del bacalao" label="El caso del bacalao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9097" end="9129" title="Chapeau el &amp;quot;esmirriau&amp;quot;" label="Chapeau el &amp;quot;esmirriau&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9131" end="9154" title="La máquina del cambiazo" label="La máquina del cambiazo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9156" end="9184" title="La caja de los diez cerrojos" label="La caja de los diez cerrojos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9186" end="9213" title="¡Magín &amp;quot;el mago&amp;quot;!" label="¡Magín &amp;quot;el mago&amp;quot;!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9215" end="9237" title="¡A la caza del cuadro!" label="¡A la caza del cuadro!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9268" end="9302" title="Los inventos del profesor Bacterio" label="Los inventos del profesor Bacterio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9304" end="9317" title="Gatolandia 76" label="Gatolandia 76"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9319" end="9337" title="Operación: ¡Bomba!" label="Operación: ¡Bomba!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3728198" start="9339" end="9371" title="Los diamantes de la gran duquesa" label="Los diamantes de la gran duquesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727139" start="9373" end="9417" title="El otro &amp;quot;yo&amp;quot; del profesor Bacterio" label="El otro &amp;quot;yo&amp;quot; del profesor Bacterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727206" start="9419" end="9432" title="Los monstruos" label="Los monstruos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9434" end="9454" title="El elixir de la vida" label="El elixir de la vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457616" start="9456" end="9464" title="El circo (Mort &amp;amp; Phil comic)" label="El circo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9466" end="9477" title="El antídoto" label="El antídoto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9479" end="9492" title="Los invasores" label="Los invasores"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9494" end="9517" title="Los cacharros majaretas" label="Los cacharros majaretas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3728308" start="9519" end="9532" title="¡A las armas!" label="¡A las armas!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752714" start="9534" end="9557" title="El plano de Alí-Gusa-No" label="El plano de Alí-Gusa-No"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726587" start="9588" end="9606" title="¡Pánico en el zoo!" label="¡Pánico en el zoo!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9608" end="9626" title="Concurso-oposición" label="Concurso-oposición"/>
<link wikidata="Q3728192" start="9628" end="9643" title="Los mercenarios (Mort &amp;amp; Phil)" label="Los mercenarios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9645" end="9661" title="Misión de perros" label="Misión de perros"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9663" end="9681" title="Los secuestradores" label="Los secuestradores"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9683" end="9714" title="La gallina de los huevos de oro" label="La gallina de los huevos de oro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9716" end="9736" title="El caso del calcetín" label="El caso del calcetín"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730064" start="9767" end="9775" title="El brujo" label="El brujo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729947" start="9777" end="9786" title="¡Soborno!" label="¡Soborno!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9788" end="9806" title="Los guardaespaldas" label="Los guardaespaldas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9808" end="9818" title="Mundial 78" label="Mundial 78"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9820" end="9833" title="Los gamberros (Mort &amp;amp; Phil)" label="Los gamberros"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9835" end="9846" title="Contrabando (Mort &amp;amp; Phil)" label="Contrabando"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9848" end="9874" title="La máquina de copiar gente" label="La máquina de copiar gente"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9876" end="9900" title="Los &amp;quot;bomberos&amp;quot;" label="Los &amp;quot;bomberos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9902" end="9929" title="El transformador metabólico" label="El transformador metabólico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9931" end="9946" title="¡A por el niño!" label="¡A por el niño!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9948" end="9967" title="La gente de Vicente" label="La gente de Vicente"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9969" end="9984" title="Secuestro aéreo" label="Secuestro aéreo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10015" end="10029" title="Olimpiada 1980" label="Olimpiada 1980"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10031" end="10044" title="La elasticina" label="La elasticina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10046" end="10065" title="Kilociclos asesinos" label="Kilociclos asesinos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10067" end="10085" title="Ladrones de coches" label="Ladrones de coches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10087" end="10111" title="Lo que el viento se dejó" label="Lo que el viento se dejó"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10113" end="10131" title="La brigada bichera" label="La brigada bichera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10133" end="10144" title="Tete Cohete (comic)" label="Tete Cohete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10146" end="10169" title="En marcha el mundial 82" label="En marcha el mundial 82"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10171" end="10204" title="El caso de los señores pequeñitos" label="El caso de los señores pequeñitos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10235" end="10246" title="En Alemania" label="En Alemania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10248" end="10278" title="Queda inaugurado el mundial 82" label="Queda inaugurado el mundial 82"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681357" start="10280" end="10301" title="El balón catastrófico" label="El balón catastrófico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10303" end="10332" title="Billy &amp;quot;El Horrendo&amp;quot;" label="Billy &amp;quot;El Horrendo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682359" start="10334" end="10363" title="¡Hay un traidor en la T.I.A.!" label="¡Hay un traidor en la T.I.A.!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10365" end="10375" title="El bacilón" label="El bacilón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10377" end="10387" title="El ascenso" label="El ascenso"/>
<link wikidata="Q11687862" start="10418" end="10443" title="La estatua de la libertad" label="La estatua de la libertad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10445" end="10461" title="Testigo de cargo" label="Testigo de cargo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10463" end="10477" title="Los Ángeles 84" label="Los Ángeles 84"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10479" end="10496" title="El cacao espacial" label="El cacao espacial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10498" end="10522" title="El preboste de seguridad" label="El preboste de seguridad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10524" end="10541" title="El cochecito leré" label="El cochecito leré"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10572" end="10585" title="¡Terroristas!" label="¡Terroristas!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10587" end="10606" title="El huerto siniestro" label="El huerto siniestro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10608" end="10635" title="El estropicio metereológico" label="El estropicio metereológico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10637" end="10674" title="Los que volvieron de &amp;quot;allá&amp;quot;" label="Los que volvieron de &amp;quot;allá&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10676" end="10683" title="Seúl 88" label="Seúl 88"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10714" end="10738" title="La perra de las galaxias" label="La perra de las galaxias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10740" end="10754" title="Los sobrinetes" label="Los sobrinetes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10756" end="10772" title="Los superpoderes" label="Los superpoderes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10774" end="10795" title="Las tacillas volantes" label="Las tacillas volantes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10797" end="10819" title="La cochinadita nuclear" label="La cochinadita nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10821" end="10836" title="Armas con bicho" label="Armas con bicho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10838" end="10857" title="La maldición gitana" label="La maldición gitana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10859" end="10871" title="El candidato (comics)" label="El candidato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10873" end="10887" title="La Gomeztroika" label="La Gomeztroika"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10889" end="10906" title="El ansia de poder" label="El ansia de poder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10908" end="10942" title="¡...Va la T.I.A. y se pone al día!" label="¡...Va la T.I.A. y se pone al día!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10973" end="10992" title="El profeta Jeremías" label="El profeta Jeremías"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10994" end="11010" title="El premio No-Vel" label="El premio No-Vel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11012" end="11031" title="El rescate botarate" label="El rescate botarate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11033" end="11046" title="El gran sarao" label="El gran sarao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11048" end="11066" title="Los espantajomanes" label="Los espantajomanes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11068" end="11088" title="El inspector general" label="El inspector general"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11090" end="11114" title="El atasco de incluencias" label="El atasco de incluencias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11116" end="11135" title="La crisis del golfo" label="La crisis del golfo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11137" end="11149" title="Barcelona 92 (comic)" label="Barcelona 92"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11151" end="11176" title="El caso del señor-probeta" label="El caso del señor-probeta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11178" end="11195" title="La tergiversicina" label="La tergiversicina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11197" end="11220" title="Las embajadas chifladas" label="Las embajadas chifladas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11222" end="11232" title="El racista" label="El racista"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11234" end="11254" title="El quinto centenario" label="El quinto centenario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11256" end="11265" title="El S.O.E." label="El S.O.E."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11267" end="11284" title="El 35 aniversario" label="El 35 aniversario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11315" end="11335" title="El señor todoquisque" label="El señor todoquisque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11337" end="11358" title="Maastricht ¡...Jesús!" label="Maastricht ¡...Jesús!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11360" end="11385" title="El nuevo &amp;quot;cate&amp;quot;" label="El nuevo &amp;quot;cate&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11387" end="11403" title="Robots bestiajos" label="Robots bestiajos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11405" end="11424" title="Clínicas antibirria" label="Clínicas antibirria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11426" end="11437" title="Dinosaurios" label="Dinosaurios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11439" end="11458" title="La ruta del yerbajo" label="La ruta del yerbajo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11460" end="11470" title="Mundial 94" label="Mundial 94"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11472" end="11494" title="El pinchazo telefónico" label="El pinchazo telefónico"/>
<link wikidata="Q800027" start="11496" end="11512" title="¡Pesadillaaa...!" label="¡Pesadillaaa...!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11514" end="11535" title="Corrupción a mogollón" label="Corrupción a mogollón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11566" end="11583" title="¡Timazo al canto!" label="¡Timazo al canto!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11585" end="11594" title="Animalada (comic)" label="Animalada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11596" end="11627" title="20.000 leguas de viaje sibilino" label="20.000 leguas de viaje sibilino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11629" end="11649" title="¡Silencio, se rueda!" label="¡Silencio, se rueda!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11651" end="11676" title="El disfraz, cosa falaz..." label="El disfraz, cosa falaz..."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11678" end="11702" title="La prensa cardiovascular" label="La prensa cardiovascular"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11704" end="11721" title="El jurado popular" label="El jurado popular"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11723" end="11744" title="El ángel de la guarda" label="El ángel de la guarda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11746" end="11756" title="Atlanta 96 (comic)" label="Atlanta 96"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11758" end="11775" title="100 años de cómic" label="100 años de cómic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11777" end="11789" title="Expediente J" label="Expediente J"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11791" end="11805" title="El trastomóvil" label="El trastomóvil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11836" end="11846" title="¡Desastre!" label="¡Desastre!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11848" end="11867" title="Bye bye, Hong-Kong!" label="Bye bye, Hong-Kong!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11869" end="11890" title="Esos kilitos malditos" label="Esos kilitos malditos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11892" end="11902" title="Los verdes" label="Los verdes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11904" end="11922" title="Las vacas chaladas" label="Las vacas chaladas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11924" end="11934" title="Mundial 98" label="Mundial 98"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11936" end="11958" title="La banda de los guiris" label="La banda de los guiris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11960" end="11975" title="Su vida privada" label="Su vida privada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11977" end="11998" title="¡Deportes de espanto!" label="¡Deportes de espanto!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12000" end="12029" title="El espeluznante doctor Bíchez" label="El espeluznante doctor Bíchez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12060" end="12077" title="El óscar del moro" label="El óscar del moro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12079" end="12099" title="La maldita maquinita" label="La maldita maquinita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12101" end="12110" title="El tirano" label="El tirano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12112" end="12123" title="La M.I.E.R." label="La M.I.E.R."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12125" end="12137" title="Impeachment!" label="Impeachment!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12139" end="12165" title="De los ochenta p´arriba..." label="De los ochenta p´arriba..."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12167" end="12191" title="Siglo XX, ¡qué progreso!" label="Siglo XX, ¡qué progreso!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12193" end="12204" title="Sydney 2000 (comic)" label="Sydney 2000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12206" end="12215" title="La vuelta (comics)" label="La vuelta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12217" end="12228" title="La sirenita" label="La sirenita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12230" end="12241" title="Fórmula uno" label="Fórmula uno"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12272" end="12293" title="La rehabilitación esa" label="La rehabilitación esa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12295" end="12307" title="Los vikingos" label="Los vikingos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12309" end="12324" title="¡Llegó el euro!" label="¡Llegó el euro!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12326" end="12354" title="El ordenador... ¡qué horror!" label="El ordenador... ¡qué horror!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12356" end="12364" title="¡Okupas!" label="¡Okupas!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12366" end="12378" title="Mundial 2002" label="Mundial 2002"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12380" end="12396" title="¡Misión triunfo!" label="¡Misión triunfo!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12398" end="12413" title="¡El estrellato!" label="¡El estrellato!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12415" end="12425" title="¡Mascotas!" label="¡Mascotas!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12427" end="12448" title="Parque de atracciones" label="Parque de atracciones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12450" end="12489" title="El UVA (Ultraloca Velocidad Automotora)" label="El UVA (Ultraloca Velocidad Automotora)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12520" end="12536" title="¡Rapto tremendo!" label="¡Rapto tremendo!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12538" end="12549" title="Atenas 2004" label="Atenas 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12551" end="12576" title="El señor de los ladrillos" label="El señor de los ladrillos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12578" end="12600" title="Mortadelo de la Mancha" label="Mortadelo de la Mancha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12602" end="12617" title="Prohibido fumar" label="Prohibido fumar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12619" end="12639" title="¡El carnet al punto!" label="¡El carnet al punto!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12641" end="12660" title="El kamikaze Regúlez" label="El kamikaze Regúlez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12662" end="12674" title="Mundial 2006" label="Mundial 2006"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12676" end="12704" title="¡Bajo el bramido del trueno!" label="¡Bajo el bramido del trueno!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12706" end="12730" title="El dopaje...¡qué potaje!" label="El dopaje...¡qué potaje!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12732" end="12748" title="Euro Basket 2007" label="Euro Basket 2007"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12750" end="12769" title="¡...Y van 50 tacos!" label="¡...Y van 50 tacos!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12771" end="12793" title="¡Venganza cincuentona!" label="¡Venganza cincuentona!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12795" end="12811" title="¡El dos de mayo!" label="¡El dos de mayo!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12813" end="12823" title="Pekín 2008" label="Pekín 2008"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12825" end="12847" title="Gasolina... ¡la ruina!" label="Gasolina... ¡la ruina!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12878" end="12890" title="¡En la Luna!" label="¡En la Luna!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12892" end="12919" title="¡Por Isis, llegó la crisis!" label="¡Por Isis, llegó la crisis!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12921" end="12948" title="Nuestro antepasado, El Mico" label="Nuestro antepasado, El Mico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12950" end="12972" title="La gripe &amp;quot;U&amp;quot;" label="La gripe &amp;quot;U&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12974" end="12986" title="Mundial 2010" label="Mundial 2010"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12988" end="13014" title="Marrullería en la Alcaldía" label="Marrullería en la Alcaldía"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765813" start="13016" end="13044" title="Chernobil... ¡Qué cuchitril!" label="Chernobil... ¡Qué cuchitril!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13046" end="13070" title="¡A reciclar se ha dicho!" label="¡A reciclar se ha dicho!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13072" end="13101" title="Jubilación... ¡a los noventa!" label="Jubilación... ¡a los noventa!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13103" end="13135" title="La bombilla... ¡chao, chiquilla!" label="La bombilla... ¡chao, chiquilla!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13137" end="13149" title="Londres 2012" label="Londres 2012"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13151" end="13159" title="¡Espías!" label="¡Espías!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13161" end="13179" title="El coche eléctrico" label="El coche eléctrico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13181" end="13189" title="¡Brommm!" label="¡Brommm!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13191" end="13215" title="La litrona...¡vaya mona!" label="La litrona...¡vaya mona!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13217" end="13229" title="Mundial 2014" label="Mundial 2014"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13231" end="13243" title="¡Tijeretazo!" label="¡Tijeretazo!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13245" end="13269" title="Contra Jimmy el Cachondo" label="Contra Jimmy el Cachondo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13271" end="13282" title="El Tesorero" label="El Tesorero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13284" end="13296" title="¡Elecciones!" label="¡Elecciones!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13298" end="13306" title="Río 2016" label="Río 2016"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13308" end="13327" title="¡El capo se escapa!" label="¡El capo se escapa!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13329" end="13357" title="Sueldecitos más bien bajitos" label="Sueldecitos más bien bajitos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13359" end="13373" title="Drones Matones" label="Drones Matones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13375" end="13397" title="¡Miseria, La Bacteria!" label="¡Miseria, La Bacteria!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13399" end="13416" title="El 60 Aniversario" label="El 60 Aniversario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13447" end="13459" title="Mundial 2018" label="Mundial 2018"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13461" end="13478" title="Por el Olimpo ese" label="Por el Olimpo ese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13480" end="13513" title="Urgencias del Hospital... ¡Fatal!" label="Urgencias del Hospital... ¡Fatal!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13515" end="13545" title="Da Vinci, el Pintamona... Lisa" label="Da Vinci, el Pintamona... Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13547" end="13573" title="Mundial de Baloncesto 2019" label="Mundial de Baloncesto 2019"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13575" end="13594" title="¡Felices Fiestaaas!" label="¡Felices Fiestaaas!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13596" end="13606" title="Tokio 2020" label="Tokio 2020"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13608" end="13635" title="Misterio en el Hipermercado" label="Misterio en el Hipermercado"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13707" end="13726" title="Mort &amp;amp; Phil (TV series)" label="Mortadelo y Filemón"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="13813" end="13827" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13957" end="13988" title=":es:Festival de Mortadelo y Filemón" label="Festival de Mortadelo y Filemón"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14005" end="14044" title=":es:Segundo festival de Mortadelo y Filemón" label="Segundo festival de Mortadelo y Filemón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14099" end="14120" title="El armario del tiempo" label="El armario del tiempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="14143" end="14154" title="live action" label="live action"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14187" end="14229" title="Mortadelo &amp;amp; Filemon: The Big Adventure" label="Mortadelo &amp;amp; Filemon: The Big Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q944572" start="14239" end="14252" title="Javier Fesser" label="Javier Fesser"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14270" end="14306" title="Mort &amp;amp; Phil. Mission: Save Earth" label="Mort &amp;amp; Phil. Mission: Save Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q944572" start="14339" end="14352" title="Javier Fesser" label="Javier Fesser"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14389" end="14431" title="Mortadelo and Filemon: Mission Implausible" label="Mortadelo and Filemon: Mission Implausible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663878" start="14602" end="14616" title="Alcachofa Soft" label="Alcachofa Soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="14764" end="14773" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="14806" end="14812" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="14871" end="14878" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="14914" end="14921" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="14942" end="14947" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="14981" end="14987" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="15015" end="15020" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="15048" end="15054" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="15130" end="15138" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="15173" end="15179" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="15257" end="15262" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="15395" end="15404" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="15440" end="15447" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="15484" end="15492" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="15515" end="15524" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="15613" end="15619" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="15654" end="15664" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="15754" end="15762" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="15798" end="15805" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="15888" end="15894" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="15928" end="15935" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="15968" end="15975" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="16009" end="16016" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="16050" end="16057" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="16123" end="16137" title="Serbo-Croatian language" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882235" start="16194" end="16208" title="Spanish comics" label="Spanish comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500596" start="16216" end="16227" title="Spy vs. Spy" label="Spy vs. Spy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280534" wikidata="Q1211101" url="?curid=1280534" title="The Innocents Abroad">
<text>The Innocents Abroad, or The New Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress is a travel book by American author Mark Twain. Published in 1869, it humorously chronicles what Twain called his &quot;Great Pleasure Excursion&quot; on board the chartered steamship &quot;Quaker City&quot; (formerly ) through Europe and the Holy Land with a group of American travelers in 1867. The five-month voyage included numerous side trips on land.

The book, which sometimes appears with the subtitle &quot;The New Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;, became the best-selling of Twain&#x27;s works during his lifetime, as well as one of the best-selling travel books of all time.

== Publication History ==
Mark Twain&#x27;s journey aboard the &quot;Quaker City&quot; was funded by the &quot;Alta California&quot; newspaper in exchange for fifty articles documenting his trip. Twain later secured a contract with the American Publishing Company to produce a subscription-based book based on the same journey. The subscription book would become &quot;The Innocents Abroad.&quot; Twain restructured and expanded upon the letters he had originally written for the &quot;Alta California&quot; to write &quot;The Innocents Abroad&quot;; adjusting his style by minimizing slang and vulgar language to cater to a broader, national readership. He also rewrote some of the characters and stories. &quot;The Innocents Abroad&quot; was Mark Twain&#x27;s first successful publication for a national audience. 

==Analysis==
&quot;The Innocents Abroad&quot; presents itself as an ordinary travel book based on an actual voyage in a retired Civil War ship, the . The excursion was billed as a voyage to the Holy Land, with numerous stops and side trips along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, notably:
* train excursion from Marseille to Paris for the 1867 Paris Exhibition during the reign of Napoleon III and the Second French Empire
* journey through the Papal States to Rome
* side trip through the Black Sea to Odessa, Sebastopol and Yalta
* culminating excursion through the Holy Land

Twain reports the voyage covered over 20,000 miles of land and sea.

Twain recorded his observations and critiques of the various aspects of culture and society which he encountered on the journey, some more serious than others. Many of his observations draw a contrast between his own experiences and the often grandiose accounts in contemporary travelogues, which were regarded in their own time as indispensable aids for traveling in the region. In particular, he lampooned William Cowper Prime&#x27;s &quot;Tent Life in the Holy Land&quot; for its overly sentimental prose and its often violent encounters with native inhabitants. Twain also made light of his fellow travelers and the natives of the countries and regions that he visited, as well as his own expectations and reactions.

==Themes==
A major theme of the book is that of the conflict between history and the modern world. Twain continually encounters petty profiteering and trivializations of history as he journeys, as well as a strange emphasis placed on particular past events. He is either outraged, puzzled, or bored by each encounter. One example can be found in the sequence during which the boat has stopped at Gibraltar. On shore, the narrator hears seemingly dozens of people repeat an anecdote about how a particular hill nearby acquired its name, heedless of the fact that the anecdote is bland and pointless. Another example may be found in the discussion of the story of Abelard and Heloise, where the skeptical American deconstructs the story and comes to the conclusion that far too much fuss has been made about the two lovers. Only when the ship reaches areas of the world that do not exploit for profit or bore passers-by with inexplicable interest in their history, such as the early passage dealing with the ship&#x27;s time at the Azores, is this attitude not found in the text.

This reaction to those who profit from the past is found, in an equivocal and unsure balance with reverence, in Twain&#x27;s experiences in the Holy Land. The narrator reacts here, not only to the exploitation of the past and the unreasoning (to the American eye of the time) adherence to old ways, but also to the profanation of religious history. Many of his illusions are shattered, including his discovery that the nations described in the Old Testament could easily fit inside many American states and counties, and that the &quot;kings&quot; of those nations might very well have ruled over fewer people than could be found in some small towns. Disillusioned, he writes, &quot;If all the poetry and nonsense that have been discharged upon the fountains and the bland scenery of this region were collected in a book, it would make a most valuable volume to burn.&quot;

This equivocal reaction to the religious history the narrator encounters may be magnified by the prejudices of the time, as the United States was still primarily a Protestant nation at that point. The Catholic Church, in particular, receives a considerable amount of attention from the narrator, specifically its institutionalized nature. This is particularly apparent in the section of the book dealing with Italy, where the poverty of the lay population and the relative affluence of the church are contrasted.
==Adaptations==
The PBS series &quot;Great Performances&quot;, in 1983, broadcast a television movie adaptation of &quot;The Innocents Abroad&quot;, starring Craig Wasson, David Ogden Stiers, Gigi Proietti, and Brooke Adams, directed by Luciano Salce.&lt;ref name=&quot;tcmdb/468227&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;nytimes/1983/innocents-abroad&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;allocine/181362&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==See also==
* Travelogues of Ottoman Palestine

==References==
==External links==
* Hypertext Map from University of Virginia etext, Innocents Abroad, a part of Twain in His Times&quot;
* Chapter Outlines by the Author, from Wright American Fiction at Indiana University

As a travel book, &quot;Innocents Abroad&quot; is accessible through any one of its chapters, many of which were published serially in the United States. (A compilation of the original newspaper accounts was the subject of McKeithan (1958)). In many of the chapters, a uniquely &quot;Twainian&quot; sentence or word stands out. A sampling of chapter material appears below and includes links to visual representations as well as to dedicated Mark Twain projects that have included &quot;Innocents Abroad&quot; in their sweep:
* Ch.1 Holy Land tour flyer reprints The Quaker City travel prospectus and comments on exclusivity in passenger selection.
* Ch.4 Ship Routine outlines the passengers&#x27; daily routines and their affectation of sailor language.
* Ch. 8 Tangier, Morocco &quot;We wanted something thoroughly and uncompromisingly foreign -- foreign from top to bottom -- foreign from center to circumference -- foreign inside and outside and all around -- nothing anywhere about it to dilute its foreignness -- nothing to remind us of any other people or any other land under the sun. And lo! in Tangier we have found it.&quot;
* Ch.11 The Prado and other Marseille tourist sites. &quot;W&quot;e were troubled a little at dinner to-day, by the conduct of an American, who talked very loudly and coarsely. and laughed boisterously when all others were so quiet and well behaved. He ordered wine with a royal flourish...&quot;&quot; Drove the Prado avenue, visited Chateau Borely, the Zoological Gardens, and the Castle d‘If. Discussed prisoner drawings created during the years Château d&#x27;If was used as a prison.
* Old Travelers; Lyon, Saône, Tonnerre, Sens, Melun, Fontainebleau &quot;and scores of other beautiful cities&quot;; dinner, shopping, a terrifying shave. &quot;Occasionally, merely for the pleasure of being cruel, we put unoffending Frenchmen on the rack with questions framed in the incomprehensible jargon of their native language, and while they writhed, we impaled them, we peppered them, we scarified them, with their own vile verbs and participles.&quot;

==Reviews==
* etext.virginia.edu Collection of Contemporary Reviews.
* Hirst, Robert H. &quot;The Making of The Innocents Abroad : 1867–1872.&quot; Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley, 1975.
* Howells, William Dean. &quot;The Innocents Abroad, or the New Pilgrims Progress&quot;, The Atlantic Monthly, December 1869.
* New York Evening Post (January 20, 1883).

==Secondary references==

===Mark Twain projects===
* etext.virginia.edu -- Innocents Abroad Homepage
* Mark Twain Project at the University of California

===On-line snippets===
* Image of Mark Twain, on board ship in 1897, at 60 years old. (Twain traveled at age 32 and published &quot;Innocents Abroad&quot; in 1869, at the age of 34, but this image is sometimes associated with the earlier Twain.) For comparison, see 1871 image and 1875 (approx) image

===Scholarly works===
* 
* 
* (covering the period from 1867 to 1871; Twain set sail on June 8, 1867, for a five-month Mediterranean tour on board the Quaker City; &quot;Innocents Abroad&quot;, detailing the Quaker City tour, was first published in 1869)

==Primary sources==
* , with illustrations by True Williams
* Etext.virginia.edu -- Innocents Abroad Homepage
* Mark Twain Project at the University of California
* &quot;The Innocents Abroad&quot;, from Internet Archive. Illustrated, scanned original editions.
* Innocents Abroad (with facsimiles of original illustrations) in Wright American Fiction 1851-1875
* Lexicon from Wordie, &quot;Words rounded up while reading The Innocents Abroad by Mark Twain&quot;
* McKeithan, Daniel Morley, ed., &quot;Traveling with the innocents abroad; Mark Twain&#x27;s original reports from Europe and the Holy Land.&quot; Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1958.
* Passenger manifest of , the ship that took the Innocents abroad.
** on departure, as reported in June 9, 1867 &quot;New York Times&quot;
** at ship&#x27;s last port of call in St. George, Bermuda
* Correspondence markers (April 1867, June 1867, and November 1867) from the Mark Twain Project
** 15 April 1867 correspondence, anticipating Holy Land trip
** 7 June 1867 correspondence, anticipating imminent departure on 8 June 1867.
** 20 November 1867 correspondence, on arriving in New York City.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1072723" start="62" end="73" title="travel literature" label="travel book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="93" end="103" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="231" end="240" title="steamship" label="steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="300" end="309" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728615" start="752" end="767" title="The Daily Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503709" start="877" end="904" title="American Publishing Company" label="American Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1722" end="1739" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="1773" end="1782" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1786" end="1791" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345539" start="1800" end="1821" title="Exposition Universelle (1867)" label="1867 Paris Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1842" end="1854" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="1863" end="1883" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="1906" end="1918" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1922" end="1926" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1951" end="1960" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="1964" end="1970" title="Odessa, Ukraine" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="2029" end="2038" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007209" start="2517" end="2537" title="William Cowper Prime" label="William Cowper Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="3227" end="3236" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295" start="3493" end="3500" title="Abelard" label="Abelard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656" start="3505" end="3512" title="Heloise (student of Abelard)" label="Heloise"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="3861" end="3867" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="4054" end="4063" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="4354" end="4367" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4949" end="4959" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4986" end="5001" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="5318" end="5321" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599745" start="5335" end="5353" title="Great Performances" label="Great Performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="5382" end="5398" title="television movie" label="television movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q279168" start="5456" end="5468" title="Craig Wasson" label="Craig Wasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202449" start="5470" end="5488" title="David Ogden Stiers" label="David Ogden Stiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q697188" start="5490" end="5503" title="Gigi Proietti" label="Gigi Proietti"/>
<link wikidata="Q287449" start="5509" end="5521" title="Brooke Adams (actress)" label="Brooke Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q697834" start="5535" end="5548" title="Luciano Salce" label="Luciano Salce"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988805" start="5745" end="5777" title="Travelogues of Ottoman Palestine" label="Travelogues of Ottoman Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q622500" start="7589" end="7606" title="Château d&amp;#x27;If" label="Château d&amp;#x27;If"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="7646" end="7650" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187834" start="7652" end="7657" title="Saône" label="Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q498854" start="7659" end="7667" title="Tonnerre, Yonne" label="Tonnerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q212420" start="7669" end="7673" title="Sens" label="Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41139" start="7675" end="7680" title="Melun" label="Melun"/>
<link wikidata="Q182872" start="7682" end="7695" title="Fontainebleau" label="Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18910600" start="9226" end="9239" title="True Williams" label="True Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="9384" end="9400" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280543" wikidata="Q3062332" url="?curid=1280543" title="Kittanning Expedition">
<text>The Kittanning Expedition, also known as the Armstrong Expedition or the Battle of Kittanning, was a raid during the French and Indian War that led to the destruction of the American Indian village of Kittanning, which had served as a staging point for attacks by Lenape warriors against colonists in the British Province of Pennsylvania. Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel John Armstrong Sr., this raid deep into hostile territory was the only major expedition carried out by Pennsylvanian provincial troops during a brutal backcountry war. Early on September 8, 1756, they launched a surprise attack on the Indian village.

==Background==

Although it eventually became a worldwide conflict known as the Seven Years&#x27; War, the French and Indian War began on the Pennsylvania frontier as a struggle for control of the Ohio Country. With the surrender of George Washington at Fort Necessity in 1754 and Braddock&#x27;s defeat in 1755, the settlers on the Pennsylvania frontier were without professional military protection, and scrambled to organize a defense.

The French-allied Indians who had defeated General Edward Braddock at the Monongahela were primarily from the Great Lakes region to the north. The local Indians, mostly Lenape and Shawnee who had migrated to the area after white colonists had settled their lands to the east, had waited to see who would win the contest—they could not risk siding with the loser. With Fort Duquesne now secured, the victorious French encouraged the Lenape and Shawnee to &quot;take up the hatchet&quot; against those who had taken their land.

Beginning about October 1755, Lenape and Shawnee war parties, often with French cooperation, began raiding settlements in Pennsylvania. Although European-Americans also waged war with cruelty, they found Indian warfare particularly brutal and frightening. Notable among the Indian raiders were the Lenape chiefs Shingas and Captain Jacobs, both of whom lived at Kittanning which also served as a staging area for raids and a temporary holding center for captives. Following the massacres of mostly unarmed settlers at Draper&#x27;s Meadow, Penn&#x27;s Creek, Great Cove, and Gnadenhütten in 1755, the colonial governments of Pennsylvania and Virginia offered rewards for their scalps. 

Captain Jacobs was on an expedition led by François Coulon de Villiers that descended on Fort Granville (near present-day Lewistown) on the morning of August 2, 1756. The attackers were held off, but the garrison commander was killed, and his second in command surrendered the garrison, including the women and children, the next morning. Armstrong, the commander&#x27;s brother, immediately organized an expedition against Kittanning in response.

==Expedition==

Armstrong led 300 Pennsylvania provincial soldiers from Fort Shirley on August 31. By September 7, the column had reached the vicinity of Kittanning. Signs of a small Indian camp prompted Colonel Armstrong to detach a dozen men under Lieutenant James Hogg to monitor it while the column moved on toward the village. The next morning Armstrong launched a surprise attack on the village. Many of the Kittanning residents fled, but Captain Jacobs put up a defense, holing up with his wife and family inside their home. When he refused to surrender, his house and others were set on fire, touching off gunpowder that had been stored inside. Some buildings exploded, and pieces of Indian bodies flew high into the air and landed in a nearby cornfield. Captain Jacobs was killed and scalped after jumping from his home in an attempt to escape the flames. 

The battle ended when the entire village was engulfed in flames. Prisoners informed Armstrong that a party of 24 men had left the day before in advance of another planned raid. This news caused Armstrong some concern over the fate of Lieutenant Hogg, so he precipitately ordered a withdrawal. They were met after several miles by a mortally wounded Hogg, who reported that his force had been attacked by a larger Indian force. Some of his men had immediately fled, and most of the rest had been killed. Armstrong and his remaining force marched to Fort Lyttleton to rest. By September 13, they had returned to Fort Loudoun. According to Armstrong&#x27;s report, he took 11 scalps and freed 11 prisoners, mostly women and children. He estimated that his men killed between 30 and 40 Indians. Many of the white captives who were not rescued were ferried across the Allegheny River in canoes, then taken by foot over trails into Ohio, where they were assimilated into the tribes. Many were not rescued until Henry Bouquet brought them back from Ohio to Pennsylvania in 1764.

==Aftermath==
After the destruction of the town, many of its inhabitants returned and erected their wigwams on the ashes of their former homes. The town was reoccupied briefly and two of the British prisoners who had attempted to escape with Armstrong&#x27;s men were tortured to death. The Indians then harvested their corn and moved to Fort Duquesne, where they requested permission from the French to resettle further to the west, away from the British colonists. According to Marie Le Roy and Barbara Leininger, many of Kittanning&#x27;s inhabitants moved to Saucunk, Kuskusky or Muskingum. 

Historian Fred Anderson notes that equivalent raids by Indians on Pennsylvania villages were usually labeled &quot;massacres&quot;, and that the Indians considered the expedition to be one. The destruction of Kittanning was hailed as a victory in Pennsylvania, and Armstrong was known afterwards as the &quot;Hero of Kittanning&quot;. He and his men collected the &quot;scalp bounty&quot; that had been placed on Captain Jacobs. However, the victory had limitations: the attackers suffered more casualties than they inflicted, and most of the villagers escaped, taking with them almost all of the prisoners that had been held in the village. The expedition also probably aggravated the frontier war; subsequent Indian raids that autumn were fiercer than ever. The Kittanning Expedition revealed to the village&#x27;s inhabitants their vulnerability, and many moved to more secure areas. A peace faction led by Shingas&#x27;s brother Tamaqua soon came to the forefront. Tamaqua eventually made peace with Pennsylvania in the Treaty of Easton, which enabled a British force under General John Forbes to successfully mount an expedition in 1758 that drove the French from Fort Duquesne.

==See also==
* Kittanning Path
* Kittanning, Pennsylvania
* Kittanning (village)

==References==
==Sources==
* Crytzer, Brady J. &quot;War in the Peaceable Kingdom: The Kittanning Raid of 1756.&quot; Yardley, PA: Westholme Publishing, 2016.
* Hunter, William A. &quot;Forts on the Pennsylvania Frontier, 1753–1758&quot;. Originally published 1960; Wennawoods reprint, 1999.
* McConnell, Michael N. &quot;A Country Between: The Upper Ohio Valley and Its Peoples, 1724–1774.&quot; Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1992.
* Myers, James P. &quot;Pennsylvania&#x27;s Awakening: the Kittanning Raid of 1756.&quot; &quot;Pennsylvania History&quot; 66 (Summer 1999), pp. 399–420


==External links==
* Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission&#x27;s article on the expedition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3062332" start="4" end="25" title="Kittanning Expedition" label="Kittanning Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062332" start="45" end="65" title="Kittanning Expedition" label="Armstrong Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062332" start="73" end="93" title="Kittanning Expedition" label="Battle of Kittanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="117" end="138" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="174" end="189" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178756" start="201" end="211" title="Kittanning (village)" label="Kittanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="264" end="270" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475732" start="313" end="337" title="Province of Pennsylvania" label="Province of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q331294" start="371" end="389" title="John Armstrong Sr." label="John Armstrong Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q30693151" start="488" end="505" title="Provincial troops in the French and Indian Wars" label="provincial troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="703" end="724" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="730" end="751" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="820" end="832" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449358" start="843" end="852" title="Battle of Fort Necessity" label="surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="856" end="873" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077972" start="877" end="891" title="Fort Necessity" label="Fort Necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177722" start="904" end="926" title="Braddock&amp;#x27;s defeat" label="Braddock&amp;#x27;s defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q113412" start="1114" end="1129" title="Edward Braddock" label="Edward Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q524828" start="1137" end="1148" title="Battle of Monongahela" label="Monongahela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="1173" end="1191" title="Great Lakes region (North America)" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1232" end="1238" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="1243" end="1250" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q209679" start="1431" end="1444" title="Fort Duquesne" label="Fort Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482192" start="1902" end="1909" title="Shingas" label="Shingas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036682" start="1914" end="1928" title="Captain Jacobs" label="Captain Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178756" start="1952" end="1962" title="Kittanning (village)" label="Kittanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305839" start="2108" end="2128" title="Draper&amp;#x27;s Meadow massacre" label="Draper&amp;#x27;s Meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14607541" start="2130" end="2147" title="Penn&amp;#x27;s Creek massacre" label="Penn&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q124205640" start="2149" end="2159" title="Great Cove massacre" label="Great Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q124289584" start="2165" end="2177" title="Gnadenhütten massacre (Pennsylvania)" label="Gnadenhütten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="2232" end="2240" title="Province of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084321" start="2320" end="2347" title="François Coulon de Villiers" label="François Coulon de Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471237" start="2366" end="2380" title="Fort Granville" label="Fort Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184736" start="2399" end="2408" title="Lewistown, Pennsylvania" label="Lewistown"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693151" start="2773" end="2792" title="Provincial troops in the French and Indian Wars" label="provincial soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472031" start="2798" end="2810" title="Fort Shirley" label="Fort Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076613" start="4141" end="4155" title="Fort Lyttleton (Pennsylvania)" label="Fort Lyttleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471552" start="4203" end="4215" title="Fort Loudoun (Pennsylvania)" label="Fort Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q686021" start="4456" end="4471" title="Allegheny River" label="Allegheny River"/>
<link wikidata="Q116866" start="4598" end="4611" title="Henry Bouquet" label="Henry Bouquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q277986" start="4766" end="4772" title="wigwam" label="wigwam"/>
<link wikidata="Q209679" start="5004" end="5017" title="Fort Duquesne" label="Fort Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q107863032" start="5229" end="5236" title="Saucunk" label="Saucunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324988" start="5238" end="5246" title="Kuskusky" label="Kuskusky"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410721" start="5250" end="5259" title="Muskingum (village)" label="Muskingum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296930" start="5378" end="5387" title="List of Indian massacres" label="massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644435" start="6287" end="6303" title="Treaty of Easton" label="Treaty of Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181518" start="6349" end="6360" title="John Forbes (British Army officer)" label="John Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467240" start="6377" end="6396" title="Forbes Expedition" label="mount an expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418402" start="6463" end="6478" title="Kittanning Path" label="Kittanning Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186994" start="6481" end="6505" title="Kittanning, Pennsylvania" label="Kittanning, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q178756" start="6508" end="6528" title="Kittanning (village)" label="Kittanning (village)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280544" wikidata="Q334412" url="?curid=1280544" title="Manolo Blahnik">
<text>Manuel &quot;Manolo&quot; Blahnik Rodríguez (; born 27 November 1942) is a Spanish fashion designer and founder of the eponymous high-end shoe brand.

==Biography==

Blahnik was born in Santa Cruz de la Palma, in the Canary Islands (Spain), to a Czech father and Spanish mother. His father left Prague in the 1930s to avoid rising fascism; his grandparents disappeared in the 1950s after the Communists took charge. His mother&#x27;s family owned a banana plantation in the island city of Santa Cruz de la Palma, where he grew up alongside his sister, Evangelina. He was homeschooled as a child before eventually attending a Swiss boarding school. Later, his parents wanted him to be a diplomat and enrolled him at the University of Geneva majoring in Politics and Law. However, Blahnik changed his majors to Literature and Architecture. In 1965, he got his degree and moved to Paris to study art at the École des Beaux-Arts and Stage Set Design at the Louvre Art School, all while working at a vintage clothing shop. In 1969, he moved to London to work as a buyer at fashion boutique &quot;Feathers&quot; and wrote for &quot;L’Uomo Vogue&quot;, an Italian men&#x27;s version of &quot;Vogue&quot;.

In 1969, Blahnik had a chance to meet Diana Vreeland, the editor-in-chief of &quot;U.S. Vogue,&quot; while he was traveling in New York. He then presented his portfolio of fashions and set designs to Vreeland, at which point she looked him straight in the eye and said, &quot;Young man, make things, make accessories, make shoes.&quot; She admired his shoe sketches and advised him to concentrate on designing footwear. Blahnik followed her advice and worked on designing shoes.

In 1971, Ossie Clark invited him to create shoes for his runway show. He also designed shoes for other London fashion designers, such as Jean Muir and Zandra Rhodes. From 1971, Blahnik was selling Manolo Blahnik shoes for Zapata. With a loan of £2,000, Blahnik bought the Zapata Shoe Company from its owner and opened his own boutique. In 1974, Blahnik became the second man ever to be featured on the cover of &quot;U.K. Vogue&quot; (after Helmut Berger).

In 1977, Blahnik created his first American collection. These were sold in 1978 through Bloomingdales. Blahnik opened his first boutique in the US in 1979.

Manolo Blahnik&#x27;s flagship store remains in Old Church Street in the Chelsea district of London.

Blahnik&#x27;s boutiques are located in London, New York, Geneva, Madrid, Barcelona, Moscow, Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Doha, Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, Seoul, Singapore, Tokyo, and Taipei. Bloomingdales (for which he created his first American collection), Nordstrom, Neiman Marcus, Barneys, Bergdorf Goodman and Saks Fifth Avenue carry his line in the United States and newly opened in Dubai Mall. The company has signed a long-term deal with the shoewear retailer Kurt Geiger to operate Manolo Blahnik boutiques.

In 2000, Blahnik, together with Neiman Marcus, launched the first commercial virtual reality online showroom featuring 3D models of his shoes. The entire collection was sold out online within three weeks.

Blahnik was elevated to the International Best Dressed List Hall of Fame in 1987. In 2007, Blahnik was appointed as an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his service to the British fashion industry.

Blahnik currently resides in Bath, United Kingdom, and was awarded an honorary degree from Bath Spa University in July 2012.

==Early development==
One of Blahnik&#x27;s greatest inspirations was his mother. She studied fashion magazines and interpreted the latest fashion trends on her clothing. Blahnik and his family often travelled to Paris and Madrid to order clothes. His mother was always dissatisfied with the shoes from their hometown so she made her own. She learned the rudiments of her craft from a local Canary Island cobbler and, as a boy, Blahnik loved to watch his mother when she made beautiful shoes. He has inherited his mother&#x27;s love for brocade and satin fabrics and recounted how, as a boy, he found a trunk filled with shoes by the famous Russian, Pierre Yantorny, all made from silks, antique lace and brocades trimmed with delicate buckles. All were light, elegant and feminine, attributes Blahnik later brought to his own designs.

When Blahnik was attending university he lived with his aunt and uncle. Meanwhile, his aunt deeply influenced his fashion sense and style. He refined his tastes and learned to appreciate the beauty of luxury, art, and happiness and beauty. Blahnik recalled that, according to his aunt, &quot;happiness was having the single most elegant handbag ever made, in every color available.&quot;

==Shoes==
Blahnik never studied shoemaking formally. He learned the skills by visiting shoe factories and talking to pattern cutters, technicians, and machine operators. At first, he designed men&#x27;s footwear, but he immediately found that men&#x27;s shoe design limited his imagination and lacked the element of fashion so he focused on women&#x27;s shoes. When mainstream shoe styles were still dominated by clunky platforms in the 1970s, he revived the sleek stiletto heel. Also, he dislikes wedges and believes in the power of heels and the sex appeal they convey.

==Filmography==
Blahnik is the subject of the 2017 documentary film: &quot;Manolo: The Boy Who Made Shoes for Lizards,&quot; written and directed by Michael Roberts.

==Awards and honours==
Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA)
* 1987: Special Award
* 1990: Accessory Designer of the Year
* 1997: The Stiletto

British Fashion Council
* 1999: Accessory Designer of the Year
* 1990: Accessory Designer of the Year

Honors

* 1998: Shoe Designer of the Year from &quot;Footwear News&quot;
* 2003: Shoe Designer of the Year from &quot;Footwear News&quot;
* 2007 Honorary CBE from HM Queen Elizabeth II
* 2011 The SCAD (Savannah College of Art and Design) Andre Leon Talley Lifetime Achievement Award.
* 2011 A Lifetime Achievement Award from &quot;Footwear News&quot;.
* 2016 Honorary doctorate of the Universidad de La Laguna. 
*2017 Ranked #25 best dressed man alive by &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine
*2018: Luxury Legend Award by Walpole British Luxury Awards on 19 November

==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* Design Museum bio/profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334412" start="0" end="6" title="Manolo Blahnik" label="Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334412" start="13" end="19" title="Manolo Blahnik" label="Manolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334412" start="26" end="43" title="Manolo Blahnik" label="Blahnik Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q433632" start="186" end="208" title="Santa Cruz de la Palma" label="Santa Cruz de la Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="217" end="231" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="295" end="301" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q201689" start="474" end="480" title="La Palma" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q503473" start="719" end="739" title="University of Geneva" label="University of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="1126" end="1138" title="L’Uomo Vogue" label="L’Uomo Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="1185" end="1190" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q450619" start="1237" end="1251" title="Diana Vreeland" label="Diana Vreeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107475" start="1688" end="1699" title="Ossie Clark" label="Ossie Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171234" start="1816" end="1825" title="Jean Muir" label="Jean Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995217" start="1830" end="1843" title="Zandra Rhodes" label="Zandra Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q78561" start="2120" end="2133" title="Helmut Berger" label="Helmut Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="2225" end="2238" title="Bloomingdales" label="Bloomingdales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083664" start="2342" end="2359" title="Old Church Street" label="Old Church Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="2367" end="2374" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2387" end="2393" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="2575" end="2588" title="Bloomingdales" label="Bloomingdales"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="2643" end="2652" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q743497" start="2654" end="2667" title="Neiman Marcus" label="Neiman Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59465" start="2669" end="2676" title="Barneys" label="Barneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q793430" start="2678" end="2694" title="Bergdorf Goodman" label="Bergdorf Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723882" start="2699" end="2716" title="Saks Fifth Avenue" label="Saks Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133309" start="2773" end="2783" title="Dubai Mall" label="Dubai Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063744" start="2852" end="2863" title="Kurt Geiger" label="Kurt Geiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q743497" start="2934" end="2947" title="Neiman Marcus" label="Neiman Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048729" start="3136" end="3167" title="International Best Dressed List" label="International Best Dressed List"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="3236" end="3280" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091754" start="3422" end="3441" title="Bath Spa University" label="Bath Spa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="3848" end="3861" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915560" start="3862" end="3869" title="Shoemaking" label="cobbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024202" start="5181" end="5187" title="Wedge (footwear)" label="wedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="5307" end="5318" title="documentary" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833906" start="5405" end="5420" title="Michael Roberts (fashion journalist)" label="Michael Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137021" start="5446" end="5492" title="Council of Fashion Designers of America" label="Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969966" start="5576" end="5599" title="British Fashion Council" label="British Fashion Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="5845" end="5863" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q539881" start="6064" end="6088" title="Universidad de La Laguna" label="Universidad de La Laguna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1280546" wikidata="Q444331" url="?curid=1280546" title="Madylin Sweeten">
<text>Madylin Anne-Michele Sweeten (born June 27, 1991) is an American actress, best known for her portrayal of Alexandra &quot;Ally&quot; Barone on the popular family sitcom &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot; (1996–2005).

== Personal life ==
Sweeten was born in Brownwood, Brown County, Texas, the eldest of four children born to Timothy Lynn &quot;Tim&quot; Sweeten and Elizabeth Anne Gini (nee Millsap). She is the sister to Sullivan and Sawyer Sweeten, who co-starred in the American sitcom &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot;.

==Filmography==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q444331" start="0" end="28" title="Madylin Sweeten" label="Madylin Anne-Michele Sweeten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570454" start="106" end="139" title="Ally Barone" label="Alexandra &amp;quot;Ally&amp;quot; Barone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433004" start="155" end="168" title="family sitcom" label="family sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="175" end="198" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q981222" start="259" end="289" title="Brownwood, Texas" label="Brownwood, Brown County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19833220" start="437" end="451" title="Sawyer Sweeten" label="Sawyer Sweeten"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="497" end="520" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
</links>
</doc>
