<doc id="954388" wikidata="Q1583940" url="?curid=954388" title="Silliman University">
<text>Silliman University (also referred to as Silliman or SU) is a private, Protestant, and research university located in Dumaguete City, Philippines. Established in 1901 as Silliman Institute by the Presbyterian Board of Foreign Missions, it is the first American and Protestant founded institution of higher learning in the Philippines and in Asia.

The university was named after Dr. Horace Brinsmade Silliman, a former businessman and philanthropist from Cohoes, New York who provided the initial sum of $10,000 for the establishment of the school. Starting as an elementary school for boys, the school expanded to become a college in 1910, acquiring university status in 1938. Silliman University was run and operated by Americans during the first half of the 20th century. After the Second World War, Filipinos began to assume more administrative positions, resulting in the appointment of the university&#x27;s first Filipino president in 1952.

In terms of accreditation, Silliman is one of top five universities in the Philippines with &quot;Institutional Accreditation&quot; by the Federation of Accrediting Agencies of the Philippines (FAAP). The Institutional Accreditation is the highest accreditation that can be granted to an educational institution after an assessment of its number of accredited programs, its facilities, its services, and its faculty is conducted on a whole. Incidentally, Silliman also has the highest number of accredited programs in the country, twenty of which are on Level IV accreditation status, the highest level that can be granted to individual programs.

Over 10,000 students attending the university from the Philippines and at least 56 other countries are enrolled in ten colleges, five schools, and three institutes. It is registered as a National Historical Landmark by the National Historical Institute and is one of few private higher education institutions in the Philippines that have been granted full autonomous status by the Commission on Higher Education. It is also a founding member of the Association of Christian Universities and Colleges in Asia (ACUCA) and one of the recognized institutions in the U.S. Veterans Administration&#x27;s list of approved educational institutions.

The university offers programs in the fields of early childhood education, elementary education, secondary education, undergraduate education, as well as graduate education. Programs in the undergraduate and graduate levels cover disciplines such as arts, accountancy, agriculture, architecture, business administration, engineering, English, Filipino, information technology, law, medicine, nursing, anthropology, biology, chemistry, clinical sciences, pharmacy education, teacher education, economics, environmental science, fine arts, theater and performing arts, foreign languages, geology, journalism, library science, marine sciences, nutrition and dietetics, music, physics, theology, philosophy, psychology, public administration and social work. In addition to its academic undertakings, the university is involved in research and community extension projects. Silliman&#x27;s stature in the fields of environmental and marine sciences has led to its being designated by the USAID as a &#x27;Center of Excellence in Coastal Resources Management.&#x27;

==History==
===Establishment===

Silliman University was founded on August 28, 1901, as Silliman Institute by Protestant missionaries under the Board of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the United States. Originally established as an elementary school for boys, operations for the institute started through an initial $10,000 donation given by a businessman and Christian philanthropist of Cohoes, New York named Dr. Horace Brinsmade Silliman, who wanted to establish an industrial school using the Hampton Institute of Virginia model.

The person tasked by the Presbyterian Board of Foreign Missions to establish the school was Dr. David Sutherland Hibbard, a man from Lyndon, Kansas who, after serving as a pastor in a Presbyterian church in that locality, offered his services to the Presbyterian Board as missionary. Upon his arrival in the Philippines, he was commissioned, with his wife Laura, to scout the southern part of the islands to determine the best location for the school. His original points of destination were Cebu, Zamboanga and Iloilo. While in Cebu, a suggestion came to him to make a side-trip to Dumaguete. On his arrival, he was met by a Rev. Captain John Anthony Randolph, chaplain of the sixth U.S. Infantry Regiment stationed at that time in Dumaguete, who later introduced him to Don Meliton Larena, the town&#x27;s local &quot;presidente&quot; and to his brother Demetrio Larena, then the vice-governor of the province. Hibbard got attracted to the place and decided to establish the school in the locality. He would later on write that the &quot;beauty of Dumaguete and the friendliness of the people&quot; helped in bringing about his decision.

The institute had a modest beginning: Dr. and Mrs. Hibbard held classes in a rented house beside the sea until the institute&#x27;s first building, Silliman Hall, was completed in 1903. Recalling how the university started half a century later, Dr. Hibbard described:
===Expansion and World War II===

Enrollment in the school grew attracting students from other Asian countries. In 1910, Silliman was awarded government recognition and the right to grant a degree. In the same year, it was incorporated under the laws of the Philippines. Women started to be admitted in 1912, and in 1921, the Silliman Bible School (later to become the Divinity School) was established in cooperation with the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, largely representing the Congregational Churches of the United States. As enrollment in the institution grew further, a corresponding increase in faculty followed. These developments were accompanied with the use of a more developed curriculum and the construction and acquisition of more permanent buildings and equipment. By 1925, Silliman was already recognized as &quot;the most influential Protestant institution of higher learning&quot; in the Philippines, based on a report submitted by the Board of Educational Survey, which was created by the Philippine Legislature to conduct a study on all educational institutions in the country. The institute was re-incorporated in 1935, and in 1938 became the first school outside of Manila to be granted university status.

After its recognition as a university, Silliman continued to receive from the Presbyterian Board and the American Board (now the United Church Board for World Ministries) grants for land, buildings and equipment. In addition, these boards provided the university with American faculty and staff personnel. Two other American boards have contributed personnel and funds: the Board of Missions of the United Methodist Church and the United Christian Missionary Society of the Christian Churches (Disciples of Christ).

Life in the university was interrupted when World War II came. On May 26, 1942, some three weeks after the fall of Corregidor, two Japanese transports anchored in Dumaguete. Silliman was occupied by the Japanese forces and was converted into a garrison. One of its buildings, Channon Hall, became the headquarters of the dreaded Japanese &quot;kempeitai&quot; or military police where many Filipinos were tortured and killed. During the occupation, many members of the faculty and the student body were forced to evacuate to four localities within the province. Under the leadership of Dr. Arthur Carson, then president of Silliman, the remaining members of the faculty continued the operations of the university in the mountains of Negros Oriental. This led to the formation of what was then called the &quot;Jungle University&quot; in Malabo, Valencia, one of the localities in the province. University Professor Roy Bell became a major in the Negros Island guerrilla forces, established a Free Government, printed the Victory News, and used his radio transmitter to establish contact with the South West Pacific Area (command). Many students, alumni, faculty members and ROTC officers joined the resistance forces, while theology professors Alvin Scaff, Proculo Rodriguez, Paul Lindholm and James McKinley &quot;carried on pastoral and teaching duties for the resistance soldiers and civilians in guerrilla-dominated territory.&quot; The Carson and Bell families, plus other faculty members, were evacuated by the USS Narwhal (SS-167) on February 7, 1944.

American and Filipino forces liberated Dumaguete on April 26, 1945. A few days later, the Faculty Emergency Committee took charge over the campus and began preparations for the resumption of classes and the challenge of reconstruction.

===Post-war years===

For the first half of the century, Silliman was run and operated by Americans. After the Second World War and until the early 1950s, moves for the Filipinization of the university administration began to come closer to the surface. Filipino faculty members began to assume more important positions and, as more of these faculty members took administrative roles, the board of trustees elected the university&#x27;s first Filipino president, Dr. Leopoldo T. Ruiz, on August 26, 1952, officially taking office in April 1953. A Silliman alumnus (A.B. 1916) and the University of California at Berkeley alumnus (B.A. 1920), Ruiz had a long experience in higher education and in the foreign service. Before his appointment, he took up graduate studies in sociology at Columbia and Yale, with an M.A. (1924) from the former institution, as well as a Ph.D. (1942) from the University of Southern California.

In the same decade of Ruiz&#x27;s appointment, the United Board for Christian Higher Education in Asia (UBCHEA) in New York, an interdenominational group, assumed responsibility for channeling all church aid to Silliman. The United Board is an international organization supported by ten Protestant mission boards. Long after Ruiz&#x27;s appointment, however, Americans and other nationals still constituted a considerable portion of the faculty. Up to the present, American and foreign visiting professors are still regularly assigned in specialized areas.

In the early 1960s and toward the beginning of the Martial Law years, the university embarked on a &quot;Build a Greater Silliman&quot; program in response to the growing student population and the corresponding need for more facilities. With much help from many donors, mostly alumni and entities from abroad, the program saw the construction of more academic buildings, dormitories, housing units for the faculty and other facilities. These constructions included the now famous Luce Auditorium which was funded largely by the Henry Luce Foundation, the Science Complex, equipped with an observatory on top of the third floor, the Engineering Complex, and the Silliman University Medical Center.

=== Martial law era ===
When Martial Law was declared in 1972, Silliman became one of the first two universities ordered by the government to be closed and one of the last to be opened. On the morning of September 23, 1972 some faculty members and many students were rounded up by the local Philippine Constabulary (now the Philippine National Police), some of whom were detained for one to six months. Many offices of the university, including the &quot;Weekly Sillimanian&quot;, the student paper, were raided by the PC. Journalist Crispin Maslog, who was teaching in the university at the time, recalls that Marcos himself had complained about instances where members of the political opposition such as Senator Jovito Salonga and Senator Juan Liwag were invited to speak at the university.

The year 1979 became a landmark year for Silliman when its Van Houweling Research Laboratory, then headed by Dr. George Beran, produced a dog vaccine that gave a three-year immunity from rabies, making it the first and only laboratory to produce a rabies vaccine with long-term immunity in the whole of Southeast Asia. The development of the vaccine resulted in the elimination of rabies in many parts of the Visayas and Mindanao Islands and was later on used by other countries in their fight against rabies conducted in collaboration with the World Health Organization.

===1980s to recent history===
The 1980s saw the restoration of the university&#x27;s Student Government and the approval of its constitution. After years of suppression by the Marcos regime, students were again allowed to self-organize in 1981. The decade also witnessed the 100% board exam ratings of the Electrical Engineering, Nursing and Accountancy programs and the installation of solar-powered light posts in the campus in the years 1986 and 1989 respectively.

In the 1990s the university shifted its grading system from alphabetical to numerical. In 1994, eleven Sillimanians landed in the top ten of that year&#x27;s nursing board exam, with twenty two other Sillimanian takers occupying the top twenty posts. In that same year, Silliman alumnus Gonzalo O. Catan Jr. was awarded Most Outstanding Inventor in the fifth National Technology Fair. The decade also witnessed Silliman being cited as the university with the best published scientific paper in the Dr. Elvira O. Tan Awards; and in 1995, the university hosted the first ever International Conference on Biology and Conservation of Small Cetaceans of Southeast Asia, as well as the International Coral Reef Initiative Workshop.

Toward the end of the decade, Silliman prepared for its centennial celebrations. To strengthen its local area network technology, the university installed fiber-optic cables that span the entire 62 hectare campus in 1999. In 2000, the Silliman Accountancy program ranked first in the country, culminating in its Physical Therapy program ranking first in 2001.

Silliman University continues to draw support from the United Board for Christian Higher Education in Asia (UBCHEA), as well as from its alumni and other benefactors. The university has adopted a policy of providing education to the surrounding regions without depending much on tuition and other fees to meet its operational expenses. Recently, Silliman constructed the Portal West Building, a five-storey commercial building on campus, to help augment its operational expenses. In line with the same policy, it has leased portions of its properties to business entities to further raise its financial base.

Because significant portion of the student population ride on motorbikes and scooters, the university has also aggressively adopted a &quot;No Helmet-No Entry&quot; policy. Silliman has likewise adopted a &quot;No-Smoking Policy&quot; on campus.
Owing to its rich history, the university was declared as a National Historical Landmark by the National Historical Institute on June 19, 2002. A marker stating this declaration was installed inside the campus on September 23, 2022.

Silliman is one of few private higher educational institutions in the country that have been granted full autonomous status by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), the same government agency that recognized some of its programs as Centers of Excellence and Centers of Development. To date, the university has the highest number of accredited programs, fourteen of which have been granted Level IV accreditation status, the highest level that can be granted to individual programs.

==Campus==
Silliman is located in Dumaguete, a quiet, peaceful seaside community with a population of 116,392. The university campus has a total land area of 62 hectares composed of the main campus along Hibbard Avenue, and the campus for the College of Agriculture and the Institute of Environmental and Marine Sciences to the north. Dotted by large acacia trees, the main campus is home to most of the colleges and schools of the university and is adjacent to the city&#x27;s downtown district. Occupying almost one-third of the downtown area, the campus faces the sea to the east, flanked by its portals which are now considered symbols of the school and city. The three most prominent portals are the Gates of Knowledge, Opportunity and Service. The Gate of Knowledge is the current and main entrance; it is the starting point of the two-kilometer-long Hibbard Avenue which was named after Dr. David Sutherland Hibbard, one of the founders of the institution. The other prominent landmarks on the main campus are the Silliman Hall, which now houses the Anthropology Museum; the Silliman University Church; the Robert B. and Metta J. Silliman Library; and the Claire Isabel McGill Luce Auditorium, the largest theater outside Metro Manila. It is frequented by tourists so the university maintains a campus cruiser, a 15-seater golf cart or tram-like vehicle, to ferry visitors around the campus. It is used to transport students during regular days. 
Two kilometers to the north (the other end of Hibbard Avenue) is the campus for the College of Agriculture and the Institute of Environmental and Marine Sciences. It has a land area of 29 hectares, and houses the College of Agriculture Complex, the Silliman Farm, a number of dormitories (known as the Cocofed Dormitories) and the Marine Laboratories of the Institute of Environmental and Marine Sciences. Adjacent to it is the Silliman Beach.

Silliman has off-campus facilities located in Camp Lookout, Valencia and on Ticao Island, in the Province of Masbate. The Camp Lookout facility houses the university&#x27;s Creative Writing Center which now serves as the venue and permanent home of the Silliman National Writers Workshop. The center has a two-storey main function hall and five duplex cottages.

The university&#x27;s Ticao Island facility, on the other hand, is a 465-hectare property in the Province of Masbate, another island in Bicol Region. Donated by the family of Elizabeth How, the facility is a combination of a working ranch, agricultural plantations, and patches of secondary forests. A framework for a long-term development plan has been made and is now the subject for validation by local stakeholders. The plan includes programs for agriculture, Christian ministry, coastal resource management and public health.

Dumaguete has been called a &quot;center of learning in the south&quot; or a &quot;university town&quot; due to the presence of Silliman and other universities that have made their mark nationally and abroad. The city has become a melting pot of students, professionals, artists, scholars and the literati coming from the country and the world.

===Museums===
Silliman maintains six museums: the SU Anthropology Museum, the SU Heritage Museum, the Gonzales Museum of Natural History, the SU Marine Mammal Museum of the Institute of Environmental and Marine Sciences (IEMS), the Ariniego Art Gallery, and the SU-ROTC Museum.

The Anthropology Museum was relocated from Silliman Hall to Hibbard Hall in 2015. Established in 1973, it was opened to bring the importance of the Filipino&#x27;s cultural heritage to the attention of the public. The bulk of the artifacts displayed came from fieldworks, excavations, purchases and donations. The museum has seven galleries. The first three, contain exhibits which have been collected from known cultural or ethnic groups all over the country. These items or artifacts include simple tools and instruments such as basketry, agricultural and aquatic tools, weapons, clothing and ornaments as well as musical instruments. The display is based on two general criteria: the type of social organization (incipient, tribal or sultanate) and the type of economic subsistence (hunting, and gathering, marginal agriculture or farming) under which ethnic group is categorized. The exhibit on the last four galleries are artifacts excavated from different parts of Negros Island and in the mountain areas of Cotabato. A number of excavations done by Sillimanian anthropologists in the 1970s yielded ancient artifacts, like burial urns, and porcelain pieces which date back to the Sung period in the twelfth century.

The SU Heritage Museum which was opened in August 2020 and housed at the Silliman Hall, is a repository with exhibits on the university&#x27;s history since it was founded in 1901 by the Americans. Collections such as memorabilia and set-ups (e.g. classrooms) on what the life the founders had during the institution&#x27;s infancy are showcased in the various sections the museum has.

The other two museums are the Gonzales Museum of Natural History and the Marine Mammal Museum. The Gonzales Museum of Natural History is located at the first floor of the Science Complex. It showcases a collection of preserved animals traditionally found in the tropics such as different kinds of fishes, crustaceans, snakes, eagles, birds, flying lemurs, etc. The museum was named in honor Prof. Rodolfo Gonzales, a former biology teacher of the university. The Marine Mammal Museum on the other hand contains a large collection of whale and dolphin bones. It is located at a facility of the Institute of Environmental and Marine Sciences two kilometers north of the main campus. In 2015, the university opened its SU-ROTC Museum located on the first floor of Roman Yap Hall which houses the rare artifacts and equipment used in the Second World War and military uniforms of high-ranking Sillimanian military officials over the years.

===Zoo===
The A.Y. Reyes Zoological and Botanical Gardens or the Silliman University Zoo is the university zoo. It is also the home for the Center for Tropical Conservation Studies. The garden started in the 1960s as a tree planting project and field laboratory studies facility by the Silliman University Biology Department.
In 1990, it became the country&#x27;s first captive breeding center for the Philippine Spotted Deer (&quot;Rusa alfredi&quot;). Since then, the garden&#x27;s captive breeding program has expanded to include other endangered wildlife unique to the Philippines such as the Critically Endangered Visayan Warty Pig (&quot;Sus cebifrons&quot;) and the Negros Bleeding-Heart Dove (&quot;Gallicolumba keayi&quot;).
By 1996, the garden had grown to include over twenty animals and twenty-four plant species. The place was named the A.Y. Reyes Zoological and Botanical Garden after the late botanist, Prof. Alfredo Y. Reyes who helped start and develop the garden.

===Beach===
Silliman University has its own beach. It is situated at the front of the university&#x27;s marine laboratory building. Extension programs like local fishing has been a project to the university and to the local fishermen in Dumaguete.

==Administration==
Silliman is governed by an independent Board of Trustees composed of fifteen members. Five of its members come from the Silliman University Foundation Incorporated (SUFI), five from the UCCP, and another five from the alumni. The president of the university sits as an &quot;ex-officio&quot; member. Under the board are the administrators composed of the University President, the Vice President for Academic Affairs and Research, Chief Finance Officer, the Records Management Chief, Treasurer, Human Resource Management Chief, University General Counsel and Senior Minister.

Assisting the senior members of the administration are the deans, directors, department chairpersons, coordinators, officers and unit heads of the various colleges, schools, institutes, units, research centers, offices, programs and extension projects of the university. Though historically Protestant, the university is academically nonsectarian.

Its learning environment has remained generally liberal and its religious orientation has in no way discouraged the expression or exercise of other beliefs. A majority of the university&#x27;s student and faculty population are Roman Catholics, with a significant portion of Muslims from Mindanao and the Middle East.

==Rankings==

Internationally, Silliman is ranked among the top universities in Asia based on International Students&#x27; Review by the Quacquarelli Symonds (QS), an institution considered as one the world&#x27;s renowned university ranking agencies. In the 2023 edition of the agency&#x27;s ranking, it is ranked 5th in the Philippines, 88th in Southeastern Asia, and 551st-600th in the whole of Asia, respectively.

Quacquarelli Symonds (QS) ranked the university in Asia, placing it in the 251-300 rankings in 2016, 351–400 in 2018, 451–500 in 2019 and 2020, 501–550 in 2021 and 2022.

In the 2023 edition of Quacquarelli Symonds (QS) Asian University Rankings, 16 Philippine universities were included in the said rankings, and Silliman landed in the 551-600 place.

In a 2007 report released by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) and the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), Silliman University was ranked fourth in the country, following three schools of the University of the Philippines (UP) namely, UP-Diliman, UP-Los Baños, and UP-Manila, which ranked first, second and third respectively. The survey was based on average passing rates in Board examinations from 1991 to 2001 in all courses of all universities and colleges in the Philippines. The study is conducted every ten years.

In other board or licensure examination-related reports released by the CHED in the year 2009, Silliman was ranked first in the country in the field of Nursing Education and second in the fields of Accountancy and Mechanical Engineering.

==Academics==

===Recognition===

The Commission on Higher Education (Philippines) (CHED) designated Silliman as a Center of Excellence in Information Technology, Teacher Education and Nursing Education, and a Center of Development in Anthropology, Biology, and Medical Technology Aside from these, the university was also named by the United States Agency for International Development as a Center of Excellence in Coastal Resource Management, and by the Haribon Foundation as an Academic Center of Excellence in Biodiversity Conservation. Due to the university&#x27;s community-based coastal resource management program, Apo Island, a small island off the coast of Dauin, was recognized as one of the best diving spots in the world.

===International linkages===

On top of its strong affiliation with the United Board for Christian Higher Education in Asia (UBCHEA) and other international development organizations, Silliman maintains linkages on collaborative research as well as on faculty and student exchange, with universities in the United States, Asia, and Europe. Its longest running student exchange programs are with three Japanese universities: International Christian University, Ferris University and Shikoku Gakuin University. Silliman also maintains research and academic linkages with the University of Washington (USA), California State University, East Bay (USA), Gordon College (USA), the Smithsonian Institution (USA), Texas Tech University (USA), Old Dominion University (USA), Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University (Japan), Chonbuk National University (South Korea), Hanshin University (South Korea), Sookmyung Women&#x27;s University (South Korea), Soongsil University (South Korea), Hanyang University (South Korea), Sam Ratulangi University (Indonesia), the Asian College of Nursing and Health (Malaysia), Hannam University (South Korea), Madras Christian College (India), Kinki University (Japan), and Ingolstadt University of Applied Sciences (Germany).

===Accreditation===
Silliman University confers bachelor&#x27;s, master&#x27;s, and doctoral degrees accredited by different bodies and agencies such as the ACSCU-AAI, PAASCU (a member of FAAP), and the ATESEA among others.

===Colleges===


*The College of Agriculture provides undergraduate programs in Agribusiness, Agronomy and Animal Science. The college is located in a 29-hectare agricultural complex, two kilometers north of the main campus. Its beginnings can be traced to as early as 1913, when Dr. David S. Hibbard, first president of Silliman Institute, was instructed to make provisions for a “school garden and a farm”. In 1950, it was formalized and established as a department, and in 1976, was constituted into what was then known as the School of Agriculture. The years 1977 to 1980 saw the construction of modern classrooms, a laboratory complex, eight dormitories and a library, and the renaming of the school into what is now known as the “College of Agriculture”.
*The College of Arts and Sciences provides several degree programs. At present, it is composed of the departments of Anthropology and Sociology, Biology, Chemistry, English and Literature, History and Political Science, Filipino and Foreign Languages, Mathematics, Philosophy and Religion, Physics, Psychology, Social Work Department. During its early years (1902 up to the war years), the College of Arts and Sciences was composed of the College of Liberal Arts and the College of Sciences. In 1947, both colleges were merged to become the College of Arts and Sciences.
*The College of Business Administration provides undergraduate courses in Business Administration (majors in General Business, Management and Economics), Accountancy, Entrepreneurship, Business Computer Applications, and Office Management. It also has one graduate program in Business Administration namely &quot;Master in Business Administration&quot;. Established as a college in 1938, it is now composed of the departments of Management, Economics, Accountancy, Business Computer Applications, Entrepreneurship, and Commercial Science. Due to its consistently high performance in accountancy board examinations, the college has been designated by CHED as a Center of Development in Accountancy Education. In the October 2009 CPA Licensure Examinations (10–25 examinees category), Silliman ranked second in the country.
*The College of Computer Studies provides undergraduate courses in Computer Science, Information Technology, and Information Systems. The college was designated by CHED as a Center of Excellence in Information Technology Education. In 1997, Silliman is one of only two universities in the Philippines that has an extensive fiber-optic backbone and the only school in the country that owns its fiber-optic system. Costing US $2.5 million in 1997, this backbone connects all buildings in the campus. Silliman was also the first school in the country to use wireless Wi-Fi B2B LAN technology. Recently, the college opened its master&#x27;s degree in Information Systems, and pilot tested the Silliman Online University Learning (SOUL) website, a virtual classroom for students. It has also formed partnerships with Microsoft and IBM. The Microsoft Developer Network Academic Alliance has given the college a 3-year complimentary MSDNAA subscription which allows it to download available software in MSDNAA for free to all students and faculty for teaching and learning purposes, while the college&#x27;s partnership with IBM resulted in the introduction of the &quot;IBM Academic Exchange Offering&quot;. Electives under the program are developed for junior and graduating students majoring in Information Technology, Information Systems and Computer Science.
*The College of Engineering and Design started as a Department of Engineering in June 1932, offering an undergraduate program in civil engineering. In March 1935, the board of trustees authorized the change in status of Silliman from an institute to a university. With government approval of this change, Silliman proceeded to adopt additional undergraduate programs in mining engineering, chemical engineering and industrial engineering. Today, the college offers five undergraduate courses in: architecture, civil engineering; computer engineering; electrical engineering; and mechanical engineering. In the October 2009 Mechanical Engineering Licensure Examinations (Category A), Silliman was ranked second in the country.
*The College of Education has been designated by CHED as Center of Excellence in Teacher Education. The college has three departments: Physical Education, Teacher Education, and Nutrition and Dietetics. Its beginnings can be traced way back in 1924 when it first offered diplomas in Bachelor of Science in education. From then on, the Teacher Education Program grew and developed into what is now known as the College of Education.
* The College of Law was established in 1935, starting with a freshman class of 22 members. It is housed at the Villareal Hall, named after former Speaker of the House Cornelio Villareal. The college has chosen the motto &quot;Law with a Conscience.&quot; It is also home to the Dr. Jovito R. Salonga Center for Law and Development. Starting SY 2009–2010, the college shifted its course offering from Bachelor of Laws (LLB) to Juris Doctor (JD). Silliman is the first law school to offer the JD program in the Visayas and Mindanao area.
*The College of Mass Communication was established in 1966 as the first school outside of metropolitan Manila to offer a degree program in Journalism. Its founding director was D. Wayne Rowland, Ph.D., a visiting professor in journalism from Texas Christian University. In 1976, the college (then known as the School of Communication) changed its course offering from a bachelor&#x27;s degree in Journalism to that of Mass Communication to cover the ever-expanding field of mass communication.
*The College of Nursing was designated by CHED as a Center of Excellence in Nursing Education. The college offers one undergraduate course in Nursing and three graduate courses namely: (1) &quot;Master in Nursing&quot; [non-thesis] &quot;Majors&quot; in Family Nursing Practice, Administration, Public Health Nursing, Adult Health and Psychiatric-Mental Health Nursing; (2) &quot;Master of Science in Nursing&quot; &quot;Majors&quot; in Parent-Child Nursing, Nursing School Administration, Nursing Service Administration, Public Health Nursing, Medical Surgical Nursing, Psychiatric-Mental Nursing, Family Nursing Practice, Community Health Nursing and Adult Health; and (3) &quot;Ph.D. in Nursing&quot;. Founded in 1947, the college is known for its ratings in the professional licensure exams which have been consistently higher than the national average. In a 2009 report handed down by CHED, Silliman was ranked first in the country.
*The College of Performing and Visual Arts provides programs in Fine Arts, Music, and Speech &amp; Theater Arts. The college started in 1912 as a music department in the College of Arts and Sciences. With the arrival of American missionary Geraldine Kate in 1934, it was renamed as the Conservatory of Music, with Kate as its founding director. In 1941, it became known as the School of Music, and with the addition of the Fine Arts Department in 1969, was recast as the School of Music and Fine Arts. Another transformation came in 2001 when its name was changed to the College of Performing Arts.

===Schools===
*The Divinity School provides undergraduate and graduate programs in Divinity, Ministry and Theology. It started in 1921 as the Silliman Bible School, serving as a Congregationalist-Presbyterian training school for Visayan-speaking candidates in pastoral ministry. Its students and alumni are a diverse group of local and international students.
*The Medical School is a relatively new unit in the university. Established in 2004, it has a faculty of 50 medical doctors specializing in Rheumatology, Anesthesiology, Cardiology, Endocrinology, Eye-Ear-Nose-Throat, Family Medicine Gastroenterology, General Surgery, Hematology, Infectious Diseases, Internal Medicine, Nephrology, Neurology, Neuro-Surgery, Nuclear Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oncology, Orthopedic Surgery, Pediatrics, Psychiatry, Public Health Administration, Pulmonary Medicine, Rehabilitation Medicine, and Urology.
*The School of Public Affairs and Governance started in June 2007, with Dr. Reynaldo Y. Rivera as the first dean, to provide formal training in the management of local government affairs. It specializes in three areas: Fiscal Administration, Local Governance, and Criminal Justice System; and offers two degree programs, Public Administration (BSPA) and Foreign Affairs (BSFA). The School aims to beef up the expertise of public servants to become more efficient administrators who can discharge their duties in the most economical way with maximum results. A distinguished panel of guest lecturers from Manila and abroad join the resident faculty of Silliman in teaching the courses.
*The School of Basic Education is home to three departments: Early Childhood, Elementary, and High School. When Silliman Institute (former name of Silliman University) was founded in 1901, it started as an elementary school; thus, making the Elementary Department the oldest unit in the university. In 1916, the first high school diplomas were awarded, and in 1957–58, funding for an Early Childhood School building was secured. Historically, the Early Childhood, Elementary and High School departments operated separately. Due to developments within the university in 2001, however, and to facilitate better coordination between these departments, the early childhood, elementary, and high schools, were merged as one unit, forming what is now known as the School of Basic Education.
* The School of Agro-Industrial and Technical Education provides short TESDA-accredited technical-vocational certificate courses. These courses are generally sponsored through scholarship grants from government agencies such as TESDA and DepEd.

===Institutes===
* The Institute of Clinical Laboratory Sciences offers one undergraduate course in Medical Technology. The Institute started as a program under the Biology Department of the College of Arts and Sciences in 1970. Due to the growth of its student population, exemplary performance in licensure examinations and need for autonomy, it was separated and constituted as a department under the same college in 1987, making it into a Department of Medical Technology. In 1995, the university reorganized some of its programs and transferred the Medical Technology department to the College of Nursing, creating a new college named College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. Starting SY 2009–2010 however, in a bid to give the department more autonomy in crafting its own academic direction, it was separated from the College of Nursing as an entirely autonomous institute.
* The Institute of Rehabilitative Sciences provides one undergraduate course in Physical Therapy. Like the Medical Technology Department, the institute started as a program under the College of Arts and Sciences. It was subsequently migrated to the College of Nursing together with the Medical Technology Department, forming a new college, the College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. For over a decade, the Physical Therapy program was attached to the College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. To provide more autonomy for the program, it was separated from the college in SY 2009–2010 and reconstituted as the Institute of Rehabilitative Sciences.

===Library system===

The Silliman Library System is composed of the &quot;Robert B. and Metta J. Silliman Library&quot;, which serves as the university library, and the local libraries of the College of Agriculture, College of Business Administration, College of Law, the Divinity School, the Allied Health Sciences, High School, Elementary and Early Childhood Schools. Among these libraries the &quot;Robert B. and Metta J. Silliman Library&quot; (university library) serves as the largest repository of books, periodicals and other reading materials. Built in 1978, the university library is a four-story structure with a seating capacity of 490 readers. It holds over 250,000 volumes, with enough space to accommodate 400,000 more. It also subscribes to 500 periodicals. Some courses provide instruction in the location of books and publications for research and other school work. Students can search for library materials using the On-Line Public Access Catalogue. Instructions on how to use it are posted on the stations were the system is installed. Research can also be done using the Internet through the Cyberlibrary. Students pay a semestral fee to avail of this service.

Aside from the main section of the library which contains the bulk of its book and periodical collection, other notable sections of the facility include the Filipiniana section, containing books and materials published by famous Filipino authors during the Spanish and pre-war periods of the country, and the Sillimaniana section, containing Silliman memorabilia from 1901 up to the present (e.g. trophies, plaques of recognition, portraits of past presidents, etc.), and an archive of past publications and documents.

The university library is likewise home to two notable centers: the American Studies Resource Center (ASRC) and a World Bank Knowledge for Development Center (WB-KDC). The American Studies Resource Center is a result of a memorandum of agreement between the United States Embassy in Manila and Silliman University. It is the only ASRC in Region VII hosted by an academic institution. The ASRC provides a variety of materials: books, periodicals, CD-ROMS, DVDs, VCDs, VHS tapes, electronic materials for those interested in studies and issues related to the United States.

The World Bank Knowledge for Development Center is a result of a partnership between the university and the World Bank. It contains an extensive collection of development publications and World Bank project documents to people involved in the academe, researchers, NGOs, media, government agencies and the business sector. The section is open to the public.

To date, the Silliman Library remains as one of the biggest libraries in the Philippines. In 2008, the Silliman University Library System was given the &quot;Outstanding Library Award&quot; by the Philippine Association of Academic and Research Librarians (PAARL) for its growing collection and ongoing computerization program.

===Medical Center===

The Silliman University Medical Center is a university-owned hospital that is currently being operated and managed by the Silliman University Medical Center Foundation Inc. (SUMCFI), a separate and distinct foundation with its own Board of Directors. The hospital supports the academic institution by serving as the university&#x27;s base facility for the internship programs of the College of Nursing, School of Medicine, the Institutes of Clinical Laboratory and Rehabilitative Sciences, the Divinity School (for its chaplaincy program), and the Nutrition and Dietetics Department.

It is a 140-bed hospital located on campus with comprehensive medical services available to both the university and the community in general. The SU Medical Center started as an infirmary in 1901 and later became a hospital in 1923. In 1974, the cornerstone for a New Medical Center was laid down by the Netherlands Ambassador to the Philippines to commence the building of a four-storey structure with passenger elevators (the first in Negros Oriental). Inaugurated in 1976, it is considered as one of the most modern hospitals outside Metro Manila and Cebu. In 1979, the Medical Center made history when its Van Houweling Research Laboratory discovered and produced a dog vaccine that gave a three-year immunity from rabies. The development of the vaccine was later used by other countries, in collaboration with the World Health Organization, on their fight against rabies. Recently, a new Medical Arts Building was added to the main structure of the hospital to further address the growing needs of the surrounding community. The SU Medical Center has collaborative ties with St. Luke&#x27;s Medical Center.

===Research and extension===

Concurrent with its academic undertakings, the university is engaged in collaborative research and community extension programs. From 2000 to 2011, it has been designated as a CHED Zonal Research Center for Region VII, and in 2011, was chosen by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) as one of few academic institutions to comprise a national research network which entitles the university to receive an annual allocation of P10 million for a three-year period.

Selected researches are published in the &quot;Silliman Journal&quot;, the university&#x27;s research publication. Foremost among the university&#x27;s research outputs are those that have been undertaken in the field of Environmental and Marine Sciences, historically spearheaded by the Silliman University Marine Laboratory (SUML) now the Institute of Environmental and Marine Sciences (IEMS). IEMS is a research institute in the field of marine sciences located at Silliman Beach, two kilometers north of the main campus. Established in 1974 through a modest grant from the United Church of Canada, it has produced notable research that are presently being applied in various cooperative projects in different local communities, such as the conservation programs in Sumilon and Apo Island. This research institute also led in the establishment of 20 marine protected areas (MPAs) and has provided assistance to 61 others in the Visayas and Mindanao. For its research and biodiversity conservation efforts, it was recognized by the Commission on Higher Education as the best in research program in the country. In July 2013, Greenpeace an international environmental organization partnered with Silliman University in conducting a reef check at Apo Island to determine the damage on the reef caused by climate change.

Other units engaged in either research or extension include the Center for Gender Studies and Development; the Center for Tropical Conservation Studies (CENTROP); the Salonga Center for Law and Development; and the SU-Angelo King Center for Research and Environmental Management (SUAKCREM).

Extension projects of the university also include the SU-Affiliated Non-Conventional Energy Center (SU-ANEC); the SU-KNH Kaugmaran Child Development Center (SUKCDC); the Alternative Lifestyle for Women in Negros Project; H. Capability Program (CBP) for the Province of Negros Oriental; HIV-AIDS Prevention Project; the Marina Clinic Outreach Program, Rural Development and Credit Program (On Monitoring); and the SU-AADC Integrated Agro-Forestry Participatory Program for Negros Oriental (On Monitoring).

==Culture and traditions==
===Via, Veritas, Vita===
&quot;Via, Veritas, Vita&quot; is a Latin phrase which means “The Way, The Truth, and The Life.” Chosen by the university as its motto, this phrase is attributed to Jesus Christ and is found in the Gospel of John chapter 14, verse 6, which reads “5Thomas said to him, &quot;Lord, we don&#x27;t know where you are going, so how can we know the way?&quot; 6Jesus answered, &quot;I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. 7If you really knew me, you would know my Father as well. From now on, you do know him and have seen him.&quot; (New International Version) The choice of the motto is firmly rooted in the university&#x27;s belief that religious instruction, particularly in the teachings of Jesus Christ, is essential to the moral development of every young person. Incidentally, the motto has been adopted by the Province of Negros Oriental by incorporating it in its provincial seal.

===Galilean Fellowships===
Once every semester, the Silliman academic community celebrates the University Christian Life Emphasis Week (UCLEW). In this week-long celebration, the university encourages all students to participate in the different Bible study or fellowship activities held in the homes and cottages of assigned members of the Silliman academic or religious community. Conducted after classes, these sessions are called the Galilean Fellowships. Galilean fellowships are brief devotional sessions where participants are given the opportunity to reflect on the teachings of the Bible, relax, share their thoughts and experiences, and have fellowship with other members of the academic community.

===Founders Week===
Founders Week is part of a two-week-long event conducted by the Silliman community to commemorate the founding of the university. This event is held in the last week of August. The celebration is characterized by class reunions, alumni, fraternity and organizational gatherings, concerts, exhibits, booth-building, awarding ceremonies (e.g. the Outstanding Sillimanian Awards), and invitational games with other schools. The week-long celebration is traditionally commenced by an early morning worship service called Sunrise Service at the Silliman University Church and culminated with a citywide parade held on the anniversary of the university&#x27;s founding, August 28. The parade is referred to as the &quot;Parada Sillimaniana&quot; and August 28 is referred to as the &quot;Founders Day&quot; in honor of the pioneers. For the past few years, however, the university moved the parades to August 27. Traditionally, the parade is characterized by the use of floats, with each representing a particular college, department, or school.

===Silliman Song===
Before the end of an important event or ceremony the &quot;Silliman Song&quot; is sung by the attendees. The lyrics were written in 1918 by Dr. Paul Doltz, then the vice-president of Silliman Institute and pastor of Silliman Church. The tune of the song is an or modification of &quot;The Orange and the Black&quot; of Princeton University, Dr. Doltz&#x27;s &quot;alma mater&quot;. The melody is based on the original song &quot;Sadie Ray&quot; composed by J. Tannenbaum late in the 19th century. The Silliman Song briefly describes Silliman&#x27;s tranquil location; the student&#x27;s college or university experience; the student&#x27;s victories, whether it be in the classroom, the court, the track, or the field; the highs and lows in life; and the principles that the graduate brings as the latter leaves the halls of the university. Sang by the Silliman community for almost a hundred years, the Silliman Song has popularized the phrases &quot;Dear old Silliman&quot; and &quot;Silliman beside the sea&quot;.

==Student life==

===Athletics===
Silliman has several athletic facilities. The university Gymnasium is a multipurpose facility used for basketball, volleyball, badminton, rock-climbing, table-tennis, cheering, and other indoor activities. The Cimafranca Ballfield is primarily used for football, and for track and field events. Other athletic facilities include an Olympic-sized swimming pool, tennis courts, pelota courts, and an archery range.

Silliman has varsity teams for almost every major sport. A regular participant of the Philippine University Games (UniGames) and the Private Schools Athletic Association (PRISAA), Silliman is represented by a red and white Stallion or Mare. In the recent Beijing Olympics, Mark Javier, a Sillimanian, represented the Philippines in the field of Archery. He was the lone male archer that represented the country. Other notable Philippine Olympians that came from Silliman include Jennifer Chan, who recently won a gold medal in the 25th SEA Games, Lisa Ygnalaga, and long jumper Simeon Toribio.

===Student government===

The coordination of student activities and student organizations are handled by the Silliman University Student Government (SUSG), established in 1912 and interrupted during World War II and briefly suspended during Martial Law. Under the present set-up, the Student Government is divided into three branches: the executive, the legislative, and the judicial departments. The executive power is exercised by the President with the assistance of the Cabinet. The Cabinet is composed of the President, Vice President and the respective heads of the executive committee who are appointed by the President. The legislative power of the SUSG is vested in the Student Assembly. It is composed of elected representatives of the different schools and colleges. The Judiciary exercises judicial power. It is composed of the Prime Justice, who must be a junior Law student, and six other justices appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the Committee on Appointments. Election of Student Government officers are held before the close of the academic year. Political campaigns or rallies may be held after securing the necessary permits. Political campaigns in the university are characterized by rallies in the Amphitheater, classroom-to-classroom speaking engagements, and dorm-to-dorm campaigns.

Currently, there are two student political parties in the university, the Students&#x27; Union for Reforms (SURE) Party and the Concerted Action for the Upliftment of Student Endeavors (CAUSE) Party, established in 1980 and 1981, respectively.

The Student Government is under the supervision and oversight of the Student Organizations and Activities Division (SOAD).

===Organizations===

Numerous student organizations are registered in the university. Some are regional societies organized to promote fellowship among students from particular geographical areas. There are service clubs such as fraternities and sororities which carry out, as part of their activities, projects on campus and in the community. Others are identified with particular academic disciplines such as physics, chemistry, and mathematics known as course-related organizations, and still others belong to the special or interest groups. The supervision and coordination of student organizations are undertaken by the Student Organizations and Activities Division (SOAD) together with the Silliman University Student Government (SUSG).

===Student publications===
Student publications include the &quot;Weekly Sillimanian&quot;, one of the first weekly student newspaper in the country, with its existence dating back as early as 1903; the &quot;Portal&quot;, official yearbook, first published in 1913; the &quot;Dark Blue Southern Seas&quot;, a literary journal published in cooperation with the Department of English; the &quot;Junior Sillimanian&quot;, a publication of students from the High School Department; and the &quot;Stones and Pebbles&quot;, a publication of students from the Elementary School. In addition to the &quot;Silliman Law Journal&quot;, the College of Law in partnership with the Salonga Law Center maintains its own publication called the &quot;Purple Map&quot;, a legal discussion platform for law students which was started in 2010.

Most of these publications, particularly the &quot;Weekly Sillimanian&quot;, the &quot;Portal&quot;, &quot;Junior Sillimanian&quot; and the &quot;Stones and Pebbles&quot; are supported by the students through a publication fee; the &quot;Purple Map&quot; is maintained by way of endowments from law alumni.

===Dormitories and faculty housing===
Silliman operates regular and cooperative dormitories which can provide space for approximately 800 students. These dormitories are named after Philippine trees, flowers, and significant historical figures of the university. The university categorizes these dormitories as either &quot;regular&quot; or &quot;cooperative.&quot; Of the first type, housekeeping is generally maintained by a dorm staff and meals are supervised by the university&#x27;s Food Services. There are six regular dormitories (four for women and two for men) and seven cooperative dormitories (four for women and three for men). The regular dormitories for women are Edith Carson, Ethel Chapman, Larena and the Woodward Hall. For men, the regular dormitories are the Vernon Hall (formerly New Men&#x27;s Dormitory) and Doltz Hall.

The second type of dormitories are the cooperative dormitories. In these dormitories, residents undertake the housekeeping and planning of the food. With the exception of Channon Hall, cooperative dormitories for women are named after flowers like Azucena, Rosal, and Sampaguita. For men, the dormitories are named after trees like Ipil, Molave, and Narra.

In addition to the foregoing, the university maintains a number of cottages for members of its faculty and staff as well as for guests and visiting alumni.

==Alumni==

There are currently forty alumni chapters throughout the world that are duly organized and recognized. Five of these are based in the U.S. and Canada. Notable alumni of the university include Carlos P. Garcia, eighth President of the Philippines; Senators Robert Barbers, Lorenzo Teves, and the Great Filibuster Roseller Lim; House Speaker Cornelio Villareal; John Gokongwei Sr., a Philippine business magnate; Frederick Dael, former CEO and President of Pepsi Cola Asia Pacific, and former CEO of Islacom; William Torres, &quot;Father of Philippine Internet&quot; and co-founder of Mozaic Corporation; Vicente Sinco, one of the signatories of the UN Charter in 1945, the eighth President of the University of the Philippines, and founder of Foundation University; MacArthur Corsino, former Philippine Ambassador to the Republic of Cuba; Antonio P. Villamor, Philippine Ambassador to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; Juanita Amatong, former Secretary of the Department of Finance and first woman executive director in the World Bank Group from the Philippines; Angel Alcala, Ramon Magsaysay Awardee for Public Service and former Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Leonor M. Briones, former National Treasurer of the Republic of the Philippines; Emilio Macias II, former Governor of Negros Oriental; Efren N. Padilla, executive director, Center for Filipino Studies California State University, East Bay; Jose Andrada, first commanding officer of the Philippine Navy (formerly Off Shore Patrol) under the Philippine Commonwealth in 1939 and after whom the Headquarters of the Philippine Navy is now named; Edith L. Tiempo, National Artist for Literature (1999); Edilberto K. Tiempo, Filipino writer, professor and founder of the Silliman National Writers Workshop., Eddie S. Romero, National Artist for Cinema and Broadcast Arts (2003); Leoncio P. Deriada, Palanca Awards Hall of Famer; César Ruiz Aquino, Filipino poet and fictionist; Simeon Toribio, one of few Filipinos who won medals in the history of world Olympics.

Sillimanians have also excelled in the field of journalism such as Claire Delfin of GMA Network and Ina Reformina of ABS-CBN; while there are those who entered showbusiness such as Bret Jackson, Beauty Gonzalez, and Theodore Boborol.

==References==

===Notes===
:a. References for the Presidents of Silliman: David S. Hibbard, Roy H. Brown; Arthur L. Carson; Leopoldo T. Ruiz; Cicero D. Calderon; Quintin S. Doromal; Venancio D. Aldecoa; Pedro V. Flores; Angel C. Alcala; Mervyn J. Misajon; Agustin A. Pulido; and Ben S. Malayang.

:b. The main library was renamed as the Robert B. and Metta J. Silliman Library. Robert B. Silliman served as the University&#x27;s Vice-President during the Presidency of Dr. Leopoldo Ruiz.
===Footnotes===
===References===
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1583940" start="0" end="19" title="Silliman University" label="Silliman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583940" start="41" end="49" title="Silliman University" label="Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583940" start="53" end="55" title="Silliman University" label="SU"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="62" end="69" title="private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="71" end="81" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="87" end="106" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q873377" start="118" end="132" title="Dumaguete City" label="Dumaguete City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583940" start="170" end="188" title="Silliman University" label="Silliman Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="252" end="260" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="265" end="275" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="284" end="295" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="299" end="314" title="Higher education" label="higher learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="352" end="362" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902130" start="383" end="408" title="Horace Brinsmade Silliman" label="Horace Brinsmade Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303396" start="455" end="471" title="Downtown Cohoes Historic District" label="Cohoes, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="564" end="581" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="785" end="801" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="920" end="928" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1512" end="1525" title="Higher education in the Philippines#Accreditation" label="accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652138" start="1820" end="1849" title="National Historical Commission of the Philippines" label="National Historical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152716" start="1978" end="2008" title="Commission on Higher Education (Philippines)" label="Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809727" start="2046" end="2104" title="Association of Christian Universities and Colleges in Asia" label="Association of Christian Universities and Colleges in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="2164" end="2187" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs" label="Veterans Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="2489" end="2493" title="arts" label="arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="2495" end="2506" title="accountancy" label="accountancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2508" end="2519" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="2521" end="2533" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="2535" end="2558" title="business administration" label="business administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="2560" end="2571" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="2573" end="2580" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="2582" end="2590" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="2592" end="2614" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="2616" end="2619" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2621" end="2629" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="2631" end="2638" title="nursing" label="nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="2640" end="2652" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="2654" end="2661" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="2663" end="2672" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519843" start="2674" end="2691" title="medical Technology" label="clinical sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="2693" end="2711" title="Pharmacy" label="pharmacy education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374230" start="2713" end="2730" title="teacher education" label="teacher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="2732" end="2741" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188847" start="2743" end="2764" title="environmental science" label="environmental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="2766" end="2775" title="fine arts" label="fine arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="2777" end="2804" title="Performing Arts" label="theater and performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q150352" start="2806" end="2822" title="foreign language" label="foreign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="2825" end="2832" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="2834" end="2844" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420675" start="2846" end="2861" title="library science" label="library science"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="2863" end="2878" title="marine sciences" label="marine sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="2880" end="2903" title="Nutrition" label="nutrition and dietetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="2905" end="2910" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2912" end="2919" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="2921" end="2929" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="2931" end="2941" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="2943" end="2953" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="2955" end="2976" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="2981" end="2992" title="social work" label="social work"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="3223" end="3228" title="USAID" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3411" end="3421" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3478" end="3490" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380598" start="3705" end="3711" title="Cohoes, New York" label="Cohoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3713" end="3721" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902130" start="3732" end="3757" title="Horace Brinsmade Silliman" label="Horace Brinsmade Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797817" start="3814" end="3831" title="Hampton Institute" label="Hampton Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240187" start="3948" end="3972" title="David Sutherland Hibbard" label="David Sutherland Hibbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q568451" start="3985" end="3999" title="Lyndon, Kansas" label="Lyndon, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13786" start="4344" end="4348" title="Cebu" label="Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629" start="4350" end="4359" title="Zamboanga City" label="Zamboanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13825" start="4364" end="4370" title="Iloilo" label="Iloilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q873377" start="4435" end="4444" title="Dumaguete" label="Dumaguete"/>
<link wikidata="Q463587" start="5687" end="5739" title="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions" label="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="5766" end="5789" title="Congregational" label="Congregational Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710866" start="6293" end="6315" title="Philippine Legislature" label="Philippine Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="6473" end="6479" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="6913" end="6936" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="7008" end="7027" title="Disciples of Christ" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7075" end="7087" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q928075" start="7146" end="7156" title="Corregidor" label="Corregidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q873377" start="7194" end="7203" title="Dumaguete" label="Dumaguete"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798213" start="7621" end="7634" title="Arthur Carson" label="Arthur Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13863" start="7764" end="7779" title="Negros Oriental" label="Negros Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q195140" start="7868" end="7884" title="Valencia, Negros Oriental" label="Malabo, Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932912" start="7946" end="7954" title="List of American guerrillas in the Philippines" label="Roy Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q581261" start="8127" end="8160" title="South West Pacific Area (command)" label="South West Pacific Area (command)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872121" start="8548" end="8568" title="USS Narwhal (SS-167)" label="USS Narwhal (SS-167)"/>
<link wikidata="Q873377" start="8630" end="8639" title="Dumaguete" label="Dumaguete"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="9613" end="9621" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="9626" end="9630" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="9716" end="9749" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740956" start="11039" end="11050" title="Martial law under Ferdinand Marcos" label="Martial Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q963772" start="11334" end="11360" title="Philippine National Police" label="Philippine National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774147" start="11465" end="11483" title="Weekly Sillimanian" label="Weekly Sillimanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106280562" start="11544" end="11558" title="Crispin Maslog" label="Crispin Maslog"/>
<link wikidata="Q471876" start="11725" end="11739" title="Jovito Salonga" label="Jovito Salonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12965483" start="11752" end="11762" title="Juan Liwag" label="Juan Liwag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907935" start="11943" end="11954" title="Vaccination of dogs" label="dog vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="11992" end="11998" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007169" start="12053" end="12067" title="rabies vaccine" label="rabies vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="12108" end="12122" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211436" start="12214" end="12221" title="Visayas" label="Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="12226" end="12234" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="12350" end="12375" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="12554" end="12567" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Marcos regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="13496" end="13510" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="13673" end="13691" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="13729" end="13740" title="fiber-optics" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="14607" end="14617" title="motorbikes" label="motorbikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193234" start="14622" end="14630" title="Motorscooter" label="scooters"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14851" end="14879" title=":Category:National Historical Landmarks of the Philippines" label="National Historical Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652138" start="14887" end="14916" title="National Historical Commission of the Philippines" label="National Historical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152716" start="15156" end="15186" title="Commission on Higher Education (Philippines)" label="Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q873377" start="15547" end="15556" title="Dumaguete" label="Dumaguete"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="15864" end="15870" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854429" start="16112" end="16119" title="portal (architecture)" label="portals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240187" start="16411" end="16435" title="David Sutherland Hibbard" label="David Sutherland Hibbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623604" start="16534" end="16547" title="Silliman Hall" label="Silliman Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q195140" start="17472" end="17480" title="Valencia, Negros Oriental" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861798" start="17488" end="17500" title="Ticao Island" label="Ticao Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13847" start="17521" end="17528" title="Masbate" label="Masbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515380" start="17665" end="17699" title="Silliman National Writers Workshop" label="Silliman National Writers Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861798" start="17797" end="17809" title="Ticao Island" label="Ticao Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13847" start="17884" end="17891" title="Masbate" label="Masbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13662" start="17911" end="17923" title="Bicol Region" label="Bicol Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="18936" end="18948" title="Anthropology" label="Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="18949" end="18955" title="Museum" label="Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623604" start="18975" end="18988" title="Silliman Hall" label="Silliman Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q212777" start="19903" end="19916" title="Negros Island" label="Negros Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13791" start="19946" end="19954" title="Cotabato" label="Cotabato"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="20847" end="20858" title="crustaceans" label="crustaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="20860" end="20866" title="snakes" label="snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="20868" end="20873" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="20876" end="20881" title="birds" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q183383" start="20883" end="20896" title="flying lemurs" label="flying lemurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q645732" start="21881" end="21904" title="Philippine Spotted Deer" label="Philippine Spotted Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707414" start="22916" end="22920" title="United Church of Christ in the Philippines" label="UCCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q508719" start="22948" end="22954" title="alumni" label="alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="23005" end="23015" title="ex-officio" label="ex-officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049579" start="23641" end="23653" title="nonsectarian" label="nonsectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="23944" end="23952" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087798" start="24112" end="24132" title="Quacquarelli Symonds" label="Quacquarelli Symonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087798" start="24394" end="24414" title="Quacquarelli Symonds" label="Quacquarelli Symonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087798" start="24588" end="24608" title="Quacquarelli Symonds" label="Quacquarelli Symonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248019" start="24780" end="24814" title="Professional Regulation Commission" label="Professional Regulation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152716" start="24829" end="24859" title="Commission on Higher Education (Philippines)" label="Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q746592" start="24953" end="24982" title="University of the Philippines" label="University of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152716" start="25355" end="25359" title="Commission on Higher Education (Philippines)" label="CHED"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152716" start="25560" end="25604" title="Commission on Higher Education (Philippines)" label="Commission on Higher Education (Philippines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="25858" end="25908" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072397" start="25978" end="25996" title="Haribon Foundation" label="Haribon Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q618753" start="26145" end="26155" title="Apo Island" label="Apo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q194940" start="26189" end="26194" title="Dauin" label="Dauin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141728" start="26682" end="26716" title="International Christian University" label="International Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445386" start="26718" end="26735" title="Ferris University" label="Ferris University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496605" start="26740" end="26765" title="Shikoku Gakuin University" label="Shikoku Gakuin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="26831" end="26855" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026916" start="26863" end="26900" title="California State University, East Bay" label="California State University, East Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585004" start="26908" end="26922" title="Gordon College (Massachusetts)" label="Gordon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="26934" end="26957" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="26965" end="26986" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="26994" end="27017" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133142" start="27025" end="27060" title="Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University" label="Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q623851" start="27070" end="27097" title="Chonbuk National University" label="Chonbuk National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q624561" start="27113" end="27131" title="Hanshin University" label="Hanshin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q482735" start="27147" end="27180" title="Sookmyung" label="Sookmyung Women&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q489331" start="27196" end="27215" title="Soongsil University" label="Soongsil University"/>
<link wikidata="Q40006" start="27231" end="27249" title="Hanyang University" label="Hanyang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408055" start="27265" end="27289" title="Sam Ratulangi University" label="Sam Ratulangi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q626053" start="27355" end="27372" title="Hannam University" label="Hannam University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524031" start="27388" end="27412" title="Madras Christian College" label="Madras Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q912329" start="27422" end="27438" title="Kinki University" label="Kinki University"/>
<link wikidata="Q462039" start="27452" end="27493" title="University of Ingolstadt" label="Ingolstadt University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="27554" end="27569" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="27571" end="27584" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="27590" end="27605" title="doctoral degree" label="doctoral degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184938" start="27674" end="27680" title="PAASCU" label="PAASCU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27694" end="27698" title="Federation of Accrediting Agencies of the Philippines" label="FAAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809529" start="27709" end="27715" title="ATESEA" label="ATESEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="27785" end="27798" title="Undergraduate education" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="27811" end="27823" title="Agribusiness" label="Agribusiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q173113" start="27825" end="27833" title="Agronomy" label="Agronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168091" start="27838" end="27852" title="Animal Science" label="Animal Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="28609" end="28621" title="Anthropology" label="Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="28626" end="28635" title="Sociology" label="Sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="28637" end="28644" title="Biology" label="Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="28646" end="28655" title="Chemistry" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="28657" end="28664" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="28669" end="28679" title="Literature" label="Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="28681" end="28688" title="History" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="28693" end="28710" title="Political Science" label="Political Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="28712" end="28720" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q150352" start="28725" end="28742" title="Foreign Languages" label="Foreign Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="28744" end="28755" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="28757" end="28767" title="Philosophy" label="Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="28772" end="28780" title="Religion" label="Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="28782" end="28789" title="Physics" label="Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="28791" end="28801" title="Psychology" label="Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="28803" end="28814" title="Social Work" label="Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="29137" end="29160" title="Business Administration" label="Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="29190" end="29200" title="Management" label="Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="29205" end="29214" title="Economics" label="Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="29217" end="29228" title="Accountancy" label="Accountancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="29230" end="29246" title="Entrepreneurship" label="Entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966741" start="29284" end="29301" title="Office management" label="Office Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="29927" end="29940" title="Undergraduate education" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="29952" end="29968" title="Computer Science" label="Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="29970" end="29992" title="Information Technology" label="Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q121182" start="29998" end="30017" title="Information Systems" label="Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="30208" end="30219" title="fiber-optic" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142907" start="30220" end="30228" title="Backbone network" label="backbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="30449" end="30454" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="30459" end="30462" title="LAN" label="LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q121182" start="30532" end="30551" title="Information Systems" label="Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="30697" end="30706" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="30711" end="30714" title="International Business Machines" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="31712" end="31725" title="undergraduate" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="31738" end="31750" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="31752" end="31769" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q428691" start="31771" end="31791" title="computer engineering" label="computer engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="31793" end="31815" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="31821" end="31843" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374230" start="32049" end="32066" title="Teacher Education" label="Teacher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171208" start="32568" end="32586" title="Cornelio Villareal" label="Cornelio Villareal"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="32801" end="32817" title="Bachelor of Laws" label="Bachelor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="32827" end="32839" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211436" start="32910" end="32917" title="Visayas" label="Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="32922" end="32930" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="33076" end="33086" title="Journalism" label="Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302280" start="33179" end="33205" title="Texas Christian University" label="Texas Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q853710" start="33355" end="33373" title="Mass Communication" label="Mass Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="33573" end="33580" title="Nursing" label="Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="34433" end="34442" title="Fine Arts" label="Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="34444" end="34449" title="Music" label="Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="34455" end="34461" title="Speech" label="Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="34468" end="34480" title="Theater Arts" label="Theater Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="35013" end="35026" title="Undergraduate education" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="35031" end="35039" title="Graduate education" label="graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="35052" end="35060" title="Divinity" label="Divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="35062" end="35070" title="Minister (Christianity)" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="35075" end="35083" title="Theology" label="Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519843" start="37691" end="37709" title="Medical Technology" label="Medical Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="38557" end="38573" title="Physical Therapy" label="Physical Therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="40958" end="40968" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41182" end="41192" title="Visayas#Central Visayas" label="Region VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852724" start="42131" end="42165" title="Silliman University Medical Center" label="Silliman University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="43531" end="43556" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536509" start="43792" end="43822" title="St. Luke&amp;#x27;s Medical Center" label="St. Luke&amp;#x27;s Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152716" start="44105" end="44135" title="Commission on Higher Education (Philippines)" label="Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515375" start="44369" end="44385" title="Silliman Journal" label="Silliman Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q198745" start="44899" end="44922" title="United Church of Canada" label="United Church of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q618753" start="45103" end="45113" title="Apo Island" label="Apo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q211436" start="45253" end="45260" title="Visayas" label="Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="45265" end="45273" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="45449" end="45459" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q618753" start="45569" end="45579" title="Apo Island" label="Apo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="46529" end="46534" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="46658" end="46670" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="46691" end="46705" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="47354" end="47362" title="Province" label="Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13863" start="47366" end="47381" title="Negros Oriental" label="Negros Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="47420" end="47424" title="Seal (emblem)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529255" start="49121" end="49127" title="float (parade)" label="floats"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="49537" end="49557" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="49582" end="49592" title="alma mater" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q14092" start="50327" end="50330" title="Gym" label="Gym"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085113" start="50770" end="50797" title="Philippine University Games" label="Philippine University Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706562" start="50957" end="50968" title="Mark Javier" label="Mark Javier"/>
<link wikidata="Q877484" start="51220" end="51229" title="SEA Games" label="SEA Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q931673" start="51262" end="51276" title="Simeon Toribio" label="Simeon Toribio"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="53206" end="53218" title="fraternities" label="fraternities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="53223" end="53233" title="sororities" label="sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774147" start="53787" end="53805" title="Weekly Sillimanian" label="Weekly Sillimanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q738377" start="53837" end="53854" title="student newspaper" label="student newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089011" start="53953" end="53961" title="yearbook" label="yearbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774147" start="54598" end="54616" title="Weekly Sillimanian" label="Weekly Sillimanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="54935" end="54946" title="dormitories" label="dormitories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397098" start="55547" end="55560" title="Escape to the Hills" label="Ethel Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q319939" start="56417" end="56433" title="Carlos P. Garcia" label="Carlos P. Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533043" start="56481" end="56495" title="Robert Barbers" label="Robert Barbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680843" start="56497" end="56510" title="Lorenzo Teves" label="Lorenzo Teves"/>
<link wikidata="Q12970154" start="56537" end="56549" title="Roseller Lim" label="Roseller Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171208" start="56565" end="56583" title="Cornelio Villareal" label="Cornelio Villareal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235618" start="56585" end="56599" title="John Gokongwei" label="John Gokongwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="56873" end="56883" title="UN Charter" label="UN Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q746592" start="56921" end="56950" title="University of the Philippines" label="University of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474366" start="56967" end="56988" title="Foundation University (Philippines)" label="Foundation University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301522" start="57138" end="57153" title="Juanita Amatong" label="Juanita Amatong"/>
<link wikidata="Q320863" start="57243" end="57259" title="World Bank Group" label="World Bank Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908578" start="57282" end="57294" title="Angel Alcala" label="Angel Alcala"/>
<link wikidata="Q777181" start="57296" end="57317" title="Ramon Magsaysay Award" label="Ramon Magsaysay Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277331" start="57367" end="57414" title="Department of Environment and Natural Resources" label="Department of Environment and Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526653" start="57416" end="57433" title="Leonor Briones" label="Leonor M. Briones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171719" start="57497" end="57513" title="Emilio Macias II" label="Emilio Macias II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13863" start="57534" end="57549" title="Negros Oriental" label="Negros Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026916" start="57617" end="57654" title="California State University, East Bay" label="California State University, East Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577431" start="57857" end="57872" title="Edith L. Tiempo" label="Edith L. Tiempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359033" start="57874" end="57889" title="National Artist of the Philippines" label="National Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550871" start="57913" end="57932" title="Edilberto K. Tiempo" label="Edilberto K. Tiempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515380" start="57980" end="58014" title="Silliman National Writers Workshop" label="Silliman National Writers Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470168" start="58017" end="58032" title="Eddie Romero" label="Eddie S. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359033" start="58034" end="58049" title="National Artist of the Philippines" label="National Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526182" start="58088" end="58106" title="Leoncio P. Deriada" label="Leoncio P. Deriada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543953" start="58108" end="58122" title="Palanca Awards" label="Palanca Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202629" start="58138" end="58155" title="César Ruiz Aquino" label="César Ruiz Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q931673" start="58187" end="58201" title="Simeon Toribio" label="Simeon Toribio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125182" start="58341" end="58354" title="Claire Delfin" label="Claire Delfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q399643" start="58358" end="58369" title="GMA Network" label="GMA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650387" start="58391" end="58398" title="ABS-CBN News and Current Affairs" label="ABS-CBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q625568" start="58434" end="58446" title="showbusiness" label="showbusiness"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58455" end="58467" title="Pinoy Big Brother: Teen Clash 2010#Bret" label="Bret Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877877" start="58469" end="58484" title="Beauty Gonzalez" label="Beauty Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q44216469" start="58490" end="58506" title="Theodore Boborol" label="Theodore Boborol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954390" wikidata="Q9331" url="?curid=954390" title="Flemish Community">
<text>The Flemish Community (, ) is one of the three institutional communities of Belgium, established by the Belgian constitution and having legal responsibilities only within the precise geographical boundaries of the Dutch-language area and of the bilingual area of Brussels-Capital. Unlike in the French Community of Belgium, the competences of the Flemish Community have been unified with those of the Flemish Region and are exercised by one directly elected Flemish Parliament based in Brussels.

== History ==
State reforms in Belgium turned the country from a unitary state into a federal one. Cultural communities were the first type of decentralisation in 1970, forming the Dutch, French and German Cultural Community. Later on, in 1980, these became responsible for more cultural matters and were renamed to simply &quot;Community&quot;, the Dutch (Cultural) Community also being renamed to the Flemish Community. In the same state reform of 1980, the Flemish and Walloon Region were set up (the Brussels-Capital Region would be formed later on). In Flanders it was decided that the institutions of the Flemish Community would take up the tasks of the Flemish Region, so there is only one Flemish Parliament and one Flemish Government.

== Legal authority ==

Under the Belgian constitution, the Flemish Community has legal responsibility for the following:
* education (except for degree requirements, the minimum and maximum age of compulsory education, and teachers&#x27; pensions);
* culture;
* language legislation in monolingual Dutch-speaking municipalities;
* certain aspects of welfare, health care and child allowances;
* international cooperation in all areas of the competency of the Community.

As the Flemish Community&#x27;s institutions (parliament, government and ministry) absorbed all competencies of the Flemish region, they became also competent for all regional policy areas, including:
* agriculture (although the bulk of this policy is determined by the European Union);
* public works and regional economic development;
* local authorities;
* environment;
* mobility;
* energy (although nuclear energy remains on the federal level).

Members of the Flemish Parliament elected in the Brussels-Capital Region have no right to vote on Flemish regional affairs, only on community affairs, since affairs concerning their region are governed by the Brussels Parliament. Legally speaking, in the region of Brussel-Capital, the Flemish Community is responsible not for individual people but for Flemish institutions such as schools, theatres, libraries and museums. The reason is that no distinct sub-national status exists in Belgium. Yet, individuals living in Brussels can opt by their own choice for certain policies of the Flemish Community.

== Language ==

Dutch is the official language of the Flemish Community. Minorities speak French, Yiddish, Turkish, Arabic, Berber, Italian, Spanish, English and German. Though most of these groups are recent immigrants, since the Middle Ages, Jews have formed the oldest minority to retain its own identity.

Compared with most areas in the Netherlands, the historical dialects of Flemish people still tend to be strong and particular to locality. Since the Second World War however, the influences of radio and television, and of a generally prolonged education, as well as the higher mobility for short trips or for moving towards farther localities, have resulted in a deterioration of the traditional &#x27;pure&#x27; dialects, in particular amongst younger people. Some of the differences between the dialects are eroding, and mainly in localities or suburbs with a considerable influx from other areas, new intermediate dialects have appeared, with various degrees of influence by standard Dutch. In Dutch, these are often called &quot;tussentaal&quot; (&quot;in-between language&quot;, often used for near-standard Dutch interspersed with typical dialect aspects) or, rather derogatorily, &quot;verkavelingsvlaams&quot; (a mix of more or less &quot;cleaned-up&quot; dialects as heard in a newly built-up suburban area with people influenced by different dialects). More recently, a number of local initiatives have been set up to save the traditional dialects and their diversity.

In Brussels, the local dialect is heavily influenced by French, both in pronunciation and in vocabulary. Nowadays, most Flemings in Brussels do not speak the local dialect. This is due in part to the relatively large numbers of young Flemings coming to Brussels, after a long period of many more others moving out while French-speakers moved in.

In certain municipalities along the border with the Walloon and the Brussels-Capital regions, French-speakers enjoy &quot;language facilities&quot;. These cover rights such as to receive official documentation in their own tongue. Similar facilities are enjoyed by Dutch-speakers in some Walloon municipalities bordering the Flemish Region, by German-speakers in two municipalities in the French language area of the Walloon Region, and by French-speakers in the territory of the German-speaking community.
The geographical limitations of the communities require the French Community to ensure Dutch basic education in its municipalities with facilities for speakers of Dutch, and the Flemish Community to finance French schools in its municipalities with facilities.

== Flemish institutions in Brussels ==
Where responsibilities of the Flemish Region can be devolved to the provincial level, no such equivalent exists in the Brussels-Capital Region, which itself exercises many competencies for &quot;territorial tasks&quot; elsewhere assigned to the provinces. The community competencies (education, culture and social welfare) there, are exercised by the two affected institutional communities. The Flemish Community therefore established a local elected council and executive (the Flemish Community Commission or &#x27;VGC&#x27;) to cater for &quot;intermediate-level decision making &amp; public services&quot;. The VGC then recognised local, municipal institutions to take care of the purely local public service in these community areas (called &quot;gemeenschapscentra&quot; or community centres).

== Media ==
Flanders has an official radio and television broadcasting company, the &quot;Vlaamse Radio en Televisieomroep&quot; or VRT in Dutch. Since 1989, several private companies for region-wide radio and television broadcasting have become established. There are also so-called &quot;regional&quot; broadcast companies of which the range is limited to only smaller parts of the Flemish Region. The written press is dominated by a number of &#x27;quality&#x27; dailies (such as &quot;De Tijd&quot;, &quot;De Morgen&quot; and ), several &#x27;popular&#x27; dailies (such as &quot;Het Laatste Nieuws&quot; and &quot;Het Nieuwsblad&quot;) and a large number of general and specialized magazines. 

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Flemish authorities (Dutch: &quot;Vlaamse overheid&quot;)
* Flemish authorities (Dutch: &quot;Vlaamse overheid&quot;)
* Flemish Parliament (Dutch: &quot;Vlaams Parlement&quot;)
* Flemish government (Dutch: &quot;Vlaamse regering&quot;)
* Flemish Community Council in Brussels (Dutch: &quot;Vlaamse Gemeenschapscommissie (VGC)&quot;)
* Public radio &amp; television (Dutch: &quot;Vlaamse radio en Televisie&quot;)
* VRT online news in English, French and German
* Flanders Today, weekly paper about Flanders (actual information in English)
* Study opportunities in Flanders (accredited non Dutch-language courses)
* Touristic information about Flanders (Dutch: &quot;Toerisme Vlaanderen&quot;)
* Flanders Investment and Trade - Information for foreign investors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="4" end="21" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q838185" start="47" end="72" title="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium" label="institutional communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="76" end="83" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q633629" start="104" end="124" title="Belgian constitution" label="Belgian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="295" end="322" title="French Community of Belgium" label="French Community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9337" start="401" end="415" title="Flemish Region" label="Flemish Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292" start="458" end="476" title="Flemish Parliament" label="Flemish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="486" end="494" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136557" start="511" end="535" title="State reform in Belgium" label="State reforms in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292" start="1194" end="1212" title="Flemish Parliament" label="Flemish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186029" start="1221" end="1239" title="Flemish Government" label="Flemish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292" start="1759" end="1769" title="Flemish Parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186029" start="1771" end="1794" title="Flemish Government" label="government and ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1983" end="1997" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q435623" start="2373" end="2392" title="Brussels Parliament" label="Brussels Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2786" end="2791" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2860" end="2866" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="2868" end="2875" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="2877" end="2884" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2886" end="2892" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="2894" end="2900" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="2902" end="2909" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2911" end="2918" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2920" end="2927" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2932" end="2938" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176463" start="3014" end="3017" title="Jews in Belgium" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3229" end="3245" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="3813" end="3823" title="tussentaal" label="tussentaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450775" start="4580" end="4604" title="Frenchification of Brussels" label="French-speakers moved in"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="4659" end="4666" title="Wallonia" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q737681" start="4729" end="4748" title="municipalities with language facilities" label="language facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q90027" start="5087" end="5112" title="German-speaking Community of Belgium" label="German-speaking community"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="5534" end="5557" title="Brussels-Capital Region" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924609" start="5893" end="5921" title="Flemish Community Commission" label="Flemish Community Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858" start="6347" end="6350" title="Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroep" label="VRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180345" start="6704" end="6711" title="De Tijd" label="De Tijd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180166" start="6725" end="6734" title="De Morgen" label="De Morgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457499" start="6799" end="6817" title="Het Laatste Nieuws" label="Het Laatste Nieuws"/>
<link wikidata="Q12467" start="6834" end="6848" title="Het Nieuwsblad" label="Het Nieuwsblad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954392" wikidata="Q1710696" url="?curid=954392" title="Stewart Maxwell">
<text>William Stewart Maxwell (born 24 December 1963) is a Scottish National Party (SNP) politician. He was the Minister for Communities and Sport from 2007 to 2009 and a Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the West of Scotland region from 2003 to 2016.

==Early life==
Maxwell was born on 24 December 1963 in Glasgow, Scotland. Maxwell attended Kings Park Secondary School before graduating from Glasgow College of Technology with a BA Honours Social Sciences. He worked for Strathclyde Fire Brigade between 1993 and 2003 before being elected.

==Political career==
He stood as the SNP candidate in the 2003 election and was elected by the regional list.

After his election in 2003, Stewart Maxwell became the Deputy Convener of the Parliament&#x27;s Justice 1 Committee and a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. He transferred from Justice 1 to Justice 2 Committee in 2004 and was also appointed to the post of SNP spokesperson on Public Health and the Shadow Deputy Minister for Health. In September 2006 he was promoted to the SNP&#x27;s Shadow Cabinet when he became the Party Spokesperson for Sport and Culture. At the end of 2006 he moved from the Justice 2 Committee to the Parliament&#x27;s Enterprise and Culture Committee and remained on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. After the SNP&#x27;s victory at the 2007 Scottish Parliament Election, he became the Minister for Communities and Sport. However, he returned to the backbenches in the SNP Ministerial reshuffle on 10 February 2009. After leaving Ministerial office he became one of two representatives from the Scottish Parliament on the European Committee of the Regions and became a member of the Parliament&#x27;s Justice Committee. After the 2011 election he was appointed to the post of Convener of the Education and Culture Committee and as one of the SNP members of the Scotland bill Committee.

Stewart Maxwell is best known for being the architect of the ban on smoking in enclosed places in Scotland. He laid a motion in the Scottish Parliament stating that he intended to bring forward a bill to ban smoking in public places in July 2003 and went on to introduce the Bill to ban tobacco smoking in enclosed public places in February 2004. The Scottish Executive at first opposed this proposal, but were eventually forced to accept the idea after it received widespread support. They eventually published their own bill which was passed on 30 June 2005 and the ban came into effect on 26 March 2006.

For the last few years he has also been campaigning on knife crime and has made various proposals to tackle this issue in Scotland, including the mandatory reporting of knife attacks by hospitals to the police and the use of hand-held metal detectors at the doors of some pubs and clubs. He successfully moved an amendment to the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice Bill which doubled the maximum sentence for carrying a knife in public.

He was a member of the SNPs National Executive Committee as well as serving as the Vice Convenor in charge of Publicity during 2003–2004. During the 2003–2007 session of Parliament he was a member of six Parliamentary cross party groups; Tobacco Control, Sport, Contemporary Scottish Music Industry, Culture and Media, Cancer and Food. He is currently a member of the following CPGs: Tobacco Control, Veterans, Golf and Universities and Colleges.

The SNP hold a &#x27;One Member One Vote&#x27; ballot of all Party members to determine the order of their candidates on the regional lists for the Scottish Parliament elections. Stewart Maxwell, who was third on the SNP list for the West of Scotland in 2003, was elected to first place on the SNP list for 2007 and topped the list again in 2011.

In November 2006 he was made Honorary Vice-President of the Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland for his work on the introduction of the ban on smoking in public places.

Ahead of the 2016 elections, Maxwell was confirmed as the SNP&#x27;s candidate for the Eastwood constituency in July 2015. In October it was announced that he would be second on the SNP&#x27;s list of candidates for West Scotland. In a close contest, Conservative Jackson Carlaw won the seat and Labour&#x27;s Ken Macintosh was pushed into third. Maxwell was not re-elected.

==Armed Forces Legal Action==
Maxwell was appointed as an honorary patron of Armed Forces Legal Action (AFLA) in April 2014. AFLA is a network of law firms committed to offering discounted legal services to members of the UK Armed Forces community. AFLA was founded by Scottish solicitor Allan Steele WS, who stood against Maxwell as the Scottish Liberal Democrat candidate in the Westminster Parliamentary election of 2001 and the Holyrood Parliamentary election of 2003.

He is married with one daughter.

== References ==
==External links==
*Personal website of Stewart Maxwell, MSP
*Scottish National Party
*Sunday Times – MSP advocates Mandatory Reporting</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1710696" start="0" end="23" title="Stewart Maxwell" label="William Stewart Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="53" end="76" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865870" start="106" end="140" title="Minister for Communities and Sport" label="Minister for Communities and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="165" end="198" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987073" start="213" end="229" title="West of Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="West of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="312" end="319" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412989" start="348" end="375" title="Kings Park Secondary School" label="Kings Park Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353139" start="399" end="428" title="Glasgow College of Technology" label="Glasgow College of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622042" start="478" end="502" title="Strathclyde Fire Brigade" label="Strathclyde Fire Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="606" end="619" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="1340" end="1373" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007 Scottish Parliament Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865870" start="1389" end="1423" title="Minister for Communities and Sport" label="Minister for Communities and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="2177" end="2192" title="tobacco smoking" label="tobacco smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="2241" end="2259" title="Scottish Executive" label="Scottish Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908649" start="2553" end="2564" title="knife crime" label="knife crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437890" start="3935" end="3949" title="2016 Scottish Parliament election" label="2016 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278307" start="4009" end="4017" title="Eastwood (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231522" start="4186" end="4200" title="Jackson Carlaw" label="Jackson Carlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738887" start="4232" end="4245" title="Ken Macintosh" label="Ken Macintosh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954393" wikidata="Q723829" url="?curid=954393" title="Eyal Berkovic">
<text>Eyal Berkovic (or Berkovich, ; born 2 April 1972) is an Israeli former professional association footballer, football coach, team owner and television talk show presenter.

As a player he was an attacking midfielder who spent most of his career in England playing in the Premier League for Southampton, West Ham United, Blackburn Rovers, Manchester City and Portsmouth. He also had a spell in the Scottish Premier League with Celtic as well as beginning and finishing his career in his native Israel for Maccabi Haifa and Maccabi Tel Aviv. He made 78 appearances for Israel, and is considered one of the nation&#x27;s greatest players. Graeme Souness described Berkovic as &quot;a tremendous passer. In the last third of the field, he is the best that I&#x27;ve ever worked with.&quot; Berkovic was also noted for various clashes with managers and players, including Kevin Keegan (his manager at Manchester City), and Welsh striker John Hartson.

Following retirement he was appointed as general manager of Maccabi Netanya and later held a similar position of Hapoel Tel Aviv. He is the former owner of Hapoel Rishon LeZion.

==Early life==
Berkovic was born in moshav Regba, Israel, to a family of Ashkenazi Jewish (Hungarian-Jewish) descent, and is the older brother of former Israeli footballer Nir Berkovic.

==Club career==
===Maccabi Haifa===
Berkovic started his career at Maccabi Haifa in 1989, playing there until 1996. During his time with the club he won league titles in 1990–91 and 1993–94, and the State Cup three times, including a domestic double in the 1990–91 season. His performances for the club earned him a call-up to the Israel national team as well as the Most Valuable Player award for the 1993–94 season.

===Southampton===
For the 1996–97 season, Berkovic signed on a season-long loan for English club Southampton. He proved to be a big influence, and was a major part of a 6–3 victory in his second appearance, against Manchester United, as he scored twice and got three assists.

===West Ham United===
The next season, he was signed by manager Harry Redknapp for West Ham United for £1.75 million, for whom he played for two seasons. Well liked by West Ham fans, he became an instant fans&#x27; hero by scoring the decisive goal against Tottenham Hotspur in a 2–1 win on his Upton Park debut on 13 August 1997. He played in 79 games in all competitions, scoring 12 goals.

Striker John Hartson had a prolific 1997–98 season for West Ham helped by Berkovic&#x27;s assists. In a training ground bust-up between the two, Hartson kicked Berkovic in the head, after Berkovic had punched Hartson in the leg as he attempted to help Berkovic to his feet after a crunching tackle. The incident was captured on camera. Berkovic said of the incident &quot;if my head had been a ball, it would have been in the top corner of the net&quot;. Hartson was fined £20,000 for the incident and suspended for three games.

===Celtic===
Soon after the incident, he was signed for £5.75 million by Celtic, who were coached by John Barnes. In November 1999 Berkovic was subjected to religious taunts by Hearts fans while playing at their Tynecastle ground. He played for the Scottish club for two years, scoring ten goals, but Martin O&#x27;Neill left him out of the team when he took over as manager and Berkovic returned to England to join Blackburn Rovers on loan for the second half of the 2000–01 season, where he scored twice against Queens Park Rangers and Grimsby, helping Blackburn achieve promotion to the Premier League in the process. Berkovic&#x27;s loan move to Blackburn was not made into a permanent deal. The following year Manchester City&#x27;s manager Kevin Keegan signed him in a permanent move. During his tenure in Scotland, Berkovic struggled to win over the Celtic fans.

===Manchester City===
In July 2001, Berkovic joined Manchester City for a reported fee of £1.5 million. He made his debut in August 2001, scoring one goal in a 3–0 home win against Watford. In his second game for the team he suffered an injury which prompted the team to sign Ali Benarbia, an additional playmaker. When Berkovic returned, the City team began to play with both playmakers in a 3–5–2 formation with Kevin Horlock operating in the anchor midfield position. This was a successful formation, earning City promotion in emphatic style, with 99 points and a record 108 goals. In an FA Cup game against then-Premiership team Ipswich Town, Berkovic scored a volley goal set up by Benarbia from a corner and City beat the team in the league above them 4–1.

The following season when City were in the Premiership, Berkovic was instrumental in a 3–1 victory over local rivals Manchester United, a team he had also helped his previous team (Southampton) demolish 6–3 in the 1996–97 season. Eyal scored a brace. The tactic of playing with two playmakers was continued in the Premiership but results were not favourable and Keegan subsequently decided to play with Berkovic as the only playmaker. Berkovic was voted as Manchester City&#x27;s player of the season in 2002–03 in the club&#x27;s magazine. Berkovic received abuse from some of the City support when he made a &#x27;throat-slitting&#x27; gesture to a female fan during a League Cup tie at Maine Road against Crewe Alexandra. The FA investigated the incident.

===Portsmouth===
A fallout with manager Keegan saw him move to Portsmouth for £500,000 in January 2004. His first game for them was against his former Manchester City side. Pompey beat the Cityzens 4–2. Berkovic soon established himself in the first team at Fratton Park where he was reunited with his former manager at West Ham, Redknapp, who described him as a &quot;special footballer&quot;. Berkovic became a vital part of Portsmouth&#x27;s drive for FA Premier League survival, scoring his first goal against Tottenham Hotspur.

However, despite scoring against Fulham in the league and Leeds in the League Cup, he failed to hold down a regular starting place in the team for the 2004–05 season, and in January 2005 left Portsmouth. He had been linked with a move to Crystal Palace but instead decided to return to the country of his birth. He wanted to return to Maccabi Haifa but was rejected, leading him to a decision to sign for bitter rivals Maccabi Tel Aviv.

===Maccabi Tel Aviv===
The return to Israel opened with promise as the 2005–06 season was the 100th anniversary for Maccabi Tel Aviv and the club wanted to celebrate with a championship. The club signed several more stars such as Avi Nimni, Giovani Rosso, Blessing Kaku, Avi Yehiel, and Eugen Trica. Berkovic announced at a press conference that the team would go all the way to secure the domestic double. Although the team had a positive start to the season, they were not able to sustain good form and their chances of winning the title diminished, resulting in a sacking of the coach Nir Klinger, who was replaced with Ton Caanen.

Berkovic announced his retirement from professional football on 7 May 2006.

==International career==
Berkovic gained 78 caps and scored 9 goals for the senior Israel national team.

==Media career==
From 2007 until 2023, Berkovic hosted a popular sports radio program along with Ofira Asayag.

In November 2017, the two began to present a weekly television show on Friday evenings, called Ofira and Berkovic, on Keshet Channel 12. The show achieved high ratings, but critics scolded the interviewers&#x27; vulgar style. Several interviews caused public controversy, such as with trans model Stav Strashko, or with rapper Dudu Faruk. Berkovic quit the show in 2023. Shortly after, he signed a contract with Reshet13, which made him one of the most highly paid TV personalities in Israel.

==Management career==

In the summer of 2006 he was appointed as the general manager of Maccabi Netanya. However, he was manager only for two months in which time he did not oversee any games. He stated that he left the job due to poor professional relations with Daniel Jammer, the club&#x27;s owner and chairman. Berkovic had been an active manager in the transfer market during his two months, signing 15 players including Mazuwa Nsumbu, Liran Strauber and Itay Shechter.

In May 2014 he was appointed as general manager of Hapoel Tel Aviv. In January 2015 he resigned following a breakdown in his relationship with club owner, Haim Ramon.

On 11 May 2015, Berkovic became the owner of Hapoel Rishon LeZion from Liga Leumit, he paid $385,000 for the ownership of the club.

==Overseas career statistics==


==Honours==
Maccabi Haifa
*Liga Leumit: 1990–91, 1993–94
*Israel State Cup: 1990–91, 1992–93, 1994–95
*Toto Cup: 1993–94

West Ham
*UEFA Intertoto Cup: 1999

Celtic
*Scottish League Cup: 1999–2000

Blackburn Rovers
*Football League First Division runner-up: 2000–01

Manchester City
*Football League First Division: 2001–02

Individual
*Israel Footballer of the Year: 1994
*PFA Team of the Year: 2001–02 First Division

==See also==
*List of Jewish footballers
*List of Jews in sports

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Berkovic signs with Maccabi (Tel-Aviv)&quot; at Eurosport.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q723829" start="0" end="13" title="Eyal Berkovic" label="Eyal Berkovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="84" end="106" title="association footballer" label="association footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="194" end="214" title="Attacking Midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="247" end="254" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="270" end="284" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="289" end="300" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="302" end="317" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="319" end="335" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="337" end="352" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="357" end="367" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187304" start="396" end="419" title="Scottish Premier League" label="Scottish Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="425" end="431" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129100" start="503" end="516" title="Maccabi Haifa F.C." label="Maccabi Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223728" start="521" end="537" title="Maccabi Tel Aviv F.C." label="Maccabi Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q191406" start="566" end="572" title="Israel national football team" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310352" start="635" end="649" title="Graeme Souness" label="Graeme Souness"/>
<link wikidata="Q152832" start="866" end="878" title="Kevin Keegan" label="Kevin Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="895" end="910" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q356392" start="931" end="943" title="John Hartson" label="John Hartson"/>
<link wikidata="Q426513" start="1006" end="1021" title="Maccabi Netanya" label="Maccabi Netanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q206585" start="1059" end="1074" title="Hapoel Tel Aviv F.C." label="Hapoel Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584246" start="1102" end="1122" title="Hapoel Rishon LeZion F.C." label="Hapoel Rishon LeZion"/>
<link wikidata="Q917146" start="1161" end="1167" title="moshav" label="moshav"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890435" start="1168" end="1173" title="Regba" label="Regba"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1175" end="1181" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="1198" end="1214" title="Ashkenazi Jewish" label="Ashkenazi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q469544" start="1216" end="1232" title="Hungarian-Jewish" label="Hungarian-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039816" start="1297" end="1309" title="Nir Berkovic" label="Nir Berkovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129100" start="1379" end="1392" title="Maccabi Haifa F.C." label="Maccabi Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165593" start="1511" end="1520" title="Israel State Cup" label="State Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057336" start="1569" end="1576" title="1990–91 Liga Leumit" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q191406" start="1643" end="1663" title="Israel national football team" label="Israel national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="1679" end="1705" title="Most Valuable Player" label="Most Valuable Player award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057317" start="1714" end="1721" title="1993–94 Liga Leumit" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474922" start="1757" end="1771" title="1996–97 in English football" label="1996–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="1828" end="1839" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="1946" end="1963" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q221349" start="2072" end="2086" title="Harry Redknapp" label="Harry Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="2091" end="2106" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="2111" end="2112" title="GBP" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="2265" end="2282" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q330731" start="2303" end="2313" title="Boleyn Ground" label="Upton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q356392" start="2409" end="2421" title="John Hartson" label="John Hartson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="3004" end="3010" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10536" start="3032" end="3043" title="John Barnes (footballer)" label="John Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q202093" start="3108" end="3114" title="Heart of Midlothian F.C." label="Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326446" start="3143" end="3153" title="Tynecastle Stadium" label="Tynecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q310263" start="3232" end="3251" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="3347" end="3363" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930669" start="3399" end="3413" title="2000–01 in English football" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="3445" end="3464" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="3646" end="3661" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q152832" start="3677" end="3689" title="Kevin Keegan" label="Kevin Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="3983" end="3990" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362048" start="4078" end="4090" title="Ali Benarbia" label="Ali Benarbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396517" start="4216" end="4229" title="Kevin Horlock" label="Kevin Horlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="4435" end="4447" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="4683" end="4700" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="4747" end="4758" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474922" start="4780" end="4787" title="1996–97 in English football" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="5237" end="5247" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19587" start="5274" end="5289" title="Crewe Alexandra F.C." label="Crewe Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="5291" end="5297" title="The FA" label="The FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="5389" end="5399" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q619531" start="5584" end="5596" title="Fratton Park" label="Fratton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="5781" end="5798" title="Premier League" label="FA Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q960028" start="6011" end="6025" title="2004–05 in English football" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="6098" end="6112" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129100" start="6195" end="6208" title="Maccabi Haifa F.C." label="Maccabi Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223728" start="6279" end="6295" title="Maccabi Tel Aviv F.C." label="Maccabi Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q223728" start="6414" end="6430" title="Maccabi Tel Aviv F.C." label="Maccabi Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408077" start="6528" end="6537" title="Avi Nimni" label="Avi Nimni"/>
<link wikidata="Q342103" start="6539" end="6552" title="Đovani Roso" label="Giovani Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906423" start="6554" end="6567" title="Blessing Kaku" label="Blessing Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828495" start="6569" end="6579" title="Avi Yehiel" label="Avi Yehiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q600144" start="6585" end="6596" title="Eugen Trica" label="Eugen Trica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479239" start="6886" end="6897" title="Nir Klinger" label="Nir Klinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889025" start="6921" end="6931" title="Ton Caanen" label="Ton Caanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191406" start="7094" end="7114" title="Israel national football team" label="Israel national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584873" start="7214" end="7226" title="Ofira Asayag" label="Ofira Asayag"/>
<link wikidata="Q41424455" start="7347" end="7364" title="Channel 12 (Israel)" label="Keshet Channel 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q20726316" start="7526" end="7539" title="Stav Strashko" label="Stav Strashko"/>
<link wikidata="Q60529885" start="7556" end="7566" title="Dudu Faruk" label="Dudu Faruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520212" start="7641" end="7649" title="Channel 13 (Israel)" label="Reshet13"/>
<link wikidata="Q426513" start="7811" end="7826" title="Maccabi Netanya" label="Maccabi Netanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217676" start="7987" end="8000" title="Daniel Jammer" label="Daniel Jammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q961906" start="8149" end="8162" title="Nsumbu Mazuwa" label="Mazuwa Nsumbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889764" start="8164" end="8178" title="Liran Strauber" label="Liran Strauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q715963" start="8183" end="8196" title="Itay Shechter" label="Itay Shechter"/>
<link wikidata="Q206585" start="8250" end="8265" title="Hapoel Tel Aviv F.C." label="Hapoel Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q652581" start="8354" end="8364" title="Haim Ramon" label="Haim Ramon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584246" start="8412" end="8432" title="Hapoel Rishon LeZion F.C." label="Hapoel Rishon LeZion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824581" start="8438" end="8449" title="Liga Leumit" label="Liga Leumit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824581" start="8560" end="8571" title="Liga Leumit" label="Liga Leumit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057336" start="8573" end="8580" title="1990–91 Liga Leumit" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057317" start="8582" end="8589" title="1993–94 Liga Leumit" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165593" start="8591" end="8607" title="Israel State Cup" label="Israel State Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128378" start="8609" end="8616" title="1990–91 Israel State Cup" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128382" start="8618" end="8625" title="1992–93 Israel State Cup" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128386" start="8627" end="8634" title="1994–95 Israel State Cup" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377843" start="8636" end="8644" title="Toto Cup" label="Toto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="8665" end="8683" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153489" start="8685" end="8689" title="1999 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="8699" end="8718" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757604" start="8720" end="8729" title="1999–2000 Scottish League Cup" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="8749" end="8779" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436291" start="8791" end="8798" title="2000–01 Football League First Division" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="8817" end="8847" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436296" start="8849" end="8856" title="2001–02 Football League" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="8907" end="8927" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8929" end="8951" title="2001–02 Football League#First Division" label="2001–02 First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575346" start="8967" end="8993" title="List of Jewish footballers" label="List of Jewish footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904879" start="8995" end="9017" title="List of Jews in sports" label="List of Jews in sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q21484379" start="9109" end="9122" title="Eurosport" label="Eurosport.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954394" wikidata="Q3850026" url="?curid=954394" title="Martin Allen">
<text>Martin James Allen (born 14 August 1965) is an English football manager and former player. 

He played more than 100 games as a midfielder for both Queens Park Rangers and West Ham United before finishing his playing career with Portsmouth and Southend United. Five years later, he took his first job in management, at non-league Barnet. He has since managed Brentford, Milton Keynes Dons, Leicester City, Cheltenham Town and Notts County. He rejoined Barnet as manager on 16 April 2012 on a short-term, three-match contract succeeding Lawrie Sanchez. In July 2012 he became manager of Gillingham and in the 2012–13 season led the team to the Football League Two title, earning Allen his first promotion as a manager and Gillingham&#x27;s first divisional title in 49 years. He was sacked as Gillingham manager in October 2013. Allen rejoined Barnet for a fourth spell in 2014, leading the Bees back into League Two before dropping divisions to join Eastleigh in December 2016, a role he held only until the following February.

==Playing career==
Often referred to by his nickname of &quot;Mad Dog&quot;, Allen began his career with Queens Park Rangers, signing professional in 1983 and spending six years at Loftus Road playing in the 1986 League Cup final defeat against Oxford United, before a £670,000 move to West Ham United. Signed by manager Lou Macari, Allen made his debut on 26 August 1989 in a 3–2 home win against Plymouth Argyle. He scored the second goal, the other West Ham goals coming from David Kelly and Kevin Keen. Under manager Billy Bonds Allen was part of the team which won promotion to the First Division in 1991 and to the Premier League in 1993. Allen was frequently booked during his West Ham career and had a reputation for poor discipline. He was sent off in a match on 17 January 1990 for a two-footed lunge on Derby County&#x27;s Mark Patterson. During a game on 30 November 1991 against Sheffield Wednesday, managed by Allen&#x27;s manager at Queens Park Rangers, Trevor Francis, Allen was booked after only 20 seconds of being on the pitch for a jump tackle on Carlton Palmer which saw Palmer carried off with a suspected broken leg. Although not sent-off, West Ham manager Bonds fined Allen a week&#x27;s wages. During his time at Queens Park Rangers Allen had been refused permission, by manager Francis, to attend the birth of his first child as Allen would miss an important match. Allen attended the birth and was disciplined by the club. Under Bonds and Harry Redknapp Allen formed a successful partnership with Peter Butler with Allen contributing 34 goals from midfield in 234 appearances. However, by 1995 team discipline was poor at West Ham and with Allen playing alongside Julian Dicks, John Moncur and Don Hutchison bookings were commonplace. Allen was again dismissed in a match against Queens Park Rangers on 3 May 1995 after fouling Rufus Brevett. He would play only five more games before being allowed to leave.

Allen stayed with the Hammers until September 1995 when he made a £500,000 switch to Portsmouth after a successful loan spell at Fratton Park. After three frustrating years with Pompey, which took in a brief loan stint at Southend United, he retired and began a coaching career.

==Management career==

===Reading===
Allen began his management career as an assistant manager at hometown club Reading, where he joined Alan Pardew when the Royals were in the relegation zone. The team produced championship form in their closing 20 fixtures, winning 12 and drawing 4 to secure a top 10 finish. Two years later they won promotion to Division One.

===Barnet===
Allen&#x27;s first full manager role was at Conference side Barnet, from March 2003 to March 2004. He succeeded from Peter Shreeves, to whom he was assistant manager from March 2002. Allen built a team from scratch in pre-season of the 2003–04 campaign. The team shot straight to the top end of the table, however Allen left for Brentford with a few weeks of the season remaining in a move that disappointed many Barnet fans. Under the guidance of new manager Paul Fairclough, the Bees made the play-offs but were beaten in the semi-finals by Shrewsbury Town.

===Brentford===

Allen took over from Wally Downes at Second Division side Brentford in March 2004. He had a good run at the club, saving them from relegation to the Third Division in what remained of the 2003–04 season. In the 2004–05 and 2005–06 seasons he took Brentford to the play-offs with fourth and third-place finishes respectively, but they were eliminated by Sheffield Wednesday and Swansea City respectively in the semi-finals on both occasions. Allen won press attention during the 2004–05 season for the success of his self-described &quot;two bob team&quot;, which was composed of ageing pros (John Salako, Andy Myers, Scott Fitzgerald and Jamie Lawrence), free transfers (Deon Burton, Chris Hargreaves, Stewart Talbot and Isaiah Rankin) and young guns who would go on to play in the Premier League (Jay Tabb, Stephen Hunt, Sam Sodje and Michael Turner). Allen took Brentford to the fifth round of the FA Cup in two consecutive years, going out to Premier League sides Southampton in the 2004–05 season (losing 3–1 in a replay, after a 2–2 draw at St Mary&#x27;s) and Charlton Athletic 3–1 in the 2005–06 season. He also was in charge of one of the major giant killings in the fourth round in the 2005–06 season, beating Premier League side Sunderland 2–1.

At Brentford, he proved to be a very popular manager with the fans and an object of curiosity to opponents and media alike due to his unconventional managerial methods, which paid off due to the relative success Brentford had under him on a limited budget. He participated in a 25-mile sponsored bike ride in November 2005 to raise funds for Brentford. To inspire the team, Allen swam in the Tees before a 1–0 FA Cup fourth round replay victory over Hartlepool United in February 2005 and jumped naked into the Solent before Brentford&#x27;s 2–2 draw at Southampton in the following round. In May 2006, Allen announced his resignation as manager of Brentford, citing lack of Board commitment to investing in the team to take it to the next level. In July 2006 he completed his UEFA Pro Licence in coaching. With the club struggling in League One in late 2010, there was speculation that Allen would replace Andy Scott as manager, but the reports were quashed by Brentford chief executive Andrew Mills.

===Milton Keynes Dons===
Allen then dropped down a level to manage League Two team Milton Keynes Dons for the 2006–07 season, a club with heavy financial backing and ambitions from owner Pete Winkelman, albeit one that had been in severe decline for the past few years and had dropped from the Championship to League Two in three seasons. Allen managed to arrest the club&#x27;s decline and took his team to the play-offs, but lost in the semi-finals to Shrewsbury Town.

===Leicester City===
In May 2007, Allen became the new manager at Championship side Leicester City, after Leicester and Milton Keynes Dons had negotiated a compensation package.

In August 2007, striker Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink agreed contract terms with Leicester and chairman Milan Mandarić invited him to undergo a medical at Leicester. But when Hasselbaink arrived in Leicester on 13 August, Allen told him that the medical was no longer going take place. Six days later, Mandarić confirmed an interest in striker Derek Riordan, who was lacking first team football at Celtic. However, Allen refused to make an offer for Riordan, which further aggravated Mandarić. Relations with chairman Milan Mandarić quickly deteriorated and his contract was terminated by mutual consent on 29 August 2007 after just four games in charge.

After leaving Leicester, Allen declared his interest in managing Swindon Town, which eventually went to Maurice Malpas.

===Cheltenham Town===
Allen was appointed as manager of Cheltenham Town on 15 September 2008, on a three-year contract. His father, Dennis, had been manager at Whaddon Road between 1974 and 1979. With financial difficulties hitting the club and an increasingly troubled dressing room atmosphere, the entire Cheltenham squad were put up for sale. Allen allowed key players to leave mid-season either on loan or for reduced prices, contributing to a run of results which left Cheltenham near the foot of the League Two table. On 20 October 2009 and amidst poor results on the pitch, Allen was suspended by Cheltenham Town and placed on gardening leave pending an internal investigation into allegations that he racially abused a nightclub bouncer. In November Gloucestershire police announced that no action would be taken against Allen concerning the alleged nightclub incident. He remained on leave whilst Cheltenham Town considered his future at the club. On 11 December it was announced he had left the club. In January 2010 he was appointed part-time scout for Queens Park Rangers.

===Return to Barnet===
On 23 March 2011, Allen returned to his first managerial club, Barnet, until the end of the 2010–11 season. He was working on an eight-game contract but left after only three games, in which Barnet were unbeaten, to take charge of Notts County.

===Notts County===

Allen took charge of Notts County on 11 April 2011 signing a one-year rolling contract. Notts County won eight points out of the seven games Allen was in charge of at the end of the 2010–11 season, enough for them to avoid relegation. Allen was named League One Manager of the Month in September 2011 after leading the team to four wins and a draw in the league.

Allen was sacked by Notts County on 18 February 2012.

===Third spell at Barnet===

Allen was appointed caretaker manager of Barnet on 16 April 2012 for the last three games of the 2011–12 season, replacing Lawrie Sanchez. Barnet managed two wins under Allen&#x27;s managership, finished 22nd and avoided relegation from League Two with a 2–1 win on 5 May 2012 on the last day of the season, against Burton Albion. Following the end of the season, Allen&#x27;s contract ended.

===Gillingham===
On 5 July 2012, Allen was appointed manager of Gillingham signing a two-year contract.
His first match as Gillingham manager came on 14 August 2012, a 2–1 away win against Bristol City in the League Cup. While at Gillingham, Allen oversaw the Kent side&#x27;s best ever start to a league season. He also broke the club record for most away wins in a football league season with a 1–0 win over Chesterfield, the eleventh of the season on 23 February 2013. On 6 April 2013 Gillingham secured promotion to League One, Allen&#x27;s first ever promotion in his career as a manager. They secured the League Two title with a 2–2 draw against AFC Wimbledon at Priestfield on 20 April. On 20 May 2013, Allen was crowned League 2 Manager of the Year by the LMA for his achievements with the club. Allen was sacked by Gillingham in October 2013 after sixteen months in charge. Gillingham had won just two games from eleven played on their return to League One.

===Fourth spell at Barnet===
Allen was appointed head coach of Barnet on 19 March 2014 until the end of the 2014–15 season, marking his fourth spell at the club. He coached them to the 2014–15 Football Conference championship on 25 April 2015 to secure promotion to League Two. Barnet comfortably avoided relegation in their first season back in League Two, finishing 15th. However, despite the Bees starting the 2016–17 season just outside the play-off zone in 8th place, Allen made an unexpected request to terminate his contract to join National League side Eastleigh. The request was granted on 1 December 2016.

===Eastleigh===
On 1 December 2016, Eastleigh had confirmed that Allen had joined up with them taking the Manager&#x27;s position previously help by Ronnie Moore. His first game incharge was in the FA Cup against Halifax Town which ended 3–3. This required a replay in which Eastleigh went away to Halifax and won 2–0. For the third round of the FA Cup Allen and Eastleigh were drawn an away match against Brentford. BBCs &quot;Football Focus&quot; interviewed Allen in the lead up to the game and he revealed he almost quit football due to health problems while suffering from stress at Barnet. Eastleigh lost their game against Brentford 5–1. Allen was fired by Eastleigh on 22 February 2017 after only winning two of his 14 games in charge.

===Fifth spell at Barnet===

On 19 March 2018, the departure of Graham Westley and the return of Allen as manager of Barnet was announced. On 10 May 2018, it was announced that Allen had left the club, following relegation from the Football League.

===Chesterfield===

Less than a week after leaving Barnet, Allen was appointed manager of Chesterfield, who themselves had seen relegation from the Football League at the end of the 2017–18 season. Allen was sacked on 27 December 2018, with the club sitting third bottom of the National League table.

==Personal life==
=== Family ===
His cousins, Paul Allen, Bradley Allen and Clive Allen, were also footballers, as was his uncle Les Allen. His father, Dennis, played for Reading, Charlton Athletic and Bournemouth &amp; Boscombe Athletic. His son Charlie Allen played under his management at several clubs. His nephew Harry Grant played professionally, and Harry&#x27;s brother Freddie trained with Oxford United&#x27;s youth team before being released by the club.

===Business career===
Having run his own soccer schools programme across 13 towns while still playing professionally. Allen, a UEFA Pro Licence holder and a graduate of the LMA&#x27;s Certificate in Applied Management at Warwick University, created the company Pro FC which finds young people with the potential to become footballers. He is also non-exec director of the football charity, Coaching for Hope.

===Journalism===
In December 2013 Allen began writing for the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;. His column, &quot;Mad Dog on Monday&quot;, is published online via the Daily Mail&#x27;s website, &quot;Mail Online&quot; Sport.&quot;

==Managerial statistics==


==Honours==

=== As a player ===
Queens Park Rangers
*Football League Cup runner-up: 1985–86

West Ham United
*Football League Second Division runner-up: 1990–91

Individual
*PFA Team of the Year: 1992–93 First Division

=== As a manager ===
Brentford
*Supporters Direct Cup: 2004

Gillingham
*Football League Two: 2012–13

Barnet
*Conference Premier: 2014–15

Individual
*Football League One Manager of the Month: September 2004, February 2006, September 2011
*BBC Radio London Sports Personality of the Year: 2005
*Football League Two Manager of the Month: August 2012, January 2013
*LMA League Two Manager of the Season: 2012–13

==References==
==External links==
*Martin Allen at westhamstats.info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3850026" start="0" end="18" title="Martin Allen" label="Martin James Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="55" end="63" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="148" end="167" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="172" end="187" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="229" end="239" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q48951" start="244" end="259" title="Southend United F.C." label="Southend United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9408" start="330" end="336" title="Barnet F.C." label="Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="359" end="368" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q248188" start="370" end="388" title="Milton Keynes Dons F.C." label="Milton Keynes Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="390" end="404" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48932" start="406" end="421" title="Cheltenham Town F.C." label="Cheltenham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="426" end="438" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q919436" start="536" end="550" title="Lawrie Sanchez" label="Lawrie Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="586" end="596" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15100304" start="608" end="615" title="2012–13 in English football" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="643" end="662" title="Football League Two" label="Football League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="905" end="915" title="EFL League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303493" start="950" end="959" title="Eastleigh F.C." label="Eastleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="1134" end="1153" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q31670" start="1210" end="1221" title="Loftus Road" label="Loftus Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583016" start="1237" end="1258" title="1986 Football League Cup final" label="1986 League Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="1274" end="1287" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="1315" end="1330" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q964290" start="1350" end="1360" title="Lou Macari" label="Lou Macari"/>
<link wikidata="Q48947" start="1427" end="1442" title="Plymouth Argyle F.C." label="Plymouth Argyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606601" start="1508" end="1519" title="David Kelly (association footballer)" label="David Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814815" start="1524" end="1534" title="Kevin Keen" label="Kevin Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q863022" start="1550" end="1561" title="Billy Bonds" label="Billy Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="1616" end="1630" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="1650" end="1664" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q976745" start="1695" end="1701" title="Yellow card (sports)" label="booked"/>
<link wikidata="Q976745" start="1778" end="1786" title="Red card (sports)" label="sent off"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="1843" end="1855" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769175" start="1863" end="1877" title="Mark Patterson (footballer born 1968)" label="Mark Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="1921" end="1940" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q345221" start="1998" end="2012" title="Trevor Francis" label="Trevor Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043454" start="2096" end="2110" title="Carlton Palmer" label="Carlton Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221349" start="2495" end="2509" title="Harry Redknapp" label="Harry Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173098" start="2553" end="2565" title="Peter Butler (footballer born 1966)" label="Peter Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189086" start="2720" end="2732" title="Julian Dicks" label="Julian Dicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249142" start="2734" end="2745" title="John Moncur" label="John Moncur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035800" start="2750" end="2763" title="Don Hutchison" label="Don Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378006" start="2884" end="2897" title="Rufus Brevett" label="Rufus Brevett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="3051" end="3061" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q619531" start="3095" end="3107" title="Fratton Park" label="Fratton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q48951" start="3188" end="3203" title="Southend United F.C." label="Southend United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="3358" end="3365" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q360491" start="3383" end="3394" title="Alan Pardew" label="Alan Pardew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9408" start="3684" end="3690" title="Barnet F.C." label="Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176927" start="3741" end="3755" title="Peter Shreeves" label="Peter Shreeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949686" start="3860" end="3867" title="2003-04 in English football" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="3953" end="3962" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725439" start="4084" end="4099" title="Paul Fairclough" label="Paul Fairclough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19626" start="4167" end="4182" title="Shrewsbury Town F.C." label="Shrewsbury Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963343" start="4223" end="4235" title="Wally Downes" label="Wally Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="4239" end="4254" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="4351" end="4365" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039403" start="4390" end="4397" title="2003–04 Brentford F.C. season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039312" start="4413" end="4420" title="2004–05 Brentford F.C. season" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039413" start="4425" end="4432" title="2005–06 Brentford F.C. season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="4579" end="4591" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182416" start="4794" end="4805" title="John Salako" label="John Salako"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616558" start="4807" end="4817" title="Andy Myers" label="Andy Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436328" start="4819" end="4835" title="Scott Fitzgerald (footballer born 1969)" label="Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147094" start="4840" end="4854" title="Jamie Lawrence (footballer, born 1970)" label="Jamie Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622633" start="4857" end="4871" title="Free transfer (association football)" label="free transfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456848" start="4873" end="4884" title="Deon Burton" label="Deon Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106784" start="4886" end="4902" title="Chris Hargreaves" label="Chris Hargreaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615955" start="4904" end="4918" title="Stewart Talbot" label="Stewart Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379532" start="4923" end="4936" title="Isaiah Rankin" label="Isaiah Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="4984" end="4998" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701276" start="5000" end="5008" title="Jay Tabb" label="Jay Tabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q313694" start="5010" end="5022" title="Stephen Hunt (footballer, born 1981)" label="Stephen Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753614" start="5024" end="5033" title="Sam Sodje" label="Sam Sodje"/>
<link wikidata="Q562007" start="5038" end="5052" title="Michael Turner (footballer, born 1983)" label="Michael Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="5102" end="5108" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="5169" end="5180" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q567339" start="5248" end="5262" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="5268" end="5285" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406791" start="5355" end="5369" title="Upset (competition)" label="giant killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="5441" end="5451" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="5850" end="5854" title="River Tees" label="Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592" start="5908" end="5925" title="Hartlepool United F.C." label="Hartlepool United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162050" start="5969" end="5975" title="Solent River" label="Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760088" start="6235" end="6251" title="UEFA Pro Licence" label="UEFA Pro Licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761294" start="6365" end="6375" title="Andy Scott (footballer, born 1972)" label="Andy Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q248188" start="6544" end="6562" title="Milton Keynes Dons F.C." label="Milton Keynes Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028129" start="6571" end="6578" title="2006-07 in English football" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172346" start="6648" end="6662" title="Pete Winkelman" label="Pete Winkelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="6755" end="6767" title="Football League Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="7017" end="7031" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q223176" start="7136" end="7159" title="Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink" label="Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink"/>
<link wikidata="Q741313" start="7210" end="7224" title="Milan Mandarić" label="Milan Mandarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q734273" start="7450" end="7463" title="Derek Riordan" label="Derek Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="7504" end="7510" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="7827" end="7839" title="Swindon Town F.C." label="Swindon Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q718817" start="7866" end="7880" title="Maurice Malpas" label="Maurice Malpas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48932" start="7939" end="7954" title="Cheltenham Town F.C." label="Cheltenham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258139" start="8015" end="8021" title="Dennis Allen (footballer)" label="Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q541299" start="8043" end="8055" title="Whaddon Road" label="Whaddon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q787457" start="8517" end="8532" title="gardening leave" label="gardening leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860242" start="8620" end="8627" title="Bouncer (doorman)" label="bouncer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="8641" end="8656" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339677" start="8937" end="8942" title="Scout (sport)" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="9223" end="9235" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q919436" start="9829" end="9843" title="Lawrie Sanchez" label="Lawrie Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="9943" end="9953" title="Football League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q48929" start="10022" end="10035" title="Burton Albion F.C." label="Burton Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="10164" end="10174" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19456" start="10289" end="10301" title="Bristol City F.C." label="Bristol City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156289" start="10309" end="10319" title="2012–13 Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="10360" end="10364" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48935" start="10510" end="10522" title="Chesterfield F.C." label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="10620" end="10630" title="Football League One" label="League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616351" start="10711" end="10721" title="2012–13 Football League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851" start="10752" end="10765" title="AFC Wimbledon" label="AFC Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q619148" start="10769" end="10780" title="Priestfield Stadium" label="Priestfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508936" start="10828" end="10856" title="League Managers Association Awards" label="League 2 Manager of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508933" start="10864" end="10867" title="League Managers Association" label="LMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="11261" end="11280" title="Football Conference" label="Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="11608" end="11623" title="National League (division)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303493" start="11629" end="11638" title="Eastleigh F.C." label="Eastleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185482" start="11834" end="11846" title="Ronnie Moore" label="Ronnie Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="11883" end="11889" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214935" start="11898" end="11910" title="F.C. Halifax Town" label="Halifax Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="12091" end="12100" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465835" start="12113" end="12127" title="Football Focus" label="Football Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593351" start="12494" end="12508" title="Graham Westley" label="Graham Westley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9408" start="12547" end="12553" title="Barnet F.C." label="Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48935" start="12770" end="12782" title="Chesterfield F.C." label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595333" start="12862" end="12869" title="2017–18 in English football" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149040" start="13028" end="13038" title="Paul Allen (footballer)" label="Paul Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954865" start="13040" end="13053" title="Bradley Allen" label="Bradley Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706818" start="13058" end="13069" title="Clive Allen" label="Clive Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830807" start="13111" end="13120" title="Les Allen" label="Les Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258139" start="13134" end="13140" title="Dennis Allen (footballer)" label="Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568" start="13184" end="13219" title="Bournemouth &amp;amp; Boscombe Athletic F.C." label="Bournemouth &amp;amp; Boscombe Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084441" start="13229" end="13242" title="Charlie Allen (footballer, born 1992)" label="Charlie Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235413" start="13300" end="13311" title="Harry Grant (footballer)" label="Harry Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="13381" end="13394" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="13670" end="13688" title="Warwick University" label="Warwick University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13838" end="13855" title="Coaching for Hope" label="Coaching for Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="13926" end="13936" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735687" start="14048" end="14059" title="Mail Online" label="Mail Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="14162" end="14181" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810514" start="14193" end="14200" title="1985–86 Football League Cup" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="14219" end="14250" title="Football League Second Division" label="Football League Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253708" start="14262" end="14269" title="1990–91 Football League Second Division" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="14283" end="14303" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14305" end="14327" title="PFA Team of the Year (1990s)#First Division 4" label="1992–93 First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644608" start="14361" end="14382" title="Supporters Direct Cup" label="Supporters Direct Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="14402" end="14421" title="Football League Two" label="Football League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616351" start="14423" end="14430" title="2012–13 Football League Two" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="14440" end="14458" title="Conference Premier" label="Conference Premier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14460" end="14467" title="2014–15 Football Conference#Conference Premier" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465868" start="14481" end="14521" title="Football League One Manager of the Month" label="Football League One Manager of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834838" start="14570" end="14586" title="BBC Radio London" label="BBC Radio London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465877" start="14625" end="14665" title="Football League Two Manager of the Month" label="Football League Two Manager of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508936" start="14694" end="14730" title="League Managers Association Awards" label="LMA League Two Manager of the Season"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954401" wikidata="Q444675" url="?curid=954401" title="Shona Robison">
<text>Shona McRory Robison (born 26 May 1966) is a Scottish politician who has served as Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Local Government since 2023. A member of the Scottish National Party (SNP), she previously served as Deputy First Minister of Scotland from 2023 to 2024. Robison has been the Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for Dundee City East since 2003 and was an additional member for the North East Scotland region from 1999 to 2003.

Robison served as Minister for Public Health and Sport from 2007 to 2011. She then oversaw the Scottish Government&#x27;s preparations for the 2014 Commonwealth Games as Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport from 2011 to April 2014, when she was promoted to the Scottish Cabinet by Alex Salmond as Cabinet Secretary for Commonwealth Games, Sport, Equalities and Pensioners&#x27; Rights. When Nicola Sturgeon succeeded Salmond as First Minister in November 2014, she appointed Robison the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Sport.

In 2018, she resigned from government during a cabinet reshuffle after being widely criticised for her poorly received tenure as Health Secretary. She returned to the backbenches, where she served on the justice and health committees. In 2021, Robison returned to Sturgeon&#x27;s government as the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government. During her tenure in the position, she oversaw the government&#x27;s efforts to pass the controversial Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill. 

Following Sturgeon&#x27;s resignation as first minister in 2023, Robison was appointed Deputy First Minister and Finance Secretary by Humza Yousaf in his new government. After Yousaf&#x27;s resignation and the subsequent appointment of John Swinney as First Minister in 2024, Robison resigned as Deputy First Minister but retained her finance portfolio in Cabinet, with additional responsibility for local government.

==Early life ==
Shona McRory Robison was born in Redcar, North Yorkshire, England, on 26 May 1966. She attended Alva Academy in Clackmannanshire. She gained a Master of Arts in Social Science at the University of Glasgow in 1989. The following year, she gained a Postgraduate Cert in Community Education at Jordanhill College.

Robison joined the Scottish National Party (SNP) in 1988. She was an active member of the party&#x27;s youth wing the Young Scottish Nationalist, now known as Young Scots for Independence, where she met the likes of Nicola Sturgeon and Fiona Hyslop.

Before being elected to the Scottish Parliament, she worked in Glasgow City Council&#x27;s Social Work Department.

==Early parliamentary career==
=== SNP in opposition; 1997–2007 ===
Robison contested in the first election to the Scottish Parliament for the Dundee East constituency. Although she was unsuccessful, having came second to Scottish Labour&#x27;s John McAllion, she was elected as an additional member for the North East Scotland region. In her first term, she was member of the Health and Community Care Committee and was the Deputy Convenor of the Equal Opportunities Committee.

She served in the SNP&#x27;s opposition cabinet as the shadow deputy minister for health and community care.

In the 2003 Scottish Parliament election, Robison successfully defeated McAllion by just 100 votes in Dundee East. She served as the Shadow Minister for Health and Social Justice in the SNP&#x27;s opposition benches. Robison was a member of the Health Committee.

=== Junior ministerial career; 2007–2014 ===

After the SNP&#x27;s victory in the 2007 election, Robison was appointed as the Minister for Public Health. In 2009, she added Sport onto her portfolio. In the 2011 election, Robison was re-elected into the newly drawn, Dundee City East constituency. She was appointed Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport.

In the run up to the Scottish independence referendum in 2014, Robison wrote to the University of Dundee to complain that a Dundee professor had chaired an event for the Better Together campaign. Robison insisted that Christopher Whatley&#x27;s involvement in the Five Million Questions project about the implications of the referendum meant he should have taken a neutral stance on the constitutional issue. However, Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson said: &quot;I&#x27;m not sure this kind of bullying and intimidation is the best advert for the SNP&#x27;s vision of a future separate Scotland. In fact, it is chilling.&quot;

In April 2014, Alex Salmond promoted her to the full Cabinet position of Cabinet Secretary for Commonwealth Games, Sport, Equalities and Pensioners&#x27; Rights.
==Cabinet Secretary for Health (2014–2018)==
On 21 November 2014, Robison was appointed by Sturgeon as Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Sport, in Sturgeon&#x27;s first government. Following the 2016 election, she was reappointed into Sturgeon&#x27;s cabinet as Cabinet Secretary for Health and Sport. In January 2018, during an appearance at Holyrood&#x27;s Health and Sport Committee, she was warned by Labour MSP Neil Findlay of a &quot;drugs disaster&quot;. In 2018, Scotland went on to record the highest number of drug deaths per head in the European Union, at a rate nearly three times higher than the UK average.

On 26 June 2018, she announced her intention to resign from Cabinet. Shortly after a cabinet reshuffle was made by Sturgeon. BBC political correspondent Glenn Campbell wrote after the reshuffle: &quot;The most widely anticipated departure was t/hat of health secretary, Shona Robison. She&#x27;s been under considerable pressure over NHS performance. She stood down on the day the Scottish government confirmed its worst cancer waiting times for six years.&quot;

== Backbenches (2018–2021) ==
Following her resignation from government, Robison returned to the backbenches. She served on the Parliament&#x27;s Justice Committee and Social Security Committee. Amid the outbreak of the Coronavirus pandemic, she served as a member of the COVID-19 Committee.

In February 2021, Audit Scotland published a report that concluded the Scottish Government had not prepared adequately for a pandemic. The watchdog also noted that recommendations from pandemic planning exercises during Robison&#x27;s time as Health Secretary had not been fully implemented. One particular failure it highlighted was that not enough had been done to ensure Scottish hospitals and care homes had enough personal protective equipment (PPE). Overall, it concluded that ministers &quot;could have been better prepared to respond to the Covid-19 pandemic&quot;. Nicola Sturgeon said there were &quot;lots of lessons to learn&quot;.

==Third Sturgeon government (2021–2023)==
=== Social Justice Secretary ===
On 20 May 2021, Sturgeon announced her third government, with Robison returning as Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government. Robison held the position of Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice until the election of Humza Yousaf as First Minister in March 2023. Following a cabinet reshuffle, Yousaf appointed Shirley-Anne Somerville as Robison&#x27;s replacement and promoted Robison to Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Finance.

===Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill===
During Robison&#x27;s tenure in the Social Justice department, she oversaw the implementation of the Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill which was received with backlash from many fearing it was jeopardising the safety of women. Robison reassured MSPs and the public that the bill did &quot;not conflict with work to advance women&#x27;s rights and equality&quot; and that she was &quot;conscious that some of the details of the proposed reforms have become lost within the wider discussions around trans rights and the perceived conflict with the rights of women and girls&quot;. The bill intended to introduce a process of self-declaration for transgender people, allowing them to obtain a gender recognition certificate (GRC), thus removing the need for a psychiatric diagnosis of gender dysphoria before being allowed to change their gender legally. In December 2022, 150 amendments had been put forward to the Scottish Parliament regarding the bill which saw MSPs sit and debate the bill in the Scottish Parliament chamber long into the evening. Robison wrote to three individual MSPs claiming that their amendments put the bill &quot;at serious risk&quot;. 

The bill was blocked by the UK Government, with Robison stating that she would &quot;vigorously contest&quot; any attempt by the UK Government to block the gender reform legislations which the Scottish Parliament has control over. Under Section 35 of the Scotland Act 1998, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak blocked the implementation of the gender reform bill. This marked the first time that the UK Government had blocked a piece of legislation from being passed since devolution.

== Deputy First Minister (2023–2024) ==

On 28 March 2023, newly elected First Minister Humza Yousaf announced Robison as his deputy first minister of Scotland. She was officially sworn into office the next day and was appointed finance secretary in Yousaf&#x27;s new government.

In July 2023, Robison intervened in the speculation over Inverclyde Royal Hospital being downgraded. Robison issued a statement through an interview with &quot;The Telegraph&quot; on the issue, stating that the hospital would not be downgraded or lose its casualty department, citing the fact that the Emergency Department at Inverclyde Royal Hospital was &quot;one of the best performing A&amp;E&#x27;s in Scotland, certainly within NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. Robison committed further money for improvements to both NHS Scotland services and facilities, citing proposals set out to be met by 2026. 

===Cabinet Secretary for Finance===

Robison said that her immediate priorities as Finance Secretary was &quot;more efficient public services and fair work&quot; being at the heart of the Economy of Scotland. In April 2023, Robison launched the Scottish Government&#x27;s &quot;Portfolio Prospectus&quot; which sets out a number of economic actions to be achieved by 2026. These include proposals for creating the UK&#x27;s most progressive tax system to assist in the delivery of Scottish public services, new opportunities to tackle poverty and measures to grow the wellbeing economy whilst increasing the number of employees earning the real living wage, while narrowing the gender pay gap. Additionally, the Scottish Government has an ambition of spearheading Scotland as a leading European start-up nation for the creation of new businesses as well as developing Scotland&#x27;s existing international exports while developing into new international trading market. Robison also recognising the importance of re-developing Scotland&#x27;s infrastructure and economy to allow it to be more sustainable in the future, with plans for laying foundations to produce 5 Gigawatts (GW) of hydrogen production by 2030, as part of a Scottish hydrogen supply chain. As Finance Secretary, Robison will commit to implementing a &quot;New Deal&quot; for Scottish local authorities. 

Robison delivered her first Medium–Term Financial Strategy to the Scottish Parliament in May 2023. Robison highlighted the importance of &quot;sound public finances&quot; being &quot;key to ensuring we can tackle poverty and build a fair, green and growing economy whilst improving our public services&quot;. Robison claimed that the current economic situation in Scotland had &quot;been amongst the most challenging since devolution&quot;, citing global issues such as the Covid-19 pandemic, the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and soaring inflation being driving factors directly impacting the Scottish economy. Robison was also critical of UK Government policy and decision making that had impacted on Scotland, including Brexit and its association economic impact, &quot;a decade of austerity&quot; and the September 2022 United Kingdom mini-budget.

====Public sector workforce====

In November 2023, Robison claimed that the workforce within Scotland&#x27;s public sector &quot;will have to shrink&quot; as a result of funding pressure. Robison claimed that public sectors such as health would be protected from any proposals to reduce the workforce, claiming that &quot;tight budgets and inflation-driven pay deals&quot; may require other public sectors to see their workforce reduced.

During an interview on &quot;The Sunday Show&quot; on the BBC, Robison said &quot;This will be one of the most difficult budgets under devolution and we will be having a number of challenges around how to make sure we can invest what we can in public services. But I need to be honest with the public that this budget, this UK Tory budget and the chancellor&#x27;s decisions have made my job very difficult. This is the worst case scenario for the Scottish budget&quot;.

====Council tax freeze====
Ahead of the 2024 Scottish budget, the Yousaf government intended to maintain the council tax freeze which had been in place in Scotland since the first SNP led government came to power in 2007. However, two Scottish local authorities – Argyll and Bute Council and Inverclyde Council defied the Scottish Government and approved plans to increase the rate of council tax in their respective areas. Argyll and Bute Council voted for a 10% rise and Inverclyde Council a 8.2% increase to council tax. The administrations of Argyll and Bute Council and Inverclyde Council asked for additional funding from the Scottish Government to assist in maintaining a council tax freeze in their local authorities, with Robison saying that &quot;if approved, it means households across the whole country would benefit from help during the cost of living crisis&quot;. COSLA Resources Spokesperson, Councillor Katie Hagmann, explained that Robison&#x27;s proposals to allocate £144 million in the Scottish budget to fund the council tax freeze will &quot;not fully fund a council tax freeze&quot;. Hagmann criticised the proposals, saying that &quot;the Scottish Budget has not provided our local authorities with a fully funded council tax freeze as expected. The Scottish Government has set aside £144m stating this will ‘fully fund’ a council tax freeze – this would only provide the income equivalent to a 5% rise&quot;.

By April 2024, all Scottish local authorities, including Argyll and Bute Council and Inverclyde Council who had previously voted to increase council tax rates, confirmed that council tax would be frozen across all of Scotland&#x27;s 32 local authorities after both Argyll and Bute and Inverclyde Councils voted to accept the Scottish Government funding package to support a council tax freeze for the forthcoming financial year. In a statement, Robison said that &quot;many households continue to struggle with the impact of rising prices, and this council tax freeze – funded by the Scottish Government – is just one of many ways that we’re offering support. Council tax is already lower in Scotland than elsewhere in the UK, and over two million households will now benefit from this freeze. We deeply value the role local authorities play in Scotland’s communities, which is why – in the face of a profoundly challenging financial situation – we have made available record funding of more than £14 billion to councils in 2024-25, a real-terms increase of 2.5% compared with the previous year&quot;.

====2024–2025 Scottish budget====

Robison delivered the 2024–2025 Scottish budget to the Scottish Parliament in December 2023. Upon setting the budget, Scotland faced a £1.5 billion blackhole in finances. Robison confirmed the Scottish budget for 2024–2025 to be £59.7 billion, with the budget said to be being delivered &quot;at a critical point for Scotland as we transition from the pandemic and respond to the impacts of inflation and the economic shocks caused by Brexit, the war in Ukraine&quot;. £19.5 billion was allocated to the Scottish Government department of NHS Recovery, Health and Social Care, £12.9 billion to finance, £7.5 billion to Social Justice, £3.9 billion to transport, £3.8 billion for education and Justice and Home Affairs, £2 billion for Wellbeing Economy, Net Zero and Energy, £1.1 billion for rural affairs, islands and land reform, £315.6 million for culture and foreign affairs, and £223 million for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service.

In February 2024, Robison wrote to Jeremy Hunt, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, where she was critical of the UK Governments proposals as set out in the 2024 UK Spring Budget. In the letter, Robison claimed that &quot;economic outlook for the UK continues to look uncertain and while inflation has fallen compared to a year ago, it is still high and this is continuing to place a considerable strain on both public sector and household budgets&quot;. Whilst she highlighted the continued strength of the economy of Scotland, she expressed concerns about the reduction in funding made available to the Scottish Government, as well as to other devolved governments, through the block grant. She claimed &quot;Block Grant funding has fallen by 1.2% in real terms since 2022-23 and our UK capital funding is set to fall by almost 10% in real terms between 2023-24 and 2027-28&quot;, and as a result of the decrease in funding, argued for &quot;increased investment by the UK Government in public services and infrastructure, as has been recognised by the International Monetary Fund&quot;. She also addressed the continued &quot;fallout&quot; facing the economy as a result of Brexit, again highlighting that the majority of the Scottish electorate voted against leaving the European Union. Robison argued that Brexit continues to have a negative impact on Scottish businesses as a result of additional complexities and increased costs as a result of leaving the European single market. Additionally, she highlighted to Hunt &quot;National Institute of Economic and Social Research shows the UK economy is now 2.5% smaller than it would have been in the European Union, a gap which could increase to 5.7% by 2035&quot;.

The Scottish government confirmed up to £500 million in spending cuts as Robison explained that these savings were crucial for supporting the 2024-2025 Scottish budget. She attributed the financial pressures to prolonged Westminster austerity, Brexit, the war in Ukraine, and the cost of living crisis. Despite criticisms from opposition and advocacy groups, Robison defended the need for tough decisions to maintain fiscal responsibility.

=== Resignation ===
Upon the resignation of Humza Yousaf and the subsequent election of John Swinney, on 8 May 2024 Robison resigned as Deputy First Minister. In her resignation letter to Swinney, Robison stated that the previous week she believed stepping down from the role in favour of Kate Forbes would help bring the SNP together. Forbes replaced her as Deputy First Minister.

== Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Local Government (2024–present) ==
In the cabinet of John Swinney, Robison retained the Finance portfolio and gained the additional portfolio of Local Government.

===Local government pay disputes===

In August 2024, a series of strikes were set to impact on public sector services across Scotland including schools, refuse and other local government employees in a dispute over pay. Strike action was formally called off by the three largest trade unions in Scotland following an intervention from the Scottish Government which pledged an additional £77.5 million to pay for an improved pay offer. The additional funding from the Scottish Government enabled the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA) to make an improved pay offer to trade unions to consult with their members. The new pay offer would see an overall increase of 4.27%, with a rise of 5.63% offered to the lowest paid local government employees. Following the announcement of additional funding to provide an improved pay offer, Robison stated that both she and the Scottish Government &quot;value this vital workforce&quot; but warned that to fund the improved offer &quot;money from elsewhere in the budget will have to be moved and this will reduce funding for other programmes&quot;.

In October 2024, strikes in Perth and Kinross closed schools, including in the constituency of incumbent first minister John Swinney, over pay disputes. The strikes were announced by trade union Unison and last for two weeks, with non–teaching staff, early years staff, janitorial and catering staff taking strike actions. Teachers were not striking during the strike action. In response, the first minister, John Swinney, called for an end to the strikes stating that he hopes &quot;Unison will continue meaningful dialogue with local government and join colleagues by accepting the offer and ending industrial action&quot;, with Robison claiming that there was &quot;no more money available&quot; for improved local government pay deals.

===2025 Scottish budget===
Ahead of the 2025 Scottish budget, Robison stated that as a consequence of the increase to the amount of National Insurance public sectors employers pay which was announced by the UK Government that Scotland &quot;must be compensated&quot; by HM Treasury. She made the comments following the Chancellor of the Exchequer Rachel Reeves outlining the 2024 Autumn budget which is speculated to have a decrease in funding of £500 million available to Scottish Government. Reeves suggested that an additional £3.4 billion in investment which would be made available to the Scottish Government did &quot;not include compensation&quot; and she encouraged the Scottish Government to spend the extra investment &quot;wisely&quot;. It was further announced by Reeves that the Scottish Government would receive an additional £1.5 billion to compensate for additional staff costs as a result of the public sector workforce in Scotland being larger than that in the United Kingdom as a whole.

Robison demanded &quot;urgent clarity&quot; on the announcement of additional funding to compensate for increased staffing in public sector services in Scotland. There had been suggestions that Scotland could be &quot;short changed&quot; if the compensation amount for the increase in National Insurance is not proportional to the size of the public sector in Scotland. Following the Autumn budget outlined by Reeves, Robison welcomed the budget claiming it was &quot;a step in the right direction&quot; but said that as a result of the budget, the Scottish Government &quot;will still face enormous cost pressures&quot;. Robison stated that she would carefully assess the Autumn budget in full ahead of her announcement of the Scottish Budget on 4 December 2024.

Robison delivered the 2025 Scottish budget to the Scottish Parliament on 4 December 2024. In the budget, Robison pledged that the Scottish Government would end the two child benefit cap in 2026. Additionally, record spending for the National Health Service in Scotland was announced, with £21 billion being earmarked for the NHS in order to reduce waiting times and to ensure access to GPs was easier for the public. Additional measures announced in the budget included extra winter payments for the elderly, funding to tackle the climate emergency and scrapping the council tax freeze. Opposition parties in the Scottish Parliament were critical of the budget, with Scottish Labour stating that the government was &quot;going in the wrong direction&quot;, whilst the Scottish Conservatives claimed that budget was &quot;more of the same&quot; from previous budgets set by the Scottish Government.

== Personal life ==
She was married to Stewart Hosie, who is the Westminster MP for Dundee East and was previously the SNP&#x27;s Depute Leader. They have one daughter. Robison experienced a miscarriage in 2007. It was announced on 15 May 2016 that the couple had separated. This was followed by reports that Hosie had had an affair with Westminster-based freelance journalist Serena Cowdy.

==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==

*personal website
*profile on Scottish Government website
*profile on SNP website
*Dundee SNP website
*They Work For You
*BBC Democracy Live
*Public Whip Voting Record




|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q444675" start="0" end="20" title="Shona Robison" label="Shona McRory Robison"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912094" start="83" end="133" title="Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Local Government" label="Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="162" end="185" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="218" end="251" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="Deputy First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="292" end="325" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265528" start="336" end="352" title="Dundee City East (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Dundee City East"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="359" end="363" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="375" end="392" title="Additional member system" label="additional member"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647853" start="401" end="420" title="North East Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="North East Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="433" end="437" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="441" end="445" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865944" start="466" end="502" title="Minister for Public Health and Sport" label="Minister for Public Health and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="543" end="562" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116999" start="591" end="614" title="2014 Commonwealth Games" label="2014 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q30763439" start="618" end="659" title="Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport" label="Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32859621" start="714" end="730" title="Scottish Cabinet" label="Scottish Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="734" end="746" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q30763439" start="750" end="837" title="Cabinet Secretary for Commonwealth Games, Sport, Equalities and Pensioners&amp;#x27; Rights" label="Cabinet Secretary for Commonwealth Games, Sport, Equalities and Pensioners&amp;#x27; Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q467112" start="844" end="859" title="Nicola Sturgeon" label="Nicola Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694341" start="940" end="978" title="Cabinet Secretary for Health and Sport" label="Cabinet Secretary for Health and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q30763439" start="1279" end="1345" title="Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government" label="Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q110605369" start="1450" end="1491" title="Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill" label="Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q174924" start="1629" end="1641" title="Humza Yousaf" label="Humza Yousaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q117322284" start="1653" end="1663" title="First Yousaf government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q125705602" start="1671" end="1696" title="2024 Scottish government crisis" label="Yousaf&amp;#x27;s resignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125727831" start="1705" end="1727" title="2024 Scottish National Party leadership election" label="subsequent appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q333811" start="1731" end="1743" title="John Swinney" label="John Swinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193749" start="1963" end="1969" title="Redcar" label="Redcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="1971" end="1986" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737612" start="2026" end="2038" title="Alva Academy" label="Alva Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207268" start="2042" end="2058" title="Clackmannanshire" label="Clackmannanshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785149" start="2073" end="2087" title="Master of Arts (Scotland)" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277211" start="2221" end="2239" title="Jordanhill College" label="Jordanhill College"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="2261" end="2284" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="2360" end="2386" title="Scottish National Party" label="Young Scottish Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q467112" start="2458" end="2473" title="Nicola Sturgeon" label="Nicola Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418512" start="2478" end="2490" title="Fiona Hyslop" label="Fiona Hyslop"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="2521" end="2540" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q130637" start="2556" end="2576" title="Glasgow City Council" label="Glasgow City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="2702" end="2716" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="first election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29585760" start="2724" end="2743" title="1st Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265537" start="2752" end="2776" title="Dundee East (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Dundee East constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="2831" end="2846" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379003" start="2854" end="2867" title="John McAllion" label="John McAllion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="2891" end="2908" title="Additional member system" label="additional member"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647853" start="2917" end="2943" title="North East Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="North East Scotland region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865944" start="3144" end="3196" title="Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care" label="shadow deputy minister for health and community care"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="3206" end="3239" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="3545" end="3558" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865944" start="3589" end="3615" title="Minister for Public Health (Scotland)" label="Minister for Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865944" start="3636" end="3641" title="Minister for Public Health and Sport" label="Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862416" start="3669" end="3682" title="2011 Scottish Parliament election" label="2011 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265528" start="3729" end="3758" title="Dundee City East (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Dundee City East constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q30763439" start="3778" end="3819" title="Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport" label="Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="3843" end="3875" title="Scottish independence referendum" label="Scottish independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="3906" end="3926" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898557" start="3992" end="4016" title="Better Together (campaign)" label="Better Together campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113411" start="4040" end="4059" title="Christopher Whatley" label="Christopher Whatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243587" start="4240" end="4261" title="Scottish Conservatives" label="Scottish Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177593" start="4269" end="4282" title="Ruth Davidson" label="Ruth Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="4475" end="4487" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q30763439" start="4533" end="4620" title="Cabinet Secretary for Commonwealth Games, Sport, Equalities and Pensioners&amp;#x27; Rights" label="Cabinet Secretary for Commonwealth Games, Sport, Equalities and Pensioners&amp;#x27; Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694341" start="4725" end="4774" title="Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Sport" label="Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q22120071" start="4779" end="4811" title="First Sturgeon government" label="Sturgeon&amp;#x27;s first government"/>
<link wikidata="Q979197" start="5048" end="5060" title="Neil Findlay" label="Neil Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415793" start="5407" end="5421" title="Glenn Campbell (broadcaster)" label="Glenn Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="5815" end="5826" title="Backbencher" label="backbenches"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5938" end="5958" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="Coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819944" start="6029" end="6043" title="Audit Scotland" label="Audit Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30763439" start="6814" end="6880" title="Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government" label="Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279359" start="7064" end="7087" title="Shirley-Anne Somerville" label="Shirley-Anne Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912094" start="7168" end="7197" title="Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Local Government" label="Cabinet Secretary for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q110605369" start="7349" end="7390" title="Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill" label="Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="8674" end="8691" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055561" start="8708" end="8719" title="Rishi Sunak" label="Rishi Sunak"/>
<link wikidata="Q174924" start="8984" end="8996" title="Humza Yousaf" label="Humza Yousaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="9022" end="9055" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="deputy first minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912094" start="9125" end="9142" title="Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Local Government" label="finance secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q117322284" start="9146" end="9174" title="First Yousaf government" label="Yousaf&amp;#x27;s new government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060060" start="9234" end="9259" title="Inverclyde Royal Hospital" label="Inverclyde Royal Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="9337" end="9350" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954138" start="9611" end="9640" title="NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde" label="NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175225" start="9971" end="9990" title="Economy of Scotland" label="Economy of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="11632" end="11649" title="Covid-19 pandemic" label="Covid-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="11655" end="11687" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="11884" end="11890" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q114688857" start="11970" end="12011" title="September 2022 United Kingdom mini-budget" label="September 2022 United Kingdom mini-budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767386" start="12482" end="12497" title="The Sunday Show" label="The Sunday Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12511" end="12514" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438058" start="12970" end="12985" title="Scottish budget" label="Scottish budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q117322284" start="12991" end="13008" title="First Yousaf government" label="Yousaf government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815568" start="13034" end="13045" title="Council Tax in Scotland" label="council tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530251" start="13189" end="13212" title="Argyll and Bute Council" label="Argyll and Bute Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530261" start="13217" end="13235" title="Inverclyde Council" label="Inverclyde Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166273" start="13804" end="13809" title="COSLA" label="COSLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438058" start="15531" end="15546" title="Scottish budget" label="Scottish budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="15554" end="15573" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189419" start="16402" end="16444" title="Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service" label="Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q333533" start="16482" end="16493" title="Jeremy Hunt" label="Jeremy Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="16499" end="16526" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175225" start="16952" end="16971" title="economy of Scotland" label="economy of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="17621" end="17627" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17719" end="17733" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="17907" end="17929" title="European single market" label="European single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q125705602" start="18635" end="18662" title="2024 Scottish government crisis" label="resignation of Humza Yousaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q125727831" start="18671" end="18690" title="2024 Scottish National Party leadership election" label="subsequent election"/>
<link wikidata="Q333811" start="18694" end="18706" title="John Swinney" label="John Swinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="18742" end="18763" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="Deputy First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039479" start="18895" end="18906" title="Kate Forbes" label="Kate Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125848937" start="19068" end="19075" title="Swinney government" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q333811" start="19079" end="19091" title="John Swinney" label="John Swinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="19255" end="19262" title="Strike action" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="19469" end="19481" title="trade unions" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166273" start="19689" end="19729" title="Convention of Scottish Local Authorities" label="Convention of Scottish Local Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="20320" end="20337" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q176224" start="20487" end="20493" title="Unison" label="Unison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438058" start="21078" end="21093" title="Scottish budget" label="Scottish budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q647883" start="21165" end="21183" title="National Insurance" label="National Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="21303" end="21314" title="HM Treasury" label="HM Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q574896" start="21380" end="21393" title="Rachel Reeves" label="Rachel Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q127414584" start="21408" end="21426" title="October 2024 United Kingdom budget" label="2024 Autumn budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="22855" end="22874" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933548" start="23038" end="23073" title="NHS Scotland" label="National Health Service in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q689514" start="23743" end="23756" title="Stewart Hosie" label="Stewart Hosie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954405" wikidata="Q2018299" url="?curid=954405" title="Tandragee">
<text>Tandragee () is a town in County Armagh, Northern Ireland. It is on a hillside above the Cusher River, and is overlooked by Tandragee Castle. The town is in the civil parish of Ballymore and the historic barony of Orior Lower. Earlier spellings of the name include &#x27;Tanderagee&#x27; and &#x27;Tonregee&#x27;. It had a population of 3,545 people in the 2021 census.

==History==
Overlooking the town is Tandragee Castle. It was originally the seat of the chief of the O&#x27;Hanlon clan, who was Lord of Orior. Because some of the O&#x27;Hanlons took part in the Nine Years&#x27; War, the castle and surrounding territory were confiscated from the O&#x27;Hanlons and granted to Oliver St John and his heirs.

Tandragee Castle was rebuilt in about 1837, after having previously been destroyed during the Irish Rebellion of 1641, for George Montagu, 6th Duke of Manchester. Its grounds have been home to the Tayto potato-crisp factory since 1956, after being bought by businessman Thomas Hutchinson.

=== Irish Rebellion of 1641 ===
On 23 October 1641, the fortified town of Tandragee was attacked and taken by Irish rebels led by Patrick and Edmond O&#x27;Hanlon, as a part of the O&#x27;Hanlon clan&#x27;s efforts to reclaim their territory. The rebels set fire to the church of Ballymore, as well as Captain Oliver St John&#x27;s castle (Tandragee Castle), resulting in the destruction of the town. They also reportedly executed Protestant settlers living in Tandragee.

In April 1642, Felim O&#x27;Neill, leading the rebellion, commanded that his forces gather at Tandragee to prepare to confront the Scots Covenanters who had landed in Ulster. About 2,000 soldiers responded to O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s call.

On 12 May 1643, General Robert Monro led an army of 4,000 Covenanters to Tandragee, and burned homes in the surrounding region. Felim O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s forces, comprising both cavalry and infantry, engaged Monro&#x27;s men. During this skirmish, the lieutenant of Colonel Monro&#x27;s cavalry, along with two captains and several soldiers, lost their lives. Ultimately, the O&#x27;Hanlons lost their hold of Tandragee, with the castle left in a state of disrepair as a result of the conflict.

On 9 September 1679 a group of Redmond O&#x27;Hanlon&#x27;s followers murdered Henry St John, grandnephew of Sir Oliver St John, when horse-riding near Knockbridge. He was the owner of Tandragee Castle and its demesne at the time.

=== Tandragee Volunteers ===
In the late 18th century, Britain was engaged in the American Revolutionary War. This heightened the risk of invasion by French and Spanish forces, especially in Ireland. In response, groups of Irish Volunteers were formed throughout Ireland. They were equipped and managed independently and mostly consisted of Protestants, mainly from the Church of Ireland. Several companies were set up in the Tandragee area.

The Tandragee Volunteers, organised by Captain Nicholas Johnston in 1779, were fitted with scarlet uniforms faced with white details. Johnston set up another company in Tandragee known as the Tandragee Invincibles. In the churchyard, there is a grave dedicated to one of its volunteers, John Whitten, who died in 1785.

Other companies included the Tandragee Light Dragoons, led by James Craig. Volunteer activities were mostly ceremonial, featuring reviews and shooting competitions. The Tandragee Volunteers played a notable role in a skirmish at Lisnagade in 1791. A group of Catholic Defenders set up camp at Lisnagade fort, planning to confront a group of Protestant Peep O&#x27; Day Boys commemorating King William&#x27;s triumph at the Battle of the Boyne. This skirmish inspired the creation of a ballad known as &quot;Lisnagade&quot; (&quot;Ye Protestants of Ulster&quot;).

The Volunteers&#x27; influence waned after the American Revolutionary War as new government-sanctioned groups emerged, such as the Yeomanry. Following the Battle of the Diamond, the Yeomanry became associated with the Orange Order. Established in 1796, the Tandragee Yeomanry, along with the County Armagh Yeomanry, played a key role in suppressing the 1798 United Irishmen Rebellion. &quot;The Newry Telegraph&quot; estimated that 40,000 met at a demonstration in Tandragee. With the Irish Volunteers disbanded and the United Irishmen defeated, the Acts of Union 1800 dissolved the all-Ireland Parliament.

==== Home Rule crisis ====

From the introduction of the First Home Rule Bill in 1886, the Protestant community in Tandragee strongly opposed the idea and played a role in the establishment of a proposed &#x27;Orange Army&#x27;. An effigy of Prime Minister William Gladstone was set alight in the town following an anti-Home Rule demonstration.

Tandragee also had a strong representation in the Ulster Defence Union. In the central assembly of 600 members appointed on 21 October 1886, the southern region, including Armagh, Cavan, and Monaghan, was represented by eight local representatives: Rev. P.A. Kelly, Rev. W. McEndoo, Rev. R.J. Whan, Maynard Sinton, Thomas White, William O’Brien, John Atkinson, and Rev. George Laverty.

In 1910, branches of the Unionist Club were founded in Tandragee, Clare, Scarva, Poyntzpass, and Ballyshiel. In September, under the supervision of William Montagu, 9th Duke of Manchester, members of the Tandragee Club engaged in drills prior to the Ulster Covenant.

During the Third Home Rule Crisis, the Ulster Unionist Party leadership chose to unite the various unionist paramilitary groups. By December 1912, the County Armagh Committee included several figures from the business sector, the legal field, and the local aristocracy. The representatives from Tandragee were Rev. R.J. Whan and George Davison. These people played a role in the eventual formation of a local battalion of the Ulster Volunteers.

Tandragee was identified by the Royal Irish Constabulary in 1912 as one of ten locations where unionist paramilitary drills were occurring. The population of the Tandragee area became a majority of the Third Battalion of the County Armagh Regiment of the Ulster Volunteer Force - also known as the Tandragee Volunteers. Tandragee Castle was the headquarters of the Tandragee Volunteers, with records indicating that the 9th Duke of Manchester occasionally inspected the troops and permitted the use of his estate.

A mural commemorating the Third Battalion of the County Armagh Regiment UVF is located at the junction of Montague Street and Ballymore Road in Tandragee.

=== World War I ===
On 4 August 1914, the UK entered WWI, prompting thousands of Ulster Volunteers to join the British Army. A public initiative formed to integrate the Ulster Volunteer Force into Kitchener&#x27;s new Army, with hundreds enlisting from the Tandragee District. A number joined the Armagh Volunteer Battalion of the 9th Battalion Royal Irish Fusiliers. Between 60 and 70 volunteers, led by the &#x27;Catch-my-Pal&#x27; flute band, paraded through Tandragee before departing from Madden Bridge Railway Station.

Peace Day celebrations took place in Tandragee on 19 July 1919, featuring a costume parade and a sports day in the Duke of Manchester&#x27;s demesne. In the evening, a parade led by an effigy of the Kaiser made its way to the square, where the effigy was set ablaze.

The Tandragee war memorial was unveiled in April 1925, the first in County Armagh. A large crowd gathered for the unveiling ceremony. After the hymn &#x27;O God Our Help in Ages Past&#x27; was performed, Major Shellington MP, a former officer of the 9th Royal Irish Fusiliers, unveiled the memorial. The obelisk, crafted from Newry granite, is nearly tall and is situated in the square near the castle gates.

=== World War II ===

On 25 May 1942, a Supermarine Spitfire BL325 crashed near Cordraine Orange Hall in Tandragee. The aircraft was involved in a coordinated training exercise alongside ground forces. During a low-altitude flight, the pilot clipped a tree, resulting in the plane landing upside down in a field.

Just over a year later, life in the town would experience a significant transformation with the arrival of American GIs from the 6th Cavalry. In 1943, Alexander Montagu, the 10th Duke of Manchester, leased Tandragee Castle to the United States Army for use during World War II.

Tandragee&#x27;s links to the primary Belfast-Dublin railway, along with its proximity to the River Cusher and Newry Canal, positioned it as a strategic staging area for the United States Army in 1943. Tandragee railway station experienced the arrival of thousands of soldiers during World War II.

The 6th Cavalry unit conducted its final parade in Tandragee on 31 December 1943. Following this, the regiment transitioned to become the 6th Mechanized Cavalry Group, which was comprised of the 6th Cavalry Reconnaissance Squadron and the 28th Cavalry Reconnaissance Squadron. Reports suggest that General George S. Patton was a visitor to Tandragee Castle in 1943. While inspecting troops in Northern Ireland, he was guest of honour at a dance in the castle.

The Tandragee war memorial commemorates the soldiers who served in both World War I and World War II.

=== The Troubles ===
In February 1973, a confrontation occurred between three gunmen and British soldiers at the Tandragee power station, resulting in one of the gunmen being hit.

In 2000, Tandragee was scene of the Murders of Andrew Robb and David McIlwaine, two teenaged local Protestants who were unaffiliated with any paramilitary organization, by three members of the UVF Mid-Ulster Brigade and as part of an ongoing Loyalist feud between the UVF and LVF.

== Orange Order district ==

Tandragee District No.4 is one of 11 Orange Districts within County Armagh, comprising 21 private lodges and nearly 650 members. Every year on The Twelfth (12 July), the lodges within the district participate in the &quot;Ring Ceremony&quot; at the square, which includes a brief religious service. Tandragee is the only district to hold such an event.

Tandragee District No.4 hosts The Twelfth every 11 years, as part of a rotation in which each district lodge in County Armagh takes its turn to organise the event.

The district has its origins in 1796, the year following the establishment of the Orange Order. The inaugural Orange parades in Tandragee occurred on 12 July 1796, coinciding with the first Twelfth demonstration held at Lurgan Park. At that time, the district comprised 14 lodges. By 1834, the district was home to 27 lodges with a total of 810 members. In 1900, this number had decreased to 25 lodges with 750 members, while as of the early 21st century, there are 21 lodges with over 700 members.

On 12 July 1831, 10,000 Orangemen from across Ulster gathered in Tandragee to celebrate the Twelfth. They marched around Lord Mandeville&#x27;s Castle (Tandragee Castle), which featured castle gates decorated with Orange arches and showcased between 80 and 90 Orange banners.

Tandragee District Hall was constructed in 1912 and initially established as a Protestant Temperance Hall. The building later functioned as a picture house during the 1940s and for later for dances, until it eventually transitioned to function as Tandragee District Hall. The hall also holds other events throughout the year.

On New Year&#x27;s Day 2008, the hall was the target of an arson attack, during which the door was forcibly opened, the interior was ignited and the hall sustained significant smoke damage.

== Music ==

=== The Hills of Tandragee ===
A song written about the town, &quot;The Hills of Tandragee,&quot; originates from as early as 1970. It shares similarities with &quot;The Hills of Glensuili&quot;, differing mainly in place names and a few words that alter the political perspective. In the lyrics, the singer expresses to those witnessing his departure from Tandragee his desire for the Orange flag to soon be raised over its hills. He reflects on the birds and landscapes of Tandragee, hoping for peace and that &quot;the time soon come around when I return&quot;.

Folk musician, from the nearby Portadown, Robin Morton speaking about the song, &quot;Here&#x27;s a fairly modern Orange song, and a great favorite among &#x27;the brethren&#x27; because they can all join in on the last line of each verse. Dick Bamber, who gave it to me, is generally credited as the writer, but he tells me this is not correct. An old lady who lived beside him in Ballylisk, near Tandragee, &#x27;wrote it years ago.&#x27; Just how long ago she wrote it he doesn&#x27;t remember, but he says she gave it to him and he was the first to sing it in public. Now it&#x27;s an Orange standard.&quot;

=== Lambeg drumming ===
Lambeg drumming is an important element of the County Armagh Orange Districts. A particular drumming rhythm linked to this tradition, named after Tandragee, is known as &quot;Tandragee Time&quot; and is commonly featured throughout County Armagh.

== Churches ==
There are six churches in Tandragee: Ballymore Parish Church, St James&#x27;s Catholic Church, Tandragee Presbyterian, Tandagee Free Presbyterian, Tandragee Baptist and Tandragee Methodist.

=== Ballymore Parish Church ===

Ballymore Parish Church dates to 1343 and is located beside Tandragee Castle on Church Street.

The church has a history spanning over 650 years, connected to the Dukes of Manchester until the mid-1950s. The church was mentioned in 14th-century records but it was burnt down by Edmond O&#x27;Hanlon in the Irish Rebellion of 1641. It was reconstructed in 1812 as it had become inadequate for the congregation&#x27;s needs. During construction, remnants of the old walls were found, showing signs of fire damage from the Irish Rebellion of 1641.

===St James&#x27;s Catholic Church===

The Roman Catholic Church of Saint James the Apostle was built in 1852 and stands on Market Street. It is in the Catholic parish of Tandragee (Ballymore &amp; Mullaghbrack) and the Archdiocese of Armagh.

=== Tandragee Presbyterian ===

Tandragee Presbyterian Church was established, by Rev. Dr. Henry Cooke, in March 1829. The church building, which is located on the Markethill Road, was built in 1828 and renovated in 1977. The church hall serves as the venue for the 1st Tandragee Boys&#x27; Brigade and Girls&#x27; Brigade.

=== Tandragee Free Presbyterian ===

Tandragee Free Presbyterian Church was formed in 1967 and is located off the Portadown Road in the Willowfield housing estate.

In February 1967, Rev. Ian Paisley was invited to lead a gospel campaign at the Protestant Temperance Hall. Each evening, the hall was filled to capacity and, on the final two Sunday meetings, Cargans Memorial Orange Hall was used as an overflow venue, allowing additional participants to view the services via closed circuit television. The enthusiasm for this style of preaching was so significant that, as the mission drew to a close, several members of the congregation approached Rev. Paisley with a request to establish a separate Protestant witness, specifically a Free Presbyterian Church, in Tandragee. On Easter Sunday, 26 March 1967, Paisley delivered a sermon at the Temperance Hall, leading to the formation of the Tandragee Free Presbyterian Church.

On 18 October 2008, a new church complex spanning was opened to serve the growing congregation, located off the Portadown Road in the Willowfield housing estate. This facility features a sanctuary with seating for 450, a church hall that can accommodate 350 people, a prayer room for 130, and a youth fellowship area designed for 70 participants. The complex also has a minister&#x27;s office, a space for parents with infants during services, committee room, garage, storage areas, recording studio and two kitchens.

=== Tandragee Baptist ===
Tandragee Baptist Church was formed on 29 February 1864 and is located on the Madden Road.

Approximately 2 years following the establishment of the church, the members resolved to construct a meeting house, contingent upon securing a suitable location. During a church meeting held on 11 October 1866, with thirteen members in attendance, it was decided to accept a site from William Montagu, 7th Duke of Manchester and to &quot;solicit subscriptions towards the building of the chapel by means of letter and personal solicitation&quot;. The Duke of Manchester granted a lease for a parcel of land measuring 1 Rood and 27 perches, which housed an existing structure. The lease term was set for 91 years at an annual rate of 30 shillings (£1.50). It was agreed that the chapel would measure , constructed with stone sourced from the nearby Tullyhue quarry. Initially, the funds raised were sufficient only to construct the walls, leading to a temporary halt in progress. However, work resumed shortly after a donation from Mr. E D Atkinson allowing for the completion of the roof. By the close of 1867, the church was opened without any outstanding debts, although certain tasks were still pending completion as late as 1871.

The final service at the old church building took place on the afternoon of Sunday, 22 April 2001. Shortly after, in early May 2001, the structure was demolished. The building had been deemed structurally unsound. It lacked proper foundations, the roof beams were severely affected by dry rot, and several beams were precariously positioned on the wall above the windows without adequate support. A new church building was opened in 2002.

The church encountered criticism and faced a prosecution file in November 2020 for conducting services that violated COVID-19 restrictions.

=== Tandragee Methodist ===

Tandragee Methodist Church was built in 1835 and is located on Market Street.

== Education ==
Schools in the area include:
*Tandragee Primary School
*Tandragee Junior High School
*Tandragee Nursery
*Button Moon Play Group

== Sport ==
===Motorcycling===
The Tandragee 100 is a motorcycle race that has been held in the area since 1958. This event, a handicap race, has involved a number of notable motorcycle road racers, including: Guy Martin, Joey Dunlop, Ryan Farquhar and Michael Dunlop. The race did not take place during 2020 or 2021 due to COVID-19, was cancelled in 2023 due to insurance costs and again in 2024 due to lack of course resurfacing.

=== Golf ===

Tandragee Golf Club is located within the demesne of Tandragee Castle. It is a 5,589 metre, par 71 hilly parkland course. It was originally laid out as a private course for the 9th Duke of Manchester on his estate in 1911. In 1922, the golf club became affiliated to the Golfing Union of Ireland.

===Other sports=== 
Tandragee Rovers play in the Mid-Ulster Football League. The Tayto Tandragee Soapbox Derby was established in 2015 and has since raised funds for the Royal British Legion in Tandragee, attracting over 7,500 visitors in 2019.

==Industry and transport==

Thomas Sinton opened a mill in town in the 1880s, an expansion of his firm from its original premises at nearby Laurelvale – a model village which he built. Sintons&#x27; Mill, on the banks of the Cusher River, remained in production until the 1990s. The mill caught fire in October 2024 with 6 appliances from the NI Fire and Rescue Service in attendance.

White&#x27;s Mill was established by Thomas Henry White in 1841 as a corn and flour mill along the banks of the Cusher River. It is now Northern Ireland&#x27;s largest oat miller and breakfast cereal producer. In 2023, Armagh City, Banbridge and Craigavon Borough Council approved plans for White&#x27;s Oat&#x27;s to move to new premises in Craigavon.

The potato-crisp company Tayto has a factory and offices beside Tandragee Castle which offers guided tours. In November 2019, Prime Minister Boris Johnson toured UK businesses, which included a visit to the Tayto factory.
Taranto Ltd. manufactures concrete products at a production site situated on Scarva Road.

Tandragee Wastewater Treatment Works, owned by NI Water, is located on the Scarva Road.

Northern Ireland Electricity has an interconnector to County Louth in the Republic of Ireland from the Portadown Road in the outskirts of the town.

Tanderagee railway station opened on 6 January 1852 and was shut on 4 January 1965.

== Demography ==
===2021 census===
Tandragee had a population of 3,545 people in the 2021 census. Of these:
* 76.92% were from a Protestant background and 10.75% were from a Roman Catholic background

===2011 census===
Tandragee had a population of 3,486 people (1,382 households) in 2011. Of these:
* 23.26% were under 16 years old and 12.62% were aged 65 and above.
* 50.06% of the population were male and 49.94% were female.
* 81.84% were from a Protestant background and 11.70% were from a Roman Catholic background

===2001 census===
For the 2001 census, Tandragee was classified as an intermediate settlement by the NI Statistics and Research Agency (NISRA) (i.e. with population between 2,050 and 4,500 people). On census day (29 April 2001), there were 3,050 people living in Tandragee. Of these:
*24.9% were aged under 16 years and 14.3% were aged 60 and over
*48.0% of the population were male and 50.0% were female
*86.9% were from a Protestant background and 10.5% were from a Roman Catholic background
*2.0% of people aged 16–74 were unemployed.

==See also==
* Tandragee Idol, an Iron Age stone figure

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2018299" start="0" end="9" title="Tandragee" label="Tandragee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="26" end="39" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196171" start="89" end="101" title="Cusher River" label="Cusher River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682487" start="124" end="140" title="Tandragee Castle" label="Tandragee Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910694" start="161" end="173" title="Civil parishes in Ireland" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712691" start="177" end="186" title="Ballymore, County Armagh" label="Ballymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q853565" start="204" end="210" title="Barony (Ireland)" label="barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328588" start="214" end="225" title="Orior Lower" label="Orior Lower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="357" end="368" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682487" start="407" end="423" title="Tandragee Castle" label="Tandragee Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097066" start="459" end="464" title="Chief of the Name" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078746" start="472" end="485" title="Ó hAnluain" label="O&amp;#x27;Hanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071413" start="486" end="490" title="Irish clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801552" start="500" end="504" title="Tigerna" label="Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030487" start="508" end="513" title="Orior" label="Orior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361354" start="567" end="587" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War (Ireland)" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087847" start="682" end="696" title="Oliver St John, 1st Viscount Grandison" label="Oliver St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="807" end="830" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="Irish Rebellion of 1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q859822" start="836" end="874" title="George Montagu, 6th Duke of Manchester" label="George Montagu, 6th Duke of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055553" start="910" end="915" title="Tayto (Northern Ireland)" label="Tayto"/>
<link wikidata="Q173265" start="916" end="928" title="crisps" label="potato-crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078746" start="1184" end="1197" title="Ó hAnluain" label="O&amp;#x27;Hanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087847" start="1305" end="1327" title="Oliver St John, 1st Viscount Grandison" label="Captain Oliver St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q393046" start="1434" end="1453" title="Plantation of Ulster" label="Protestant settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335800" start="1491" end="1509" title="Felim O&amp;#x27;Neill of Kinard" label="Felim O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="1607" end="1624" title="Covenanters" label="Scots Covenanters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938373" start="1728" end="1748" title="Robert Monro" label="General Robert Monro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306125" start="2239" end="2260" title="Redmond O&amp;#x27;Hanlon (outlaw)" label="Redmond O&amp;#x27;Hanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2522" end="2548" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294261" start="2663" end="2679" title="Irish Volunteers (18th century)" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="2810" end="2827" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828013" start="3432" end="3441" title="Lisnagade" label="Lisnagade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182602" start="3471" end="3480" title="Defenders (Ireland)" label="Defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047355" start="3555" end="3576" title="Peep o&amp;#x27; Day Boys" label="Peep O&amp;#x27; Day Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q644960" start="3626" end="3645" title="Battle of the Boyne" label="Battle of the Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517243" start="3898" end="3906" title="Yeomanry" label="Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872909" start="3922" end="3943" title="Battle of the Diamond" label="Battle of the Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="3985" end="3997" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="4120" end="4150" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="1798 United Irishmen Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="4287" end="4302" title="Society of United Irishmen" label="United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="4317" end="4335" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349848" start="4432" end="4452" title="Government of Ireland Bill 1886" label="First Home Rule Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="4617" end="4649" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="Prime Minister William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879951" start="4771" end="4791" title="Ulster Defence Union" label="Ulster Defence Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886818" start="5133" end="5146" title="Unionist Club" label="Unionist Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q130302171" start="5174" end="5179" title="Clare, County Armagh" label="Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q135041" start="5181" end="5187" title="Scarva" label="Scarva"/>
<link wikidata="Q170529" start="5189" end="5199" title="Poyntzpass" label="Poyntzpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585580" start="5256" end="5295" title="William Montagu, 9th Duke of Manchester" label="William Montagu, 9th Duke of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435643" start="5358" end="5373" title="Ulster Covenant" label="Ulster Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="5387" end="5409" title="Government of Ireland Act 1914" label="Third Home Rule Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="5415" end="5436" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="5475" end="5503" title="Ulster loyalism" label="unionist paramilitary groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="5633" end="5644" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q935581" start="5802" end="5819" title="Ulster Volunteers" label="Ulster Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549059" start="5854" end="5878" title="Royal Irish Constabulary" label="Royal Irish Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q935581" start="6077" end="6099" title="Ulster Volunteers" label="Ulster Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969484" start="6595" end="6616" title="British Army during the First World War" label="join the British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435813" start="6690" end="6715" title="Kitchener&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Kitchener&amp;#x27;s new Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374346" start="6824" end="6859" title="Royal Irish Fusiliers" label="9th Battalion Royal Irish Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q86751650" start="6908" end="6920" title="Catch-my-Pal" label="Catch-my-Pal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682446" start="6987" end="7016" title="Tanderagee railway station" label="Madden Bridge Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="7218" end="7224" title="Kaiser wilhelm ii" label="Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="7737" end="7763" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire BL325"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818116" start="8140" end="8151" title="6th Cavalry Regiment" label="6th Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719680" start="8162" end="8208" title="Alexander Montagu, 10th Duke of Manchester" label="Alexander Montagu, the 10th Duke of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="8241" end="8259" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743404" start="8328" end="8350" title="Belfast–Dublin line" label="Belfast-Dublin railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019131" start="8401" end="8412" title="Newry Canal" label="Newry Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682446" start="8492" end="8517" title="Tanderagee railway station" label="Tandragee railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="8887" end="8911" title="George S. Patton" label="General George S. Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758398" start="9370" end="9412" title="Murders of Andrew Robb and David McIlwaine" label="Murders of Andrew Robb and David McIlwaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876089" start="9527" end="9549" title="UVF Mid-Ulster Brigade" label="UVF Mid-Ulster Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694461" start="9576" end="9589" title="Loyalist feud" label="Loyalist feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127576" start="9602" end="9605" title="Ulster Volunteer Force" label="UVF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872696" start="9610" end="9613" title="Loyalist Volunteer Force" label="LVF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="9682" end="9698" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="9706" end="9719" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400710" start="9788" end="9799" title="The Twelfth" label="The Twelfth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="10246" end="10258" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="10274" end="10288" title="Orange Order" label="Orange parades"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="11020" end="11046" title="Temperance movement" label="Protestant Temperance Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="11083" end="11096" title="Movie theater" label="picture house"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="11271" end="11290" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="11858" end="11869" title="Orange Order" label="Orange flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="12038" end="12051" title="Folk musician" label="Folk musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q768714" start="12069" end="12078" title="Portadown" label="Portadown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793564" start="12080" end="12092" title="Robin Morton (musician)" label="Robin Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q130755596" start="12975" end="12998" title="Ballymore Parish Church" label="Ballymore Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q130755596" start="13162" end="13185" title="Ballymore Parish Church" label="Ballymore Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143723" start="13860" end="13875" title="Catholic parish" label="Catholic parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364035" start="13928" end="13949" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Armagh" label="Archdiocese of Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q296597" start="14460" end="14476" title="Rev. Ian Paisley" label="Rev. Ian Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q925585" start="15014" end="15038" title="Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster" label="Free Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q860041" start="16129" end="16168" title="William Montagu, 7th Duke of Manchester" label="William Montagu, 7th Duke of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931844" start="16363" end="16367" title="Rood (unit)" label="Rood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165588" start="16375" end="16382" title="Rod (unit)" label="perches"/>
<link wikidata="Q87866152" start="17536" end="17557" title="COVID-19 restrictions" label="COVID-19 restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q26699992" start="17848" end="17861" title="Tandragee 100" label="Tandragee 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163326" start="17867" end="17882" title="motorcycle race" label="motorcycle race"/>
<link wikidata="Q594600" start="18023" end="18033" title="Guy Martin" label="Guy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358228" start="18035" end="18046" title="Joey Dunlop" label="Joey Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384047" start="18048" end="18061" title="Ryan Farquhar" label="Ryan Farquhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829989" start="18066" end="18080" title="Michael Dunlop" label="Michael Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="18137" end="18145" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682487" start="18313" end="18329" title="Tandragee Castle" label="Tandragee Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580647" start="18531" end="18555" title="Golfing Union of Ireland" label="Golfing Union of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682488" start="18578" end="18594" title="Tandragee Rovers F.C." label="Tandragee Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840827" start="18607" end="18633" title="Mid-Ulster Football League" label="Mid-Ulster Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055553" start="18639" end="18644" title="Tayto (Northern Ireland)" label="Tayto"/>
<link wikidata="Q655882" start="18655" end="18668" title="Gravity racer" label="Soapbox Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621811" start="18728" end="18748" title="Royal British Legion" label="Royal British Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062814" start="18832" end="18845" title="Thomas Sinton" label="Thomas Sinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940668" start="18944" end="18954" title="Laurelvale" label="Laurelvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888356" start="18959" end="18972" title="model village" label="model village"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160913" start="18989" end="19007" title="Sintons&amp;#x27; Mill" label="Sintons&amp;#x27; Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196171" start="19029" end="19041" title="Cusher River" label="Cusher River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859215" start="19147" end="19173" title="Northern Ireland Fire and Rescue Service" label="NI Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412012" start="19190" end="19207" title="White&amp;#x27;s Mill (Tandragee)" label="White&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196171" start="19302" end="19314" title="Cusher River" label="Cusher River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975327" start="19409" end="19461" title="Armagh City, Banbridge and Craigavon Borough Council" label="Armagh City, Banbridge and Craigavon Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004085" start="19532" end="19541" title="Craigavon" label="Craigavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055553" start="19569" end="19574" title="Tayto (Northern Ireland)" label="Tayto"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="19685" end="19698" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058537" start="19904" end="19912" title="Northern Ireland Water" label="NI Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058492" start="19946" end="19974" title="Northern Ireland Electricity" label="Northern Ireland Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183539" start="20000" end="20012" title="County Louth" label="County Louth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="20020" end="20039" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682446" start="20095" end="20121" title="Tanderagee railway station" label="Tanderagee railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="20309" end="20319" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20360" end="20368" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="20630" end="20640" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20681" end="20689" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="21126" end="21136" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21176" end="21184" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117075315" start="21256" end="21270" title="Tandragee Idol" label="Tandragee Idol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954413" wikidata="Q202002" url="?curid=954413" title="Robin Harper">
<text>Robin Charles Moreton Harper, (born 4 August 1940) is a Scottish politician, who was a Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the Lothians region (1999–2011). 

He was co-convener of the Scottish Greens (2004–2008). 

Harper became an MSP in the first elections to the Scottish Parliament in 1999, the first ever elected Green parliamentarian in the United Kingdom.

==Early life and career==
Harper was born in Thurso, Caithness. He was educated at St Marylebone Grammar School and Elgin Academy, Moray. He graduated from the University of Aberdeen in 1962. He worked as an English teacher in Kenya, then a Modern Studies teacher at Boroughmuir High School, Edinburgh.

Harper was a member of Lothian Children&#x27;s Panel 1985–1988 and Lothian Health Council 1993–1998.

==Political career==
Harper joined the Ecology Party&#x27;s Scottish branch in 1985. At the time the branch had only 35 members and its AGM that year was held in his flat. He was elected unopposed as its convenor and secretary and remained a leading figure as it became first the UK-wide Green Party then the independent Scottish Greens.

He stood, unsuccessfully, as a Green candidate in the 1995 Perth and Kinross by-election, and for Edinburgh Pentlands in the 1997 United Kingdom general election, finishing seventh and sixth respectively.

== Scottish Parliament ==
Harper stood for election at the first ever Scottish Parliament election in 1999, and was elected as an additional member for the Lothians region, becoming the first ever elected Green Party parliamentarian in British political history. In an emotional speech, he promised to be a critical voice on the environment in the newly created devolved Parliament. He criticised the Scottish Executive&#x27;s decision to split ministerial responsibility for the environment in 2001. He served as his party&#x27;s sole representative in the first Parliament (1999–2003) until the 2003 election, when the Scottish Green Party won another 6 seats in the regional lists. Harper was sworn in by giving the formal affirmation, also adding: &quot;On behalf of the Scottish Green Party I wish to affirm that our priority will be to serve the people of Scotland who are sovereign in this land.&quot; He was the party&#x27;s spokesman on education and young people. In 2004, he was a member of the Scottish Parliament team in the TV general knowledge show &quot;University Challenge: The Professionals&quot;. He and fellow team members Richard Baker (Labour), Stewart Stevenson (SNP) and Jamie Stone (Lib Dem) who was captain, beat a Welsh Assembly team by 110 points to 75.

In January 2007, &quot;The Scotsman&quot; reported that Harper was being considered for the next Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament. Harper stated that he did not know of this story, but said &quot;it would be an honour even to be considered&quot;. Following the 2007 elections to the Scottish Parliament, Harper was returned as a list MSP for the Lothians, this time one of only two Green Party members elected. After an agreement with the Scottish National Party, the party with the largest mandate from the election, the Green MSPs including Harper voted for Alex Salmond to become First Minister of Scotland but the Greens declined to enter a formal coalition with the Scottish National Party. As part of the deal, fellow Green MSP Patrick Harvie was nominated to head the Holyrood Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. In 2009, Harper and Harvie voted to reject an SNP government budget. He did not seek re-election in 2011.

==After Parliament==
&quot;Dear Mr. Harper&quot;, Harper&#x27;s autobiography written with journalist Fred Bridgland, was published in 2011.

In September 2014, Harper became chairman of the Scottish Wildlife Trust. He remained in that role for three years.

At the beginning of December 2013, Harper announced that he would &quot;absolutely vote no&quot; in the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence, going on to say that he would be happy to help the Better Together campaign and that there was a &quot;significant minority&quot; of Greens who were opposed to independence.

In August 2021, Harper criticised the Bute House Agreement that the Greens had struck with Nicola Sturgeon&#x27;s government, claiming that his party had failed to take tougher action on North Sea oil, marine protection and taxation.

In September 2022, he joined the board of Gordon Brown&#x27;s unionist think tank, Our Scottish Future.

In August 2023, he announced that he had resigned from the Scottish Green Party, citing differences of opinion on independence, concerns over what he described as the party&#x27;s move to the left and their position on trans rights. Harper also stated his intention to vote Labour at the next election.

In June 2024, he joined the Labour Party citing their plan for combatting climate change and their ability to beat the Conservatives in the 2024 United Kingdom general election.

==Patronage==
Harper, who is married with one stepson, has been a patron of many organisations including LGBT Youth Scotland, an organisation dedicated to the inclusion and advancement of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender young people in Scotland. He was an Honorary Vice-President of English-Speaking Union Scotland. He served as Rector of the University of Edinburgh 2000–2003. Harper was an Honorary President of the Edinburgh University Savoy Opera Group. He was elected as Rector of the University of Aberdeen in 2005.

He was President of the Royal Scottish Society of Arts 2008–2011.

==References==
==External links==
* Robin Harper – MSP for the Lothians website that was in use from 2006–2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202002" start="0" end="28" title="Robin Harper" label="Robin Charles Moreton Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="87" end="120" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684773" start="135" end="150" title="Lothians (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Lothians region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="192" end="207" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="274" end="293" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="297" end="301" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="326" end="331" title="Green party" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q526576" start="417" end="423" title="Thurso" label="Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="425" end="434" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594669" start="455" end="483" title="St Marylebone Grammar School" label="St Marylebone Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360010" start="488" end="508" title="Elgin Academy, Moray" label="Elgin Academy, Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="532" end="554" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="599" end="604" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888878" start="613" end="627" title="Modern Studies" label="Modern Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946360" start="639" end="662" title="Boroughmuir High School" label="Boroughmuir High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="664" end="673" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302398" start="707" end="728" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Panel" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499324" start="817" end="830" title="Ecology Party" label="Ecology Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499324" start="1058" end="1077" title="Green Party (UK)" label="UK-wide Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170915" start="1171" end="1205" title="1995 Perth and Kinross by-election" label="1995 Perth and Kinross by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338238" start="1215" end="1234" title="Edinburgh Pentlands (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Edinburgh Pentlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="1242" end="1278" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="1393" end="1429" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="Scottish Parliament election in 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="1453" end="1470" title="Additional member system (Scottish Parliament)" label="additional member"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684773" start="1479" end="1494" title="Lothians (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Lothians region"/>
<link wikidata="Q678363" start="1559" end="1584" title="British politics" label="British political history"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="1724" end="1742" title="Scottish Executive" label="Scottish Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="1920" end="1933" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003 election"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2393" end="2432" title="University Challenge: The Professionals" label="University Challenge: The Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149018" start="2467" end="2480" title="Richard Baker (Scottish politician)" label="Richard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q559613" start="2491" end="2508" title="Stewart Stevenson" label="Stewart Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681420" start="2519" end="2530" title="Jamie Stone (politician)" label="Jamie Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="2565" end="2579" title="Senedd" label="Welsh Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049657" start="2630" end="2642" title="The Scotsman" label="The Scotsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567536" start="2704" end="2748" title="Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament" label="Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="2902" end="2921" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684773" start="2965" end="2973" title="Lothians (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Lothians"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="3058" end="3081" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="3179" end="3191" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="3202" end="3228" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057654" start="3353" end="3367" title="Patrick Harvie" label="Patrick Harvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153129" start="3394" end="3457" title="Committees of the Scottish Parliament" label="Holyrood Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862416" start="3559" end="3563" title="2011 Scottish Parliament election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494693" start="3668" end="3682" title="Fred Bridgland" label="Fred Bridgland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828470" start="3757" end="3780" title="Scottish Wildlife Trust" label="Scottish Wildlife Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="3929" end="3969" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="2014 referendum on Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898557" start="4022" end="4046" title="Better Together (campaign)" label="Better Together campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="4104" end="4110" title="Scottish Greens" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q108470797" start="4184" end="4204" title="Bute House Agreement" label="Bute House Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q467112" start="4237" end="4252" title="Nicola Sturgeon" label="Nicola Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="4423" end="4435" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="4818" end="4830" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4909" end="4922" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="4930" end="4966" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253371" start="5074" end="5093" title="LGBT Youth Scotland" label="LGBT Youth Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="5171" end="5209" title="lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender" label="lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378148" start="5273" end="5304" title="English-Speaking Union Scotland" label="English-Speaking Union Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303224" start="5319" end="5356" title="Rector of the University of Edinburgh" label="Rector of the University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303221" start="5466" end="5502" title="Rector of the University of Aberdeen" label="Rector of the University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374817" start="5537" end="5567" title="Royal Scottish Society of Arts" label="Royal Scottish Society of Arts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954419" wikidata="Q1136930" url="?curid=954419" title="Expressways of Singapore">
<text>The expressways of Singapore are a system of controlled-access highways in Singapore that allow motorists to travel quickly from one urban area to another. Construction of the system was authorised when construction of the Pan Island Expressway began in 1962. They usually have three to four lanes in each direction, although there are two-lane carriageways at many expressway intersections and five-lane carriageways in some places. There are currently ten expressways and studies about the feasibility of more are ongoing.

Construction on the first expressway, the Pan Island Expressway, started in 1966. , there are of expressways in Singapore.

The Singaporean expressway networks are connected with Malaysian expressway networks via the Ayer Rajah Expressway (connects with the Second Link Expressway via the Malaysia-Singapore Second Link bridge) and the Bukit Timah Expressway (connects with the Johor Bahru Eastern Dispersal Link Expressway via Johor–Singapore Causeway).

== History ==
== Expansion ==
The latest expressway completed is the 5 km Marina Coastal Expressway (MCE), which links the East Coast Parkway and Kallang-Paya Lebar Expressway to Marina South and Ayer Rajah Expressway and includes Singapore&#x27;s first undersea tunnel. Construction started in 2008 and the expressway opened to traffic 29 December 2013. Prior to construction of the Marina Coastal Expressway, the Kallang–Paya Lebar Expressway which runs for 12 km, 9 km of which are 10 metres underground, was started in 2001 and a 3 km section linking the Pan Island Expressway and East Coast Parkway was opened in late 2007. The Kallang–Paya Lebar Expressway was completed on 20 September 2008.

Construction of the 11th expressway, the North–South Corridor, originally conceptualised as the North-South Expressway, was announced on 30 January 2008. The new 21.5-kilometre expressway will cost about S$7.47 billion when fully completed by 2029 and will connect the East Coast Parkway with the northern parts of Singapore. In 2016, the Land Transport Authority announced that the North–South Corridor will be Singapore’s first integrated transport corridor featuring continuous bus lanes and cycling trunk routes, rather than a normal expressway when originally conceptualised.

== Features ==
Like all other global controlled-access expressway network, there are no traffic lights on the expressways. At an interchange with another road, an expressway is connected to it via slip roads. This allows traffic to change routes without having to stop or slow down. Due to the need to conserve space in land-scarce Singapore, there are no cloverleaf interchanges on the entire island as they are too large. Instead, traffic efficiency and land space are maximised by having traffic lights on terrestrial roads, as well as the usage of interchanges such as stack interchanges. The most common forms of highway-road or highway-highway intersections are single-point urban, diamond, and trumpet interchanges. Newer expressways such as the Kallang-Paya Lebar Expressway and the future North South Corridor uses on-ramps and off-ramps to conserve space even further and minimise disruption to the road system, through the construction of viaducts and tunnels.

The road surface is asphalt, unlike normal roads which may have concrete surfaces. The lanes are separated with white dashed lines, while unbroken white lines are used to mark the edges of the median and shoulder. The shoulder is designated for stops in cases of breakdowns and emergencies, and driving on it is prohibited by law. Lanes are numbered from right to left, with lane 1 being the closest to the median. Crash barriers, cat&#x27;s eyes and rumble strips are also used to ensure road safety.

There are signs marking the start and end of an expressway at its entry and exit points respectively. The expressways are also assigned route codes consisting three letters that form their respective initials, making the Singaporean expressway network as the only highway system with route coding system. The Expressway Monitoring and Advisory System is used on all the expressways—cameras are used for live monitoring of expressway conditions, and LED signboards display information messages, such as warnings of any disruptions to the normal flow of traffic, as well as estimated travel times. The longest expressway, the Pan Island Expressway, is only long and therefore has no rest areas.

Singaporean expressways are the only highway network in Singapore with their own route codes. They are assigned with three-letter codes named after their respective initials where the last letter is always E; for example, PIE for the Pan Island Expressway. The only exception is the East Coast Parkway (ECP) whose the last letter is other than E.

== Safety ==
The default speed limit and National Speed Limits on Singapore expressways is , but in certain areas a lower speed limit such as or is applied, especially in large urban areas, tunnels, heavy traffic and crosswinds. Speed traps are also deployed by the Singapore police at many places along the expressways and are deployed from 7am to 12am.

Certain types of transport, such as pedestrians, bicycles, and learner drivers, are not allowed.

==List of Expressways==
== Semi-expressways ==
Singapore also has five semi-expressways: Bukit Timah Road, Jurong Island Highway, Nicoll Highway, the Outer Ring Road System (ORRS) and West Coast Highway. These semi-expressways are scaled down versions of expressways, without a uniform speed limit. Some sections still feature traffic light controlled junctions, such as the eastern section of the ORRS, some of Bukit Timah Road, the southern section of the Jurong Island Highway and the western sections of Nicoll Highway and West Coast Highway. However, much like with the expressways, semi-expressways allow motorists to travel quickly from one urban area to another with the use of viaducts, overpasses and tunnels.

== See also ==
* Land Transport Authority
* Ministry of Transport (Singapore)

== References ==
* http://www.lta.gov.sg
* https://web.archive.org/web/20081106151957/http://www.kpeunderground.sg/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1136930" start="4" end="28" title="Expressways of Singapore" label="expressways of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="45" end="71" title="Controlled-access highway" label="controlled-access highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585650" start="223" end="244" title="Pan Island Expressway" label="Pan Island Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222002" start="292" end="296" title="lane" label="lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585650" start="568" end="589" title="Pan Island Expressway" label="Pan Island Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521575" start="705" end="734" title="Malaysian Expressway System" label="Malaysian expressway networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657325" start="743" end="764" title="Ayer Rajah Expressway" label="Ayer Rajah Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055632" start="784" end="806" title="Second Link Expressway" label="Second Link Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083571" start="815" end="845" title="Malaysia–Singapore Second Link" label="Malaysia-Singapore Second Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003271" start="862" end="884" title="Bukit Timah Expressway" label="Bukit Timah Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268878" start="904" end="949" title="Johor Bahru Eastern Dispersal Link Expressway" label="Johor Bahru Eastern Dispersal Link Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q892615" start="954" end="978" title="Johor–Singapore Causeway" label="Johor–Singapore Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898230" start="1056" end="1081" title="Marina Coastal Expressway" label="Marina Coastal Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277791" start="1105" end="1123" title="East Coast Parkway" label="East Coast Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056488" start="1161" end="1173" title="Marina South" label="Marina South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657325" start="1178" end="1199" title="Ayer Rajah Expressway" label="Ayer Rajah Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722056" start="1397" end="1426" title="Kallang–Paya Lebar Expressway" label="Kallang–Paya Lebar Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585650" start="1541" end="1562" title="Pan Island Expressway" label="Pan Island Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277791" start="1567" end="1585" title="East Coast Parkway" label="East Coast Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310053" start="1723" end="1743" title="North–South Corridor, Singapore" label="North–South Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277791" start="1951" end="1969" title="East Coast Parkway" label="East Coast Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299279" start="2021" end="2045" title="Land Transport Authority" label="Land Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310053" start="2065" end="2085" title="North–South Corridor, Singapore" label="North–South Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="2301" end="2329" title="controlled-access highway" label="controlled-access expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376564" start="2393" end="2404" title="interchange (road)" label="interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075207" start="2620" end="2642" title="cloverleaf interchange" label="cloverleaf interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253909" start="2837" end="2854" title="stack interchange" label="stack interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350656" start="2932" end="2950" title="single-point urban interchange" label="single-point urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q628131" start="2952" end="2959" title="diamond interchange" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376564" start="2965" end="2984" title="trumpet interchange" label="trumpet interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="3257" end="3264" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="3301" end="3309" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408712" start="3441" end="3449" title="shoulder (road)" label="shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344551" start="3652" end="3665" title="Crash barrier" label="Crash barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864" start="3668" end="3683" title="cat&amp;#x27;s eye (road)" label="cat&amp;#x27;s eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275574" start="3688" end="3700" title="rumble strip" label="rumble strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326080" start="4049" end="4090" title="Expressway Monitoring and Advisory System" label="Expressway Monitoring and Advisory System"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="4189" end="4192" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019180" start="4242" end="4250" title="Warning sign" label="warnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q786014" start="4421" end="4430" title="rest area" label="rest area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241753" start="4551" end="4569" title="road designation or abbreviation" label="three-letter codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585650" start="4668" end="4689" title="Pan Island Expressway" label="Pan Island Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277791" start="4717" end="4735" title="East Coast Parkway" label="East Coast Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="5174" end="5184" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="5187" end="5194" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="5201" end="5215" title="driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="learner driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003270" start="5325" end="5341" title="Bukit Timah Road" label="Bukit Timah Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315361" start="5343" end="5364" title="Jurong Island Highway" label="Jurong Island Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030296" start="5366" end="5380" title="Nicoll Highway" label="Nicoll Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112005" start="5386" end="5408" title="Outer Ring Road System" label="Outer Ring Road System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14480046" start="5420" end="5438" title="West Coast Highway, Singapore" label="West Coast Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q181348" start="5922" end="5929" title="viaduct" label="viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425560" start="5932" end="5940" title="overpass" label="overpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="5947" end="5953" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299279" start="5974" end="5998" title="Land Transport Authority" label="Land Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612431" start="6001" end="6034" title="Ministry of Transport (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Transport (Singapore)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954420" wikidata="Q5532571" url="?curid=954420" title="Generation Jones">
<text>Generation Jones is the generation or social cohort between the Baby Boom generation and Generation X. The term was coined by American cultural commentator Jonathan Pontell, who argues that the term refers to a full distinct generation born from 1954 to 1965. Media coverage of Generation Jones typically has described it as a distinct generation, using Pontell&#x27;s dates. Others see this as a subset of the Baby Boom Generation, primarily its second half. A third view is that Generation Jones is a cusp or micro-generation between the Boomers and Xers. 

Members of Generation Jones were children and teens during Watergate, the oil crisis, and stagflation. Unlike &quot;Leading-Edge Boomers&quot;, most of Generation Jones did not grow up with World War II veterans as parents, and, as they reached adulthood, there was no compulsory military service and no defining political cause, as opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War was for the older boomers. Much of their parents&#x27; generation was sandwiched between the Greatest Generation and the Baby Boomers. Also, by 1955, a majority of U.S. households had at least one television set, and so unlike Leading-Edge Boomers born from 1946 to 1953, many members of Generation Jones (trailing-edge boomers) have never lived in a world without television. Generation Jones were children during the sexual revolution of the 1960s and 1970s and were young adults when HIV/AIDS became a worldwide threat in the 1980s. The majority of &quot;Joneses&quot; reached maturity from 1972 to 1979, while younger members came of age from 1980 to 1983, just as the older Baby Boomers had come of age from 1964 to 1971.

The name &quot;Generation Jones&quot; has several connotations, including a large anonymous generation, a &quot;keeping up with the Joneses&quot; competitiveness and the slang word &quot;&quot; or &quot;jonesing&quot;, meaning a yearning or craving. Pontell suggests that Jonesers inherited an optimistic outlook as children in the 1960s, but were then confronted with a different reality as they entered the workforce during Reaganomics and the shift from a manufacturing economy to a service economy, which ushered in a long period of mass unemployment. Mortgage interest rates increased to above 12 percent in the mid-eighties, making it virtually impossible to buy a house on a single income. De-industrialization arrived in full force in the mid-late 1970s and 1980s; wages would be stagnant for decades, and 401(k)s replaced pensions, leaving them with a certain abiding &quot;jonesing&quot; quality for the more prosperous days of the past.

Generation Jones is noted for coming of age after a huge swath of their older siblings in the earlier portion of the Baby Boomer population; thus, many note that there was a paucity of resources and privileges available to them that were seemingly abundant to older Boomers. Therefore, there is a certain level of bitterness and &quot;jonesing&quot; for the level of doting and affluence granted to older Boomers but denied to them.

The term has enjoyed some currency in political and cultural commentary, including during the 2008 United States presidential election, where Barack Obama (born 1961) and Sarah Palin (born 1964) were on the presidential tickets. , the two most recent former vice presidents, Kamala Harris (born 1964) and Mike Pence (born 1959) respectively, are members of Generation Jones.

==Cultural, economic, and political dimensions==
While charismatic leaders like John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. inspired millions of older Boomers to work for—and witness—positive social change, Generation Jones were in elementary school or not yet born. The Woodstock pop festival (1969) was a defining moment for older Boomers; Generation Jones tends to remember the Watergate scandal (1972–1974) and the cultural cynicism it begat. While in high school, members of Generation Jones had a distinct feeling of having just missed the real hippie era.

Generation Jones has been covered and discussed in newspapers, magazines, TV, and radio shows. Pontell has appeared on TV networks such as CNN, MSNBC, and BBC, discussing the cultural, political, and economic implications of this generation&#x27;s emergence.

In the business world, Generation Jones has become a part of the strategic planning of many companies and industries, particularly in the context of targeting Jonesers through marketing efforts. Carat UK, a European media buying agency, has done extensive research into Generation Jones consumers.

Politically, Generation Jones has emerged as a crucial voting segment in US and UK elections. In the U.S. 2006 congressional and 2004 presidential elections, and the 2005 U.K. elections, Generation Jones&#x27;s electoral role was widely described as pivotal by the media and political pollsters. In the 2008 U.S. Presidential election, Generation Jones was again seen as a key electoral segment because of the high degree to which its members were swing voters during the election cycle. Influential journalists, like Clarence Page and Peter Fenn, singled out Generation Jones voters as crucial in the final weeks of the campaign. Numerous studies have been done by political pollsters and publications analyzing the voting behavior of Gen Jonesers. Generation Jones voters are likely to contain the highest proportion of Brexit voters.

The election to the presidency of Barack Obama, born in 1961, plus Republican vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin, born 1964, focused more attention on Generation Jones. Many journalists, publications, and experts – including Jonathan Alter (&quot;Newsweek&quot;) have classified Obama as a member of Generation Jones.

Key characteristics assigned to members are pessimism, distrust of government, and general cynicism.

In Pontell&#x27;s opinion, US Jonesers shifted left in 2020, which he attributed to Trump&#x27;s response to the COVID-19 crisis and President Trump&#x27;s mocking of President Biden&#x27;s senior moments. &quot;There are lots of seniors out there that also have senior moments,&quot; Pontell says. &quot;They don&#x27;t really like the president mocking those one bit.&quot;

==See also==

* List of generations
* Cusper
* Xennials
* Zillennials
* Interbellum Generation

== References ==
==External links==
* Generation Jones news website
* 2024 Generation Jones news website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5532571" start="0" end="16" title="Generation Jones" label="Generation Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="64" end="84" title="Baby Boom generation" label="Baby Boom generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="89" end="101" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q20020377" start="135" end="155" title="cultural commentator" label="cultural commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134195" start="503" end="507" title="Cusper" label="cusp"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="619" end="628" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="634" end="644" title="1973 oil crisis" label="oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="650" end="661" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="750" end="762" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="829" end="856" title="compulsory military service" label="compulsory military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="893" end="951" title="opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War" label="opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044693" start="993" end="1017" title="Silent Generation" label="parents&amp;#x27; generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995878" start="1045" end="1064" title="Greatest Generation" label="Greatest Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="1073" end="1085" title="Baby Boomers" label="Baby Boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="1149" end="1159" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="1371" end="1388" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="1439" end="1447" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="1762" end="1771" title="Anonymity" label="anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q863764" start="1792" end="1819" title="keeping up with the Joneses" label="keeping up with the Joneses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1883" end="1891" title="jonesing" label="jonesing"/>
<link wikidata="Q608537" start="2106" end="2117" title="Reaganomics" label="Reaganomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="2166" end="2181" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="2217" end="2234" title="mass unemployment" label="mass unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="2377" end="2397" title="De-industrialization" label="De-industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206798" start="2494" end="2500" title="401(k)" label="401(k)"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="2511" end="2518" title="pension" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="3157" end="3197" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="3205" end="3217" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="3234" end="3245" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="3321" end="3336" title="VPOTUS" label="vice presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="3338" end="3351" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="3368" end="3378" title="Mike Pence" label="Mike Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3519" end="3534" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="3539" end="3561" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="3709" end="3718" title="Woodstock" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="3819" end="3836" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="3989" end="3995" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="4141" end="4144" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="4146" end="4151" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4157" end="4160" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q372435" start="4457" end="4465" title="Carat UK" label="Carat UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751449" start="4662" end="4685" title="2006 United States general elections" label="U.S. 2006 congressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="4690" end="4717" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="4727" end="4746" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 U.K. elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="4864" end="4895" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 U.S. Presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126691" start="5079" end="5092" title="Clarence Page" label="Clarence Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173961" start="5097" end="5107" title="Peter Fenn" label="Peter Fenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="5403" end="5429" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="election to the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="5433" end="5445" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="5505" end="5516" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052861" start="5629" end="5643" title="Jonathan Alter" label="Jonathan Alter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="5651" end="5659" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q484954" start="5767" end="5776" title="pessimism" label="pessimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q245781" start="5814" end="5822" title="Cynicism (contemporary)" label="cynicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="5938" end="5953" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="COVID-19 crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="5958" end="5973" title="President Trump" label="President Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="5992" end="6007" title="President Biden" label="President Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q213381" start="6218" end="6237" title="List of generations" label="List of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134195" start="6240" end="6246" title="Cusper" label="Cusper"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901995" start="6249" end="6257" title="Xennials" label="Xennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q111737399" start="6260" end="6271" title="Zillennials" label="Zillennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045552" start="6274" end="6296" title="Interbellum Generation" label="Interbellum Generation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954425" wikidata="Q5534068" url="?curid=954425" title="Geoff Buckland">
<text>Geoffrey Frederick Buckland (born 10 November 1947), was an Australian Labor Party member of the Australian Senate from 2000 to 2005, representing the state of South Australia. Buckland was selected by the Parliament of South Australia to fill the Senate seat left vacant after the resignation of John Quirke under Section 15 of the Australian Constitution. He was born in Sydney, New South Wales, and was blast furnace operator, and an official with the Federated Ironworkers&#x27; Association and later the Whyalla-Woomera Branch Secretary of the Australian Workers&#x27; Union before entering politics.

Buckland did not contest the 2004 election. His term expired on 30 June 2005.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5534068" start="0" end="27" title="Geoff Buckland" label="Geoffrey Frederick Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="60" end="82" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="97" end="114" title="Australian Senate" label="Australian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="160" end="175" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054418" start="206" end="235" title="Parliament of South Australia" label="Parliament of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253727" start="297" end="308" title="John Quirke (politician)" label="John Quirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="333" end="356" title="Australian Constitution" label="Australian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="373" end="379" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440685" start="455" end="494" title="Federated Ironworkers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Federated Ironworkers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q782765" start="549" end="579" title="Australian Workers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Australian Workers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052932" start="636" end="649" title="2004 Australian federal election" label="2004 election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954426" wikidata="Q12973014" url="?curid=954426" title="Sports team">
<text>A sports team is a group of individuals who play a team sport together. The number of players in the group depends on the sport. The highest level of a sports team is a professional sports team. In professional sports, the athletes are very talented and are paid to compete in their sport.

Historically, sports teams and the people who play sports have been amateurs. However, by the 20th century, some sports teams and their associated leagues became extremely valuable with net worth in the millions. In 2017 the Dallas Cowboys were rated by Forbes as the world&#x27;s most valuable sports team at 4.2 billion US dollars. Some individual sports have modified rules that allow them to be played by teams.

Team identities can be formed from a number of sources, most often a type of geographic location; e.g., the Dallas Cowboys are named after Dallas, Texas, US. Some teams can also be named after an institution, such as the Alabama Crimson Tide, who represent the University of Alabama, or the Yomiuri Giants, who are named after the Yomiuri Group, a Japanese media conglomerate.

Sports teams often have numbered jerseys for fans to identify players. Players wear jerseys for different reasons. It may depend on the position of the player, the history of the number, traditions that are specific to the league, and more.

== See also ==

* Social group
* Sports club
* Sports franchise
* Works team

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12973014" start="2" end="13" title="Sports team" label="sports team"/>
<link wikidata="Q216048" start="51" end="61" title="team sport" label="team sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066131" start="86" end="93" title="sports player" label="players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="169" end="193" title="Professional sports" label="professional sports team"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991269" start="359" end="367" title="amateur sports" label="amateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="516" end="530" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="545" end="551" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962018" start="572" end="597" title="Forbes&amp;#x27; list of the most valuable sports teams" label="most valuable sports team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755547" start="630" end="646" title="individual sport" label="individual sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="816" end="830" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="847" end="853" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q971195" start="929" end="949" title="Alabama Crimson Tide" label="Alabama Crimson Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="969" end="990" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197407" start="999" end="1013" title="Yomiuri Giants" label="Yomiuri Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q11101101" start="1039" end="1052" title="Yomiuri Group" label="Yomiuri Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q874405" start="1346" end="1358" title="Social group" label="Social group"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="1361" end="1372" title="Sports club" label="Sports club"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991290" start="1375" end="1391" title="Professional sports league organization" label="Sports franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187904" start="1394" end="1404" title="Works team" label="Works team"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954430" wikidata="Q867573" url="?curid=954430" title="Freeport, The Bahamas">
<text>Freeport is a city, district and free trade zone on the island of Grand Bahama of the northwest part of The Bahamas. In 1955, Wallace Groves, a Virginian financier with lumber interests in Grand Bahama, was granted of pineyard with substantial areas of swamp and scrubland by the Bahamian government with a mandate to economically develop the area. Freeport has grown to become the second most populous city in The Bahamas.

The main airport serving the city is the Grand Bahama International Airport, which receives domestic flights from various islands of The Bahamas as well as several international flights from the United States, Italy, and Canada. Freeport is also served by domestic Bahamian ferry services to other islands, and an international ferry connection to Miami.

The Grand Bahama Port Authority (GBPA) operates the free trade zone, under the Hawksbill Creek Agreement signed in August 1955 whereby the Bahamian government agreed that businesses located in the Freeport area would pay no taxes before 1980, later extended to 2054. The area of the land grants within which the Hawksbill Creek Agreement applies has been increased to .

==History==
Freeport is a free trade zone on Grand Bahama Island, established in 1955 by the government of The Bahamas. The city of Freeport emerged from a land grant comprising of swamp and scrub to become a cosmopolitan centre.

The Grand Bahama Port Authority (GBPA) operates the free-trade zone, under special powers conferred by the government under the Hawksbill Creek Agreement, which was extended until August 3, 2054. The agreement also increased the land grants to .

The Hayward and St. George families own the GBPA, which they have used to fund estates in Great Britain such as Dunmglass, the purchase of the football club Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C., and to pay the multi-million dollar legal fees incurred due to disputes between the two families. Meanwhile, inheritance and contract disputes within the Hayward family has likewise incurred multi-million dollar fees. Bahamian politicians such as the FNM opposition leader Michael Pintard have described the legal dispute between the Haywards and St. Georges as damaging to Freeport&#x27;s economy, while in March 2024 Prime Minister Philip Davis asserted that according to a PriceWaterhouseCoopers audit, the GBPA owes the Bahamian government $357 million USD. As of August 2024, GBPA has not paid what the government of The Bahamas says is due. 

The city was severely impacted by Hurricane Dorian, which stalled above Grand Bahama for 12 hours, caused storm surges between 12-18 feet above normal, killed eight people in Grand Bahama, and destroyed up to thirteen thousand homes.

==Geography==
Freeport is located just off the coast of Palm Beach, Florida, and on the major EW–NS shipping routes. This has positioned it as an ideal centre for international business. Consequently, a growing number of international companies use Freeport as a business site.

===National parks===
Parks include the Rand Nature Centre, named after its founder James Rand; Petersons Cay, a small isle about 300 yards off the shore of Grand Bahama; and the Lucayan National Park founded by Peter Barratt, a former architect and town planner of Freeport. The Lucayan National Park is in extent and includes five ecological zones stretching from the south shore to the pineyard. There is an extensive underwater cave system beneath the park. One cave entrance is accessible by stairs at the national park, while other caves are accessible for certified scubas.

==Climate==
Freeport features a tropical rainforest climate, similar to South Florida&#x27;s. According to Köppen Climate Classification (&quot;Af&quot;), more specifically with hot humid conditions that vary only a little throughout the year. Seldom do temperatures drop below . Average temperatures are around , with water temperature varying between . The winters are usually mild and dry (with the exception of some rainfall due to cold fronts), while the summers are usually hot and wet. Although a freeze has never been reported in The Bahamas, snow was reported to have mixed with rain in Freeport in January 1977 the same time that it snowed in the Miami area. The temperature was about at the time. The temperature of was tied, on 30 January 2022.

==Economy==
Tourism draws more than 1 million visitors per year, but has diminished since 2004, when major hurricanes Hurricane Frances and Hurricane Jeanne made landfall; in 2016, Hurricane Matthew hit the island. In early September 2019, Hurricane Dorian moved over the area and stalled for over a day, causing extensive devastation. Several cruise ships stop weekly at the island. Much of the tourist industry is centered on the seaside suburb of Lucaya, owing its name to the pre-Columbian Lucayan inhabitants of the island evidence of whom has been found on the island. Freeport features at least two Junkanoo festivals near New Year&#x27;s.

The city is often promoted as Freeport/Lucaya. Most hotels on the island are located in Lucaya along the southern shore facing the Northwest Providence Channel. The primary shopping venue for tourists is the Port Lucaya Marketplace in Lucaya. Recovery from the 2004 Hurricanes Jeanne and Frances took nearly a decade and led to closure of the older shopping venue International Bazaar and neighboring Bahamas Princess Resort and Casino.

==Notable natives and residents==
* Janine Antoni - conceptual artist
* Robert Antoni - novelist, professor
* Sebastian Bach - Canadian singer, frontman of the band Skid Row
* JoBeth Coleby-Davis - Bahamian Progressive Liberal Party politician, attorney
* Andre Deveaux - NHL player
* Joanna Evans Olympian Swimmer
* Tynia Gaither - sprint Olympian
* Jeffery Gibson - 400mH world champ medalist &amp; Olympian
* Shavez Hart - sprint Olympian
* Jack Hayward - British businessman
* Raymond Higgs - Olympian Jumper
* Buddy Hield - NBA player
* Jonquel Jones - WNBA player
* Johnny Kemp- Singer/Songwriter
* Justin Hill - British writer
* Michael Mathieu - sprint Olympic medalist
* Demetrius Pinder - sprint Olympic medalist
* Mate Pavić - Croatian professional tennis player 
* Vasek Pospisil - Canadian professional tennis player 
* Magnum Rolle - NBA Player
* Alonzo Russell - sprint Olympian medalist
* Nivea Smith - Sprint athlete
* Teray Smith - Sprint Olympian
* Michael Strachan - NFL player
* Donald Thomas - high jump world champion and Olympian
* Andrae Williams - sprint Olympic medalist
* LaToy Williams - sprint athlete
* Chavez Young - baseball player

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Freeport is twin towns and sister cities with Lucaya

* Concord, North Carolina, United States, since 2019 
* Newark, New Jersey, United States, since 1990

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Mary Star of the Sea Church, Freeport

==References==
==Further reading==
*Barratt, Peter. &quot;Grand Bahama&quot;. IM Publishing, Freeport, 2002 (3rd edition) 

==External links==

* &quot;Freeport ( 2009-11-01),&quot; Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2008.
* &quot;Fast Facts,&quot; Grand Bahama Port Authority, http://www.gbpa.com/index.php/freeport, c.2008.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q867573" start="0" end="8" title="Freeport, The Bahamas" label="Freeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q158976" start="14" end="18" title="List of cities in the Bahamas" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052753" start="20" end="28" title="Local government in the Bahamas" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="33" end="48" title="free trade zone" label="free trade zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q866345" start="66" end="78" title="Grand Bahama" label="Grand Bahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="104" end="115" title="Bahamas" label="The Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012081" start="126" end="140" title="Wallace Groves" label="Wallace Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="144" end="152" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q866345" start="189" end="201" title="Grand Bahama" label="Grand Bahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842402" start="218" end="226" title="Bahamian pineyards" label="pineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="253" end="258" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="280" end="288" title="The Bahamas" label="Bahamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493876" start="466" end="500" title="Grand Bahama International Airport" label="Grand Bahama International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594286" start="785" end="812" title="Grand Bahama Port Authority" label="Grand Bahama Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947380" start="860" end="885" title="Hawksbill Creek Agreement" label="Hawksbill Creek Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594286" start="1387" end="1414" title="Grand Bahama Port Authority" label="Grand Bahama Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="1435" end="1450" title="free-trade zone" label="free-trade zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315483" start="1742" end="1751" title="Dunmaglass, Scotland" label="Dunmglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="1787" end="1815" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2566343" start="2068" end="2071" title="Free National Movement" label="FNM"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030420" start="2090" end="2105" title="Michael Pintard" label="Michael Pintard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183082" start="2251" end="2263" title="Philip Davis (Bahamian politician)" label="Philip Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="2293" end="2315" title="PwC" label="PriceWaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q66764432" start="2500" end="2516" title="Hurricane Dorian" label="Hurricane Dorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q695411" start="2757" end="2776" title="Palm Beach, Florida" label="Palm Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757209" start="2801" end="2815" title="shipping route" label="shipping route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="3552" end="3558" title="scuba diving" label="scubas"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="3593" end="3620" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567226" start="3633" end="3653" title="South Florida" label="South Florida&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3668" end="3697" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="3997" end="4007" title="cold front" label="cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142490" start="4169" end="4181" title="Cold wave of January 1977" label="January 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="4218" end="4223" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="4331" end="4338" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746497" start="4437" end="4454" title="Hurricane Frances" label="Hurricane Frances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100322" start="4459" end="4475" title="Hurricane Jeanne" label="Hurricane Jeanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058656" start="4500" end="4517" title="Hurricane Matthew" label="Hurricane Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q66764432" start="4559" end="4575" title="Hurricane Dorian" label="Hurricane Dorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696401" start="4769" end="4775" title="Lucaya, Bahamas" label="Lucaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289481" start="4813" end="4820" title="Lucayan people" label="Lucayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612069" start="4925" end="4933" title="Junkanoo" label="Junkanoo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5331" end="5351" title="International Bazaar" label="International Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5368" end="5402" title="Bahamas Princess Resort and Casino" label="Bahamas Princess Resort and Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154531" start="5441" end="5454" title="Janine Antoni" label="Janine Antoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341551" start="5477" end="5490" title="Robert Antoni" label="Robert Antoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q363490" start="5515" end="5529" title="Sebastian Bach" label="Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q108577107" start="5581" end="5600" title="JoBeth Coleby-Davis" label="JoBeth Coleby-Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q493097" start="5661" end="5674" title="Andre Deveaux" label="Andre Deveaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q26236527" start="5690" end="5702" title="Joanna Evans (swimmer)" label="Joanna Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16612258" start="5722" end="5735" title="Tynia Gaither" label="Tynia Gaither"/>
<link wikidata="Q14471871" start="5756" end="5770" title="Jeffery Gibson" label="Jeffery Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14191235" start="5817" end="5828" title="Shavez Hart" label="Shavez Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594388" start="5849" end="5861" title="Jack Hayward" label="Jack Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420920" start="5886" end="5899" title="Raymond Higgs" label="Raymond Higgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663167" start="5920" end="5931" title="Buddy Hield" label="Buddy Hield"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951394" start="5947" end="5960" title="Jonquel Jones" label="Jonquel Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182925" start="5977" end="5988" title="Johnny Kemp" label="Johnny Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317683" start="6010" end="6021" title="Justin Hill (writer)" label="Justin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q716418" start="6041" end="6056" title="Michael Mathieu" label="Michael Mathieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q194716" start="6085" end="6101" title="Demetrius Pinder" label="Demetrius Pinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588571" start="6130" end="6140" title="Mate Pavić" label="Mate Pavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q440531" start="6182" end="6196" title="Vasek Pospisil" label="Vasek Pospisil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626995" start="6238" end="6250" title="Magnum Rolle" label="Magnum Rolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17497047" start="6266" end="6280" title="Alonzo Russell (sprinter)" label="Alonzo Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041754" start="6310" end="6321" title="Nivea Smith" label="Nivea Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236551" start="6341" end="6352" title="Teray Smith" label="Teray Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q106259921" start="6373" end="6389" title="Mike Strachan (wide receiver)" label="Michael Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314573" start="6405" end="6418" title="Donald Thomas (athlete)" label="Donald Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q492872" start="6461" end="6476" title="Andrae Williams" label="Andrae Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460932" start="6505" end="6519" title="LaToy Williams" label="LaToy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q123379503" start="6539" end="6551" title="Chavez Young" label="Chavez Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="6629" end="6642" title="sister cities" label="sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030184" start="6658" end="6681" title="Concord, North Carolina" label="Concord, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="6712" end="6730" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23755049" start="6785" end="6822" title="Mary Star of the Sea Church, Freeport" label="Mary Star of the Sea Church, Freeport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954437" wikidata="Q545604" url="?curid=954437" title="Thomas Thorild">
<text>Thomas Thorild (Svarteborg, Bohuslän, 18 April 1759 – Greifswald, Swedish Pomerania, 1 October 1808), was a Swedish poet, critic, feminist and philosopher. He was noted for his early support of women&#x27;s rights. In his 1793 treatise &quot;Om kvinnokönets naturliga höghet&quot; he advocated gender equality.

He was born in Svarteborg, Sweden and died at Greifswald, which was then Swedish Pomerania, and is now part of the German state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. His original name was &quot;Thomas Thorén&quot; and he studied at Lund University in Sweden and worked or studied at the University of Greifswald in Germany.

Thorild was a supporter of the Sturm und Drang movement and considered an opponent of French-inspired classicism. In 1795 he became a professor and librarian at the University of Greifswald.

He was an important member of the cultural elite in Stockholm during the Gustavian era. He was popular among women because of his beauty and because of his ideas of gender equality; he aroused much attention with his idea, that just as a man was seen as a person first, and as a man (a gender and sexual object) second, a woman, who was seen as a gender and sexual object first and as a person second, should have the right to be seen upon the same way: &quot;Just as foolish as it is to regard a woman only in the capacity of a SHE, it would be to regard a man only in the capacity of a HE&quot;.

In Uppsala University&#x27;s main building from 1887 is Thorild cited above the entrance to the auditorium:
Thorildsplan in Stockholm is named after him.

==Works==
English language
* &quot;The sermon of sermons on the impiety of priests and the fall of religion.&quot; 1789
* &quot;True heavenly religion restored and demonstrated upon eternal principles : With a call to Christians of higher sense.&quot; 1790

== References ==

* Herman Lindqvist, &quot;Historien om Sverige. Gustavs dagar&quot; (The History of Sweden. The days of Gustav III)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q545604" start="0" end="14" title="Thomas Thorild" label="Thomas Thorild"/>
<link wikidata="Q389040" start="16" end="26" title="Munkedal Municipality" label="Svarteborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="28" end="36" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098" start="54" end="64" title="Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q682318" start="66" end="83" title="Swedish Pomerania" label="Swedish Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="108" end="115" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="116" end="120" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="130" end="138" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="294" end="309" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q389040" start="327" end="337" title="Munkedal Municipality" label="Svarteborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="339" end="345" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098" start="358" end="368" title="Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q682318" start="385" end="402" title="Swedish Pomerania" label="Swedish Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="427" end="439" title="German state" label="German state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="443" end="465" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="533" end="548" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q165528" start="588" end="612" title="University of Greifswald" label="University of Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q207741" start="657" end="672" title="Sturm und Drang" label="Sturm und Drang"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="728" end="738" title="classicism" label="classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165528" start="791" end="815" title="University of Greifswald" label="University of Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="891" end="904" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="Gustavian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q15093775" start="1525" end="1537" title="Thorildsplan" label="Thorildsplan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954445" wikidata="Q1294992" url="?curid=954445" title="Gaspé">
<text>Gaspé, Gaspésie, Gaspee, may refer to:

* Gaspé, Quebec, a city in eastern Canada
* Gaspé (electoral district), a past federal electoral district of Canada
* Gaspé (provincial electoral district), a provincial electoral district in Quebec
* Gaspé Bay, a bay located on the northeast coast of the namesake peninsula
* Gaspé Peninsula, a peninsula where both the city and district are located
* , a Royal Canadian Navy shipname

* Gaspésie–Îles-de-la-Madeleine, the provincial region containing the Gaspé peninsula and the Magdalen Islands
* Gaspésie—Les Îles-de-la-Madeleine, a federal electoral district

* Gaspee Affair, U.S. War of Independence
* , a Royal Navy shipname
* Gaspee Point, Rhode Island, United States

==See also==

* Cross of Gaspé
* 
* 
* Gasp (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1294992" start="0" end="5" title="Gaspé" label="Gaspé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294992" start="7" end="15" title="Gaspé" label="Gaspésie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294992" start="17" end="23" title="Gaspé" label="Gaspee"/>
<link wikidata="Q141903" start="42" end="55" title="Gaspé, Quebec" label="Gaspé, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098855" start="84" end="110" title="Gaspé (electoral district)" label="Gaspé (electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098859" start="158" end="195" title="Gaspé (provincial electoral district)" label="Gaspé (provincial electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526627" start="241" end="250" title="Gaspé Bay" label="Gaspé Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q151559" start="317" end="332" title="Gaspé Peninsula" label="Gaspé Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q728139" start="429" end="458" title="Gaspésie–Îles-de-la-Madeleine" label="Gaspésie–Îles-de-la-Madeleine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098861" start="540" end="573" title="Gaspésie—Les Îles-de-la-Madeleine" label="Gaspésie—Les Îles-de-la-Madeleine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495317" start="607" end="620" title="Gaspee Affair" label="Gaspee Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526612" start="675" end="687" title="Gaspee Point" label="Gaspee Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914989" start="734" end="748" title="Cross of Gaspé" label="Cross of Gaspé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093112" start="757" end="778" title="Gasp (disambiguation)" label="Gasp (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954453" wikidata="Q343133" url="?curid=954453" title="Asama">
<text>Asama may refer to:

* Mount Asama, a volcano in Japan
* Asama shrine, a category of Shinto shrine in Japan
* Asama Onsen, an &quot;onsen&quot; and former skating rink in Matsumoto, Japan
* Japanese cruiser &quot;Asama&quot;, a cruiser of the Imperial Japanese Navy
* Asama (train), a train service in Japan
* Azemmour, sometimes known in antiquity as Azama or Asama

==People with the surname==
*, Japanese baseball player
*, Japanese baseball player</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q343133" start="0" end="5" title="Asama" label="Asama"/>
<link wikidata="Q242730" start="23" end="34" title="Mount Asama" label="Mount Asama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471785" start="57" end="69" title="Asama shrine" label="Asama shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803471" start="110" end="121" title="Asama Onsen" label="Asama Onsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q75035" start="190" end="224" title="Japanese cruiser Asama" label="Japanese cruiser &amp;quot;Asama&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012798" start="268" end="281" title="Asama (train)" label="Asama (train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q178172" start="310" end="318" title="Azemmour" label="Azemmour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954457" wikidata="Q327251" url="?curid=954457" title="Harold Johnson (boxer)">
<text>Harold Johnson (August 9, 1928 – February 19, 2015) was a professional boxer. He held the NYSAC, NBA/WBA, and &quot;The Ring&quot; light heavyweight titles from 1962 to 1963.

==Boxing career==

Johnson was born in Manayunk, Philadelphia. He started boxing while serving in the United States Navy and turned professional in 1946. He won his first twenty-four fights before losing a ten-round decision to Archie Moore in 1949. Moore would be Johnson&#x27;s biggest career rival. Johnson rebounded with four straight victories, including a ten-round decision win against future Hall of Fame inductee Jimmy Bivins.

Johnson&#x27;s father, Phil Johnson, was also a professional boxer. Phil and Harold Johnson became the first father/son combination to not only fight the same fighter, but lose to him as well. Both suffered third-round knockout defeats at the hands of future World Heavyweight Champion Jersey Joe Walcott in 1936 and 1950, respectively. Harold lost after suffering an injury to the intervertebral disc in the small of his back.

After five consecutive wins, Johnson resumed his rivalry with Archie Moore, fighting Moore three times in a row between September 1951 and January 1954. All three went the ten-round distance. Johnson lost the rematch, won the rubber match and lost the fourth bout.

In 1952, Johnson split two fights with Bob Satterfield, losing the first by decision and winning the second by knockout, and won a decision over heavyweight contender Nino Valdez. The following year, he defeated former World Heavyweight Champion Ezzard Charles by a split decision. Johnson would finally get a title shot eight years into his career in his fifth and final fight against Archie Moore in 1954. Moore was making the third defense of the World Light Heavyweight Championship. In an exciting fight, Johnson knocked Moore down in the 10th round and was ahead on the scorecards after 13 rounds. But Moore rallied, knocking Johnson down and stopping him in the 14th round.

Johnson outpointed Julio Mederos over ten rounds in 1954. The following year, they had a rematch in Philadelphia. Johnson collapsed after the second round and was carried from the ring on a stretcher. Tests later revealed that Johnson had been drugged with a barbiturate. As a result, the Governor of Pennsylvania suspended boxing in the state for 114 days and instructed the Pennsylvania Athletic Commission to launch a probe. Johnson said he started feeling ill in his dressing room after eating an orange that had been given to him by a stranger who said he was a long-time admirer. A chemical analysis of a piece of the orange showed no trace of a drug or barbiturate. The probe never did uncover who drugged Johnson or how the drug was administered. However, the commission ruled that Johnson knew he was not in condition to fight and should&#x27;ve reported that fact to commission officials on duty that night. He was suspended for six months and his purse was forfeited.
When the National Boxing Association (NBA) withdrew recognition of Archie Moore as World Light Heavyweight Champion for failure to defend, Johnson defeated Jesse Bowdry in 1961 by a ninth-round technical knockout to capture the vacant NBA title. In his first title defense, Johnson stopped Von Clay in two rounds. After defeating second-ranked heavyweight contender Eddie Machen by a ten-round decision in a non-title bout, Johnson successfully defended his title for a second time with a split decision victory over 4th-ranked light heavyweight contender Eddie Cotton.

Johnson gained universal recognition as World Light Heavyweight Champion when he defeated Doug Jones in 1962 by a decision in fifteen rounds. He successfully defended the undisputed title once, outpointing Gustav Scholz in Berlin, then lost it to Willie Pastrano by a fifteen-round split decision in 1963. Johnson would never fight for a title again and retired in 1971 with a record of 76–11 with 32 knockouts.

Johnson was inducted into the World Boxing Hall of Fame in 1992 and the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1993.

Johnson was named the 7th greatest light heavyweight of the 20th century by the Associated Press in 1999. Three years later, &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine ranked Johnson 7th on the list &quot;The 20 Greatest Light Heavyweight of All-Time&quot; and 80th on the list &quot;The 80 Best Fighters of the Last 80 Years.&quot; Johnson died at the age of 86 on February 19, 2015.

==Professional boxing record==

==See also==
*List of light heavyweight boxing champions

==References==
==External links==
*Harold Johnson – CBZ Profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q327251" start="0" end="14" title="Harold Johnson (boxer)" label="Harold Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="71" end="76" title="boxing" label="boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992437" start="90" end="95" title="New York State Athletic Commission" label="NYSAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="97" end="104" title="World Boxing Association" label="NBA/WBA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110" end="155" title="list of The Ring world champions#Light heavyweight" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; light heavyweight titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747156" start="215" end="237" title="Manayunk, Philadelphia" label="Manayunk, Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="278" end="296" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q470731" start="404" end="416" title="Archie Moore" label="Archie Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q718047" start="598" end="610" title="Jimmy Bivins" label="Jimmy Bivins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570736" start="872" end="898" title="List of heavyweight boxing champions" label="World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q560461" start="899" end="917" title="Jersey Joe Walcott" label="Jersey Joe Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q502781" start="995" end="1014" title="intervertebral disc" label="intervertebral disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q888230" start="1347" end="1362" title="Bob Satterfield" label="Bob Satterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192932" start="1475" end="1486" title="Nino Valdez" label="Nino Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q471727" start="1554" end="1568" title="Ezzard Charles" label="Ezzard Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="2249" end="2260" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="2978" end="3011" title="World Boxing Association" label="National Boxing Association (NBA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q346220" start="3335" end="3347" title="Eddie Machen" label="Eddie Machen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335949" start="3525" end="3537" title="Eddie Cotton" label="Eddie Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251779" start="3630" end="3640" title="Doug Jones (boxer)" label="Doug Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="3763" end="3769" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q922965" start="3787" end="3802" title="Willie Pastrano" label="Willie Pastrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="4025" end="4058" title="International Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="4149" end="4165" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="4194" end="4214" title="Ring Magazine" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387634" start="4488" end="4530" title="List of light heavyweight boxing champions" label="List of light heavyweight boxing champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954465" wikidata="Q1275574" url="?curid=954465" title="Rumble strip">
<text>Rumble strips (also known as sleeper lines or alert strips) are a traffic calming feature to alert inattentive drivers of potential danger, by causing a tactile vibration and audible rumbling transmitted through a vehicle&#x27;s wheels into its interior. A rumble strip is applied along the direction of travel following an edgeline or centerline, to alert drivers when they drift from their lane. Rumble strips may also be installed in a series &quot;across&quot; the direction of travel, to warn drivers of a stop or slowdown ahead, or of an approaching danger spot.

In favorable circumstances, rumble strips are effective (and cost-effective) at reducing accidents due to inattention. The effectiveness of shoulder rumble strips is largely dependent on a wide and stable road shoulder for a recovery, but there are several other less obvious factors that engineers consider during design.

== Other names==

Rumble strips are also known as audible lines, sleepy bumps, wake up calls, ruffles strips (named after the potato chips), growlers, drift lines, waker-uppers, and drunk bumps.

== Placement ==
Rumble strips are divided into transverse rumble strips, shoulder rumble strips, and centerline rumble strips, depending on how they are used.

Transverse rumble strips are placed in the travel lanes where most if not all vehicles will cross them. They are used to alert the driver of an upcoming intersection, toll booth or similar hazard. They may cross the entire road from shoulder to shoulder, or they may only be in the wheel paths. Portable rumble strips, also called Andreas strips, can be used to alert traffic to upcoming lane closures or road works to prevent collision with signage and barriers.

Shoulder and centerline rumble strips are used to reduce lane departure crashes. Centerline rumble strips are used on undivided highways to reduce cross-over incidents and resultant head-on collisions. Shoulder rumble strips are used primarily to reduce run-off-road collisions. They alert distracted or drowsy drivers that they are leaving the roadway or crossing the centerline of the road. In this application, they are narrower and outside of the wheelpaths.

== Types ==
There are several different ways to install rumble strips:
* Rolled-in, applied to newly laid asphalt pavement while it is still warm and moldable.
* Milled-in, applied to existing hardened asphalt or concrete roads.
* Formed, a corrugated form is pressed into fresh concrete.
* Raised plastic or ceramic units, fastened to asphalt or concrete pavement and often with a reflector built into the edge. Botts&#x27; dots are a common installation.
* Profiled thermoplastic markings are created by fusing thermoplastic to the pavement and create alternating elevation and recession pattern. This can be done as inverted-profile markings or raised-profile markings. Inverted-profile markings are created by pressing a cog rolling over the markings while they are wet to make them corrugated. Raised-profile markings are created by extruding extra thickness of thermoplastic at a specific interval to create bumps. Raised-profile markings are sometimes known as convex traffic lines.
* &quot;Smart car&quot; virtual shoulder rumble strips, referred to as a lane departure warning system, are increasingly available on personal vehicles and commercial trucks. The alarm is similar to the sound produced when striking rumble strips.
* &quot;Smart car&quot; virtual transverse rumble strips to prevent cross-path crashes at intersections are being developed.

Surface-mount raised pavement reflectors are easily scraped off by the blade on snowplows, and thus are not practical in many locations in the United States and Canada.

Rumble strips combined with pavement markings are sometimes called rumble stripes. They may be formed with raised textured plastic pavement markers, or they may use conventional pavement marking materials sprayed onto milled rumble strips. Rumble stripes have markedly increased visibility in wet nighttime conditions, when conventional markings on flat surfaces can be difficult to see.

== History ==
An early use of this construction was in 1943 on New Jersey&#x27;s Route 6 near Great Notch. The scoring in the pavement—at the dual-lane divisions—reflected drivers&#x27; headlights, while &quot;the resonant whine or roar coming off the ridges as the vehicle&#x27;s tires rolled over the strip let the motorist know he was getting out of his traffic lane.&quot; With the &quot;singing lane&quot; safety benefit recognized for nearly a decade, the New Jersey chair of its Highway Authority, Ransford J. Abbott, mandated pavement-edge scoring for the Garden State Parkway in the early 1950s.

Rumble strips were first implemented on the Garden State Parkway in New Jersey in 1952.

Initially, shoulder rumble strip installation focused on freeways using rolled-in rumble strips of different designs using a modified roller on a pavement rolling machines. Later, paving contractors modified pavement rolling machines to mill rumble strips into existing hardened asphalt pavement. Specifically designed commercially available machines followed. The development of ceramic and plastic raised systems enabled installation on concrete pavement highways, and the smaller footprint was better suited for the dashed centerline. &quot;Virtual&quot; rumble strips followed.

As rumble strips produce audible rumbling in specific audio frequencies based on the spacing of the grooves and the speed of the automobile, they have been used to create novel musical roads. These are also known as &quot;singing shoulders&quot;.

Rumble strip installation is widespread, and in some cases controversial. Residents near urban freeways complain of noise at night as vehicles change lanes; or when vehicles strike the transverse rumble strips. The encroachment of shoulder rumble strips onto highways with narrow shoulders may create a hazard for cyclists. US and Canadian guidelines have minimum standards for installation on known cycling routes. In 2009, in Michigan, the Amish claimed that the shoulder rumble strips were dangerous for horse-drawn carriages, and successfully lobbied to have them paved over. In 2010, Kansas has considered removing shoulder rumble strips from an interstate highway to allow buses to travel on the shoulder during periods of traffic congestion.

==Accident and driver dynamics==

===On-road and run-off-road accidents ===
Single-vehicle crashes are classified into two groups: run-off-road (ROR), and on-road (OR) crashes in which the vehicle remains on the road after the crash. ROR crashes can account for up to 70% of the fatal single-vehicle crashes.

ROR crashes are due to inattention, speeding, traction loss, overreaction, crash avoidance, and mechanical failure. Rumble strips only prevent ROR crashes due to inattention.

Research indicates that 47% of RORs exited the highway to the left; while 53% exited the highway to the right (in the USA where driving is on the right-hand-side of the road).

===Inattentive driving===
A US Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) sponsored study stated that driver inattention comes in many forms, including distraction, daydreaming/competing thoughts, fatigue/drowsiness, and alcohol/drug impairment. Early evening low alcohol intake also worsens sleepiness-related driving impairment. 
In a 2008 survey in the US, 33% of fatally injured drivers tested were found to be legally impaired (BAC &gt; 80 mg %), and an additional 5% were found to have a legal amount of alcohol in their bodies. Canada has similar statistics.

===Migration of accidents===
Studies support the hypothesis that some crashes are not prevented, but merely &quot;migrated&quot; or displaced from vehicle to vehicle, season to season, or location to location (e.g., further downstream of rumble strips on the highway system), and that such crashes may be no less severe than ones prevented by rumble strips.

An FHWA sponsored study wrestled with the moral dilemma of rumble strips keeping &quot;unsafe drivers&quot; (which includes impaired drivers) on the highway. &quot;This group of unsafe drivers temporarily saved by the rumble strips may have caused some multiple-vehicle crashes involving harm to innocent victims to occur downstream from the treated site where no rumble strips existed. Unfortunately, as noted above, an examination of downstream crashes could not be conducted.&quot;

A 2008 Swedish study using a driving simulator and 35 sleep-deprived drivers concluded: &quot;The main results showed an increase in sleepiness indicators from start to before hitting the rumble strip, an alerting effect in most parameters after hitting the strip. The alertness enhancing effect was, however, short and the sleepiness signs returned 5 min after the rumble strip hit. Essentially no effects were seen due to type of strip.&quot;

A 2003 Montana study suggested that on Interstates, shoulder rumble reduced the roll-over accident rates but the severity of unprevented roll-over accidents increased. This was thought to be due to the rumble strip &quot;scaring&quot; sleeping drivers to the extent that they overreacted. This problem was more pronounced on primary highways (that have narrower shoulders) with rumble strips.&lt;ref name=&quot;mdt.mt.gov/research&quot;&gt;An Evaluation of Shoulder Rumble Strips in Montana (MDoT, Research Section, 2003)&lt;/ref&gt;

===&quot;Classic&quot; one-car crashes===
The &#x27;classic&#x27; one-car crash results when a vehicle slowly drifts to the right, hits dirt or rumble strips on the right shoulder of the road, and the driver becomes alert and overreacts, jerking the wheel left to bring the vehicle back onto the road. This motion causes the left front tire to strike the raised edge of the pavement at a sharp angle, often causing a rollover or a swerve into oncoming traffic. This form of one-car crash is &quot;classic&quot; because it occurs very often. Raised edges of pavement (or &quot;edge-drops&quot;) were once common, but are now recognized as a hazard; it is now standard practice to level the gravel shoulder with the pavement, although edge-drops may reform due to soil erosion. This &quot;slowly drift to the right&quot; scenario applies to jurisdictions with right-hand traffic, so in jurisdictions with left-hand traffic it would be a &quot;slowly drift to the left&quot; scenario.

This phenomenon implies that a sleeping driver often does not react and begin to recover, until all four wheels have struck a rumble strip; if the paved shoulder is narrower than the width of the vehicle wheel track, a rumble strip may not prevent a sleeping driver from going off the road.

On a single-lane highway, an overreacting driver has less room to regain control, which may exacerbate their initial overreaction after striking the strips, resulting in a roll-over or head-on collision. A crash investigating officer stated: &quot;It&#x27;s consistent with someone who falls asleep or overreacts to the rumble strips&quot;, which implied that this was not the first time the officer has witnessed this situation. Note that in the KATU.com article photograph (in the upper left-hand corner) of the crash scene, the passenger-side tire print in the soft shoulder that suggests that all four wheels passed over the rumble strip before the driver attempted the unsuccessful recovery.

===Fluidity of accident profiles===
Accident profiles can change over time, and this can be considered a form of migration. Studies from Canada shows that over one decade the rate of off-road ATV accidents requiring hospitalization increased by 66%, while the rate for snowmobile accidents decreased 20%. Many of these recreational vehicle owners own both or choose one over the other. Data from the US shows that motorcycles are becoming more popular and that motorcycle fatalities are increasing, while car fatalities are decreasing. Many motorcyclists own or have access to a car.

===Behavior adaptation===
Rumble strips may gradually encourage inattentive driving – thereby partially negating any safety benefits in the long term. This is referred to as &quot;behavior adaptation&quot;.

A 2006 US study suggested that airbags and antilock brakes can lead to unsafe driving. A 2007 Canadian study suggested that unsafe drivers are habitual, and that unsafe driving is increasing. A 2009 Canadian study indicated that, after a steady decline, drinking and driving has been on the increase since 2004. These support the migration and behavioral adaptation rumble strip concerns.

A safe driver population has more potential for negative behavior adaptation than an extreme unsafe driver population; whereas, an extreme unsafe driver population has more potential for positive behavior adaptation than a safe driver population.

===Accident rates and profile===
Different jurisdictions have different accident and fatality rates, as a function of various factors such as climate, road layout, demographics, educational programs, level of policing, driver attitudes toward night driving, promptness of emergency response, and level of medical intervention. For example, the 2006 Canadian motor vehicle fatality rate per province varied between 8.8 and 26.8 per 100,000 licensed drivers per year, with a national average of 13. The 2008 US rate is 20.05. Installing rumble strips on a highway with a relatively low accident rate and low proportion of accidents due to inattention will be relatively ineffective, even if the highway has paved shoulders.

The FHWA states: &quot;Long sections of relatively straight roadways that make few demands on motorists are the most likely candidates for the installation of shoulder rumble strips.&quot; The degree of engagement of a highway affects the accident rate. Implied in this statement is that highways that are twisty and hilly with a variable foreground have low rates of accidents due to inattention, and are therefore not likely candidates for the installation of rumble strips. Installing rumble strips along a highway that is highly engaging, with a narrow shoulder, a low accident rate, and relatively low proportion of accidents due to fatigue or inattentive driving would have questionable value.

===Diminishing marginal returns===
In addition, safety improvements are not linear; there are diminishing marginal returns with a safer driver population, in which it is more difficult to further reduce the accident rate. Within the industrialized countries the rate varies between about 8 and 27 (per 100,000 licensed drivers per year).

&quot;Safety improvements are usually subject to the law of diminishing marginal returns. This means that for every improvement of a fixed amount, the safety benefit gained decreases a little each time. For example, increasing the width of the median from 50m to 60m will decrease the number of collisions less than increasing it from 10m to 20m. Eventually, a width will be reached at which widening the median further cannot be justified because the improvement in safety is too small.&quot;

When the accident rate is close to the baseline of 8, there may already be several factors pushing it down so adding another safety factor (initiative) will only yield a very small improvement. Installing rumble strips on a highway with a high accident rate close to 27 should yield a relatively high accident reduction. This assumes that the road shoulder is adequate for a recovery, once a straying driver has been alerted by the rumble strips.

==Types of rumble strips==

===Continuous shoulder rumble strips (CSRS)===
Montana undertook an extensive 10-year multi-site study of the effectiveness of CSRS on Interstate and primary highways (both types are divided pavements). This study also investigated the &quot;severity&quot; of crashes, which sets it apart from previous studies. The results indicated a 14% reduction in crashes on Interstate highways; however the effectiveness on primary highways indicated both improvements and worsening, and the results were considered inconclusive. It was found that &quot;roll-overs&quot; decreased in number, but increased in severity. The study only considered crashes in dry and wet conditions, not snow and ice.

The FHWA undertook a multi-state study involving test sites from Illinois and California. The Illinois component indicated crash reduction from 7.3% to 21.7%. The California component indicated crash reductions of 7.3%. This study also indicated an overall reduction of about 14%.

The 1997 New York State Thruway study indicated a 65% to 70% reduction. 
However, in a 1999 &quot;New York Times&quot; article regarding the New York State Thruway study, an official stated that the experiment was not done completely &quot;pure&quot;, due to Troop T concurrently conducting a campaign to reduce drunk driving and increase seat-belt use, and Troop T&#x27;s campaign would also reduce the number of fatal vehicle crashes. 10 to 24 percent of crashes are estimated to involve fatigue or inattention of some kind, but these numbers are based on guesswork. Despite this, the New York State Thruway study indicating a 65% to 70% reduction continues to be cited in literature.

New Zealand used rumble strips in small applications since the late 1980s, and started a larger program in 2004. Research in the country indicated that lane delineation with rumble strips reduced crashes by an average of 27% over all crash types and studies, with types of crashes such as &quot;run off road&quot; being reduced by up to 80% in some studies. Centre-line rumble strips showed similar effects. However, it appears that there were other crash reduction initiatives that may have contributed to the relatively sizable results.
The effects remained even after road users had become accustomed to the feature, while other road safety measures (when studied at specific installations) often showed declining effectiveness over time. Cost-benefit analysis showed that even on relatively low-volume roads, the costs of applying the markings were quickly exceeded several-fold by the economic benefits of improved road safety (as counted by the reduction of crash rates weighted against the average social costs of a crash).
Further research in New Zealand led to recommendations that strip edge lines and centre lines be marked over extended lengths of road, rather than just at focal points and crash black spots. Apart from the safety benefits of providing a consistent road environment, continuous markings provide valuable alerts to drivers long before the more common crash spots.

A one-third reduction rate is commonly cited and is based on an average of early studies. It includes the New York State Thruway and Pennsylvania Turnpike results which produced a skewed result non-representative of typical situations.

The &quot;one-third&quot; reduction rate and the &quot;Pennsylvania Turnpike Study&quot; (with a 60% reduction) are the &quot;rule-of-thumb&quot; and the &quot;classic study&quot;, but these can be misleading as CSRS do not have a &quot;fixed&quot; effectiveness that may be applied to any highway.

A 1999 FHWA study concluded that &quot;a best guess&quot; might be 20% to 30% reduction in single-vehicle run-off-road crashes on rural freeways, with less effective on urban freeways.

Almost all before-and-after studies are based on Interstate (freeway, turnpikes, thruways) test sites have minimum paved shoulders and very high crash rates due to inattention.

The collision reduction attributed to the installation of CSRS is mainly a function of stable shoulder width, crash rate and profile, climate and diminishing marginal returns.

=== Centerline rumble strips (CRS) ===
Centerline Rumble Strips are applied to single-lane undivided highways to help prevent head-on collisions. When present, these are often milled into the pavement.

A 2005 National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) study concluded that overall motor vehicle crashes at sites treated with Centerline Rumble Strips were reduced overall by 14%. In these situations the opposite lane and any paved shoulder would function as a generous recovery zone. However, this study did not investigate changes in crash severity, as did the 2005 Montana study.

It is interesting that the CRS reduction value is the same as the 2005 Montana CSRS study that indicated a 14% reduction in accidents on Interstate highways. This supports the hypothesis that the overall effectiveness of CSRS with a generous recovery zone is about 14%.

Ice and slush filled rumble strips can be a concern, particularly so for milled centerline rumble strips. For this reason, some jurisdictions are reluctant to install them.

A 2015 Federal Highway Administration study evaluated the application of shoulder rumble strips and centerline rumble strips in combination by analyzing geometric, traffic, and crash data obtained at treated two-lane rural road locations in Kentucky, Missouri and Pennsylvania. The results suggested that the effect of combining centerline and shoulder rumble strips further reduces run-off-road crashes compared to shoulder rumble strips alone and both total and fatal+injury crashes compared to centerline rumble strips alone. However, it appeared that shoulder rumble strips do not further reduce head-on+sideswipe-opposite-direction crashes than applying centerline rumble strips in isolation.

===Continuous lane rumble strips (CLRS)===
CLRS are applied to multiple lane highways to help prevent vehicles from drifting into the adjacent lane and possibility colliding with an overtaking vehicle. These are typically a raised reflective system.

===Transverse rumble strips===
Transverse rumble strips (TRS) may be used to warn drivers: of the need to stop (e.g. intersections, toll plazas); the need to slow down; the need to change lanes; of a change in roadway alignment; that they are leaving the traveled way; upcoming construction zones; wildlife crossings; and other potentially unexpected conditions.

As a speed reduction measure, TRS have been marginally successful. A 2003 Texas study concluded: &quot;However, the actual reductions in speeds have been in the range of , which may be barely perceptible to the traveling public. There have been no studies that evaluate the reduction of excessive speeds.&quot;

As a construction zone safety measure, the effectiveness appears unclear. A 2007 Minnesota study concluded that while transverse rumble strips offer a low cost and easy-to-install option, they “did not seem to be successful at reducing approach speeds at the project sites”. A 2005 Maryland study stated: &quot;In conclusion, although in the present study rumble strips did not produce the desired speed reduction effect, its use for work zone applications is still highly encouraged; though, not as a speed control measure but as a driver&#x27;s attention-catching device.&quot;

As an approach stop-control crash reduction measure they have proven successful. The 2003 Texas indicated: &quot;The majority of studies found reported large reductions (40% to 100%) of accidents after installing transverse rumble strips.&quot;

In Ghana, rumble strips running across the entire carriageway were installed at Suhum Junction on the main Accra-Kumasi highway and reduced crashes by about 35% and fatalities by about 55%. By reducing speeds the environment for and safety of pedestrians was improved with a decline in the &quot;hit pedestrian&quot; crash rate of 51%. &quot;While the enforcement of speed limits by traffic police may not be affordable for most developing countries, rumble strips and speed humps were found to be effective on Ghanaian roads.&quot;

A 2009 FHWA intelligent systems study suggested that a combined infrastructure-based and in-vehicle warning could be highly effective in reducing crossing path crashes and fatalities at signalized intersections.

==Effectiveness==

===Effectiveness of CSRS on different classes of highway===
Recent before-and-after studies suggest that the effectiveness of CSRS on Interstate highway (or freeways or thruways) with paved shoulders is about 7% to 21% with an overall effectiveness of about 14%.

The effectiveness of CSRS on the lower-standard primary highways (that are also divided) has not been given the same consideration as those on Interstate highways. The 2003 Montana study suggested that CSRS on primary highways can result in either worsening or improvement of crash rates. This may be due to variation in recovery zone width and condition, and other factors. The study also stated that unprevented crash severity may worsen, and the overall results were inconclusive. The study suggested that the differences in rumble strip-related crashes between Interstate highways and primary highways were due to the primaries having smaller shoulders than Interstates.

Secondary highways are single-lane undivided highways, and CSRS would be expected to be less effective than on primary highways. The most serious problem would be an increase in crash severity. Also, there is the concern of drivers sometimes overreacting and crossing the centerline, resulting in a head-on collision. The recovery zone width and condition of single-lane highways can vary greatly. It appears that there may be no published before-and-after CSRS studies for single-lane highways.

===Actual vs. isolated CSRS and centerline rumble strips effectiveness===
Given behavior adaptation and migration, the current rigorous Interstate effectiveness of 14%, and CLRS on single-lane highways effectiveness of 14% could be over-estimations of the actual &quot;big-picture&quot; reduction. In certain situations, such as an engaging single-lane highways that typically have narrow shoulders, high precipitation, in a northern climate with frequent freeze-thaw cycles, rumble strip effectiveness may be negative.

As before-and-after studies become broader and more sophisticated, it appears the reduction estimates for both CSRS and CRS are less impressive. This may be due to the initial installations were on highways that had been identified as having very high accident rates due to inattention. Also, there may have been other accident reduction campaigns in concert with rumble strip programs.&quot;

Also, as lane departure warning systems built into vehicles become more widespread, the physical CSRS, CRS, and CLRS in pavements may become increasingly redundant.

===Shoulder width===

Research has found that on rural freeways, rumble strips are much more effective when placed at or near the edgeline than when placed closer to the shoulder edge. Edgeline rumble strips can be expected to reduce crashes by 28.8%, and non-edgeline rumble strips only reduce crashes by 8.9%.

On two-lane roads, there is little difference in effectiveness between edgeline and non-edgeline rumble strips, with crash reduction factors of 39.2% and 41.9%, respectively. FHWA now recommends rumble strips on two lane roads if the edge of shoulder is more than from the centerline, especially if the road has high volumes, poor geometry, or a history of run-off-road crashes.

The 2003 Montana study stated that in certain cases, the rumble strips may act only as a warning of an impending crash, and that sort of a situation is much more likely where less shoulder is available for recovery.

===Recovery zone condition===
A concern about highways with narrow paved shoulders is the condition of the adjacent gravel shoulder. Sometimes, the paved and gravel shoulders are combined as the &quot;recovery zone&quot; beyond the rumble strip. However, if the gravel is loose, soft, non-level, eroded, or there is an &quot;edge-drop&quot; from the pavement to the gravel, then the gravel shoulder portion will be ineffective for recovery, especially at highway speeds. When a vehicle&#x27;s tires sink into a soft shoulder, thus compromising vehicle handling, it is known as &quot;vehicle tripping&quot;.

Virtual rumble strips require an adequate recovery zone as well.

==Deterioration==

===Climate===

Climate is another factor that affects the success of a rumble strips installation. If they are installed in a northern climate, they may be filled or partially filled with a deicing salt and traction sand mixture. They may also be filled with ice. This is a particular concern in regions with freeze-thaw cycles requiring frequent deicing. Furthermore, strips filled with water, snow, slush, and ice may cause or aggravate occasional accidents. Generally, air turbulence and vibration from passing large trucks keep rumble strips clear of debris and ice, but this process may take several days. Moist traction sand tends to cake together or freezes, and is not easily dislodged by truck traffic. This is problematic on low-volume highways with frequent deicing, and can significantly reduce the effectiveness of rumble strips in winter months.

When rumble strips are installed on a very narrow paved shoulder, sometimes sand and gravel can fill the rumble strip which is usually a problem in the winter and early spring.

If the snow-cover is substantial, then the shoulder (including the rumble strip) is usually partially snow-covered as the snowplow&#x27;s wing-blade doesn&#x27;t clear the entire shoulder. Vehicles going off the road usually collide with the shoulder snow bank or go into a snow-filled ditch which reduces the possibility of serious damage and injury. In these situations, the rumble strip effectiveness can be negated but the crash implications are mitigated by the snow bank.

===Pavement deterioration===

Generally, deterioration of the shoulder asphalt pavement due to rumble strip installation is not a problem. However, if the sub-grade under the CSRS is poorly compacted or has poor drainage characteristics; or the gravel shoulder has eroded, crack(s) may form in the CSRS. Sand tends to fall into these cracks resulting in &quot;jacking&quot; of the cracks. Water percolates vertically down through the soil, but it also creeps horizontally under the paved shoulder. This may be a particular problem with narrow paved shoulders in regions with frequent freeze-thaw cycles that may result in frequent frost-heaving of the paved shoulder.

US and Canadian guidelines recommend not installing rumble strips in asphalt pavement displaying cracks, to avoid excessive break-up of pavement. It is also recommended that rumble strips be inspected in summer months for cracking, potholing, water ponding, and snowplow damage. If necessary, structural problems should be repaired. If the cracks become wide enough, grass and weeds will grow in the cracks accentuating the deterioration.

The centerline of highway has a pavement joint and if milled CLRS are installed over this joint they will make pavement more vulnerable to deterioration. Truckers have reported deterioration of the joint and the CLRS.

Also, road salt prematurely degrades asphalt, so having it retained and concentrated in rumble strips is not desirable.

== Opposition and removal ==
In February 2010, Johnson County, Kansas, considered legislation to allow buses to travel on the paved shoulder (which was rumble stripped) when traffic slows to less than . The estimated cost was between $17.6 million and $20 million, including $2.4 million to remove the already-existing rumble strips along the shoulder of I-35. The Kansas House Transportation Committee had said it would be modeled after a similar project in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Some residents living close to either newly installed lane or transverse rumble strips have complained about noise levels and were successful in having them removed at considerable expense. In 2004, the town of Chapel Hill, North Carolina, had transverse rumble strips removed as the measured noise from nighttime traffic on the rumble strips exceeded the Town&#x27;s Noise Ordinance. The noise levels at the sidewalk ranged from 60 to 77 decibels, higher than the 60 decibel noise level limit in the Town&#x27;s Noise Ordinance during nighttime hours. In 2005, the London borough of Bromley removed transverse rumble strips after residents complained of the excessive &quot;machine gun fire&quot; noise. In 2010, Reno County planned to remove rumble strips from a roundabout after residents complained about excessive noise levels.

The Transportation Association of Canada and US FHWA guidelines basically specify that a width of of clear paved shoulder between the outside of the rumble strip and the edge of pavement is adequate to provide cyclists with a clear travel path.

However, in situations of parked vehicle on the shoulder, debris on the shoulder, or downhill sections even with the clear path requirement, rumble strips present a significant hazard particularly if the pavement is wet. The argument that rumble strips help protect cyclists is moot, as inattentive drivers&#x27; vehicles generally pass entirely over the rumble strip before recovery (if any).

Other related FHWA guidelines are: &quot;Rumble strips should not normally be used in urban or suburban areas or along roadways where prevailing speeds are less than .&quot; and &quot;All responsible agencies should work in cooperation with bicycle groups, enforcement agencies, emergency groups and other roadway users, to develop policies, design standards and implementation techniques that address the safety and operational needs of all roadway users.&quot; and &quot;To provide a clear area beyond the rumble strip for bicycle travel, highway maintenance agencies should periodically sweep shoulders along identified bicycle routes of high bicycle usage.&quot;

In the United States, the 1999 American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities recommends minimum standards for road shoulders receiving rumble strips to accommodate all users of the roadway and make best use of funds.

In New Jersey, a centerline rumble strip was placed in the vicinity of the D&amp;R Canal without a permit from the Delaware &amp; Raritan Canal Commission in violation of state law. The excessive noise through a residential area and the fact that the work was not appropriately permitted was complained about to the New Jersey Department of Transportation by a local homeowner, with no corrective action taken by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

Excessive noise is noted in a Canadian study as a reason not to install rumble strips, and it is advised not to install rumble strips within of a residential area. The report states that &quot;a balance is required between installing effective rumble strips and minimizing noise impacts. Studies show that rumble strips terminated approximately away from residential or urban areas produce tolerable noise impacts on residences. At an offset of , the noise from rumble strips is negligible.” In an Open Public Records Act Request, this study was the only document provided by the New Jersey Department of Transportation when requested to provide policy documents and safety studies relating to its implementation of centerline rumble strips.

===Cycling complaints===
Numerous US and Canadian cycling associations have complained about encroachment of rumble strips. One club even launched a lawsuit to have them paved over, although the suit was dismissed for lack of standing.

A 2005 Quebec study concluded: &quot;Based on the results of the analyses, it was not possible to recommend a type of rumble strip that would provide sufficient warning to drivers who encroach on the shoulder while remaining safe for cyclists who ride over it.&quot; A 2003 Montana study stated that bicyclists cannot operate on shoulders with rumble strips and that shoulders would have to be swept as needed.

Once a section of highway with narrow paved shoulders is rumble-stripped, informed cyclists tend to avoid it, but unsuspecting cyclists occasionally have serious accidents. Much bicyclist opposition to rumble strips stems from situations in which no quantitative data was used to justify their installation, or installation was not in accordance with guidelines. Rumble strips on narrow shoulders force cyclists into the travel lanes, where it is less safe to ride. Furthermore, this scenario forces drivers to make an otherwise unnecessary lane change to go around cyclists and there is a correlation with frequency of lane changes and accidents. &quot;According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 9 percent (533,000) of all accidents occurred when vehicles were changing lanes or merging.&quot; In certain incidents, a vehicle attempting to avoid cyclists (without striking the cyclists) may go off the road or even sideswipe a passing or an oncoming vehicle. Center-line rumble strips are a concern for cyclists as well, as motorists are less inclined to cross the centerline to provide sufficient space when passing bicyclists.

Rumble strips are very inexpensive to install, so there is concern that some installations are frivolous. The 2009 economic stimulus infrastructure spending in the US and Canada has raised concerns that many new shoulder rumble strips will be frivolous as well.

===Amish lobby===
In 2009 in St. Joseph County, Michigan (US), after a lobbying campaign by the local Amish community, a new $20,000 rumble strip installation was removed at a cost of $275,000 to the taxpayers. M-DOT says they are not removing the strips just to appease the Amish. They say &quot;it is far more dangerous to have horses jumping out into the road that [sic] it is to not have the rumble strips on the road.&quot;

===Tire damage===
Motor vehicle tires can become permanently damaged if a flat occurs in the traffic lane and the driver pulls over onto the shoulder with the flat tire passing over the rumble strip. This may cause the flat tire&#x27;s sidewalls to be crushed or abraded between the metal wheel rim and rumble strip high-points.

==Wildlife attraction==


Wildlife-vehicle collisions can be a significant problem when large animals are involved such as moose, elk, and deer, which can cause serious vehicle damage, injury, and fatalities. Separate studies in New Hampshire (US) and Quebec (Canada), of radio-collared moose found that home ranges were associated with salt licks formed by road salt runoff. These roadside salt licks were thought to increase moose-vehicle collisions. Normally, salt would make its way off the pavement onto the gravel shoulder and into the soil, however, rumble strips will retain and create a salt lick on the road surface. Loose rock salt in the rumble strip subjected to evaporating moisture will cake and accumulate and is not easily dislodged by truck traffic.
==See also==
*Musical road
*Raised pavement marker
*Road hazard
*Road surface marking
*Road traffic control
*Speed bump
*Tactile paving, a conceptually similar warning for pedestrians.

==References==
==External links==
* US FHWA on Rumble Strips</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1275574" start="0" end="13" title="Rumble strip" label="Rumble strips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275574" start="29" end="42" title="Rumble strip" label="sleeper lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275574" start="46" end="58" title="Rumble strip" label="alert strips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198538" start="66" end="81" title="traffic calming" label="traffic calming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947936" start="1020" end="1032" title="Ruffles (potato chips)" label="potato chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305019" start="1897" end="1914" title="head-on collision" label="head-on collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379462" start="1969" end="1991" title="run-off-road collision" label="run-off-road collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949187" start="2592" end="2608" title="Botts&amp;#x27; dots" label="Botts&amp;#x27; dots"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="2904" end="2907" title="Gear" label="cog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222002" start="3154" end="3167" title="Lane" label="traffic lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="3177" end="3186" title="Autonomous car" label="Smart car"/>
<link wikidata="Q28253" start="3242" end="3271" title="lane departure warning system" label="lane departure warning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q14976" start="3622" end="3630" title="snowplow" label="snowplow"/>
<link wikidata="Q811493" start="4751" end="4771" title="Garden State Parkway" label="Garden State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4775" end="4785" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413664" start="5433" end="5450" title="audio frequency" label="audio frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344139" start="5556" end="5568" title="musical road" label="musical road"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="6069" end="6074" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379462" start="6508" end="6526" title="Run-off-road collision" label="run-off-road (ROR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="7009" end="7024" title="Right- and left-hand traffic" label="right-hand-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7068" end="7070" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q800112" start="7071" end="7101" title="Federal Highway Administration" label="Federal Highway Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q886470" start="7468" end="7471" title="Blood alcohol content" label="BAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408712" start="9593" end="9607" title="Shoulder (road)" label="right shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="10190" end="10202" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="10286" end="10304" title="right-hand traffic" label="right-hand traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="10331" end="10348" title="left-hand traffic" label="left-hand traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q99905" start="12225" end="12231" title="airbag" label="airbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="12237" end="12252" title="antilock brakes" label="antilock brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16635" end="16649" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="17225" end="17236" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953125" start="19907" end="19952" title="National Cooperative Highway Research Program" label="National Cooperative Highway Research Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q800112" start="20744" end="20774" title="Federal Highway Administration" label="Federal Highway Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="23193" end="23198" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="23297" end="23302" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="23303" end="23309" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635230" start="27118" end="27126" title="Geometric design of roads" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408712" start="27451" end="27466" title="Shoulder (road)" label="paved shoulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="30179" end="30196" title="freeze-thaw cycle" label="freeze-thaw cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432833" start="30226" end="30239" title="frost heave" label="frost-heaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q760081" start="30929" end="30938" title="road salt" label="road salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q374979" start="31091" end="31105" title="Johnson County, Kansas" label="Johnson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="31107" end="31113" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="31503" end="31514" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="31516" end="31525" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="31739" end="31750" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="31752" end="31766" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q800112" start="32407" end="32414" title="Federal Highway Administration" label="US FHWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408712" start="33859" end="33872" title="road shoulder" label="road shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q167589" start="37263" end="37290" title="St. Joseph County, Michigan" label="St. Joseph County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="37336" end="37341" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350930" start="37445" end="37450" title="Michigan Department of Transportation" label="M-DOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670674" start="38331" end="38340" title="salt lick" label="salt lick"/>
<link wikidata="Q760081" start="38352" end="38361" title="road salt" label="road salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344139" start="38776" end="38788" title="Musical road" label="Musical road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900752" start="38790" end="38812" title="Raised pavement marker" label="Raised pavement marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339481" start="38814" end="38825" title="Road hazard" label="Road hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392287" start="38827" end="38847" title="Road surface marking" label="Road surface marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132995" start="38849" end="38869" title="Road traffic control" label="Road traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278577" start="38871" end="38881" title="Speed bump" label="Speed bump"/>
<link wikidata="Q884259" start="38883" end="38897" title="Tactile paving" label="Tactile paving"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954471" wikidata="Q6865816" url="?curid=954471" title="Minister for Education (Ireland)">
<text>The Minister for Education and Youth () is a senior minister in the Government of Ireland and leads the Department of Education and Youth. The current Minister for Education and Youth is Helen McEntee, TD.

She is assisted by one Minister of State:
*Michael Moynihan, TD – Minister of State for special education and inclusion

==Functions==
The minister engages in a wide range of activities relating to education in Ireland, including policy planning, quality assurance and the provision of a broad range of services.

The department officially aims to:
*Promote equity and inclusion
*Promote lifelong learning
*Plan for education that is relevant to personal, social, cultural and economic needs.

In recent years some of these functions have been devolved to statutory authorities, in particular the Higher Education Authority, the National Qualifications Authority and the State Examinations Commission. Irish universities and colleges are to a large extent free of government control, with this being largely limited to policy formation and statistics preparation.

==History==
In 1919, the Gaelic League passed a motion calling for the Dáil to appoint a Minister for Irish, which was read into the record of the Dáil by the Ceann Comhairle. On 29 June 1920, John J. O&#x27;Kelly, known in Irish as Seán Ua Ceallaigh, and also by the pen name Sceilg, was appointed as Minister for Irish. The portfolio was created to promote the use of the Irish language throughout the country.

After the Second Dáil met in August 1921, the President Éamon de Valera proposed that this position be altered to that of Minister for Education, saying &quot;It was obvious the Minister in charge should be capable of dealing with the part referring to Irish but he thought the Department should have a wider meaning than at present&quot;. This was accepted by the Dáil. The following day, when de Valera proposed his new ministry, O&#x27;Kelly was proposed as Minister for Education, continuing in his previous position with an expanded function.

It was given a statutory basis in the Irish Free State as one of the positions in the Executive Council under the Ministers and Secretaries Act 1924.

==List of office-holders==
;Notes
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6865816" start="4" end="36" title="Minister for Education (Ireland)" label="Minister for Education and Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="52" end="60" title="minister (government)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="68" end="89" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294533" start="104" end="137" title="Department of Education (Ireland)" label="Department of Education and Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8939886" start="187" end="200" title="Helen McEntee" label="Helen McEntee"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="202" end="204" title="Teachta Dála" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325081" start="230" end="247" title="Minister of State (Ireland)" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777426" start="250" end="266" title="Michael Moynihan (Cork politician)" label="Michael Moynihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829610" start="273" end="326" title="Minister of State at the Department of Education" label="Minister of State for special education and inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631387" start="405" end="425" title="education in the Republic of Ireland" label="education in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758066" start="804" end="830" title="Higher Education Authority" label="Higher Education Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975141" start="836" end="869" title="National Qualifications Authority of Ireland" label="National Qualifications Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603201" start="878" end="907" title="State Examinations Commission" label="State Examinations Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q923165" start="909" end="940" title="Third-level education in the Republic of Ireland" label="Irish universities and colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q875645" start="1097" end="1110" title="Conradh na Gaeilge" label="Gaelic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052201" start="1231" end="1246" title="Ceann Comhairle" label="Ceann Comhairle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700583" start="1265" end="1285" title="John J. O&amp;#x27;Kelly" label="John J. O&amp;#x27;Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="1340" end="1348" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="1446" end="1460" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443260" start="1496" end="1507" title="Second Dáil" label="Second Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="1542" end="1557" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="2073" end="2089" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419833" start="2121" end="2138" title="Executive Council of the Irish Free State" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103939" start="2149" end="2183" title="Ministers and Secretaries Acts" label="Ministers and Secretaries Act 1924"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954473" wikidata="Q530653" url="?curid=954473" title="Linux Terminal Server Project">
<text>Linux Terminal Server Project (LTSP) is a free and open-source terminal server for Linux that allows many people to simultaneously use the same computer. Applications run on the server with a terminal known as a thin client (also known as an X terminal) handling input and output. Generally, terminals are low-powered, lack a hard disk and are quieter and more reliable than desktop computers because they do not have any moving parts.

This technology is useful in schools as it allows the school to provide pupils access to computers without purchasing or upgrading expensive desktop machines. Improving access to computers becomes less costly as thin client machines can be older computers that are no longer suitable for running a full desktop OS. Even a relatively slow CPU with as little as 128 MB of RAM can deliver excellent performance as a thin client. In addition, the use of centralized computing resources means that more performance can be gained for less money through upgrades to a single server rather than across a fleet of computers.

By converting existing computers into thin clients, an educational institution can also gain more control over how their students are using computing resources as all of the user sessions can be monitored on the server. See Epoptes (A Lab Management Tool).

The founder and project leader of LTSP is Jim McQuillan, and LTSP is distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License.

==The LTSP client boot process==
# On the LTSP server, a chroot environment is set up with a minimal Linux operating system and X environment.
# Either: 
## the computer will boot from a local boot device (like a harddisk, CD-ROM or USB disk), where it loads a small Linux kernel from that device which initializes the system and all of the peripherals that it recognizes, or
## the thin client will use PXE or Network booting, a part of the onboard Ethernet firmware, to request an IP address and boot server (the LTSP server) using the DHCP protocol. A PXE bootloader (PXElinux) is loaded which then retrieves a Linux kernel and initrd from a Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP) service usually running on the LTSP server. Using the utilities in the initrd, the kernel will request a (new) DHCP IP address and the address of a server from which it can mount its root filesystem (the chroot mentioned above). When this information is retrieved, the client mounts the path on its root filesystem via either the Network File System (NFS) or Network Block Device (NBD) services running on the LTSP server.
# The client then loads Linux from the NFS mounted root filesystem (or NBD filesystem image) and starts the X Window system. At this XDMCP login manager on the LTSP server. In case of the newer MueKow (LTSP v5.x) setup, the client first builds an SSH tunnel to the LTSP server&#x27;s X environment, through which it will start the LDM (LTSP Display Manager) login manager locally. From this point forward, all programs are started on the LTSP server, but displayed and operated from the client.

== Scalability ==
Initially, the MILLE-Xterm project, funded by Canadian public agencies and school districts in the province of Quebec, created a version of LTSP integrating four subprojects: a portal (based on uportal), an open-source middleware stack, a CD with free software for Windows/Mac and, finally, MILLE-Xterm itself. The MILLE-Xterm project&#x27;s goal was to provide a scalable infrastructure for massive X-Terminal deployment.

MILLE means &quot;Modèle d&#x27;Infrastructure Logiciel Libre en Éducation&quot; (Free Software Infrastructure Model for Education) and is targeted at educational institutions.

As of 2009, MILLE-Xterm was integrated back into the LTSP as LTSP-cluster, a project specializing in the large scale deployment of LTSP. One of the main differences between LTSP and LTSP-cluster is the integration of a web-based central control center that replaces the traditional &quot;one configuration file per thin client&quot; as is the method of client customization through LTSP&#x27;s lts.conf file in the main LTSP. LTSP-cluster allows organizations to centrally manage thousands of thin clients and their parameters from a central location.

In LTSP-cluster high-availability and high-performance thin-clients are specified through the optional use of redundant components. Services that can be load-balanced and made highly available are:
* DHCP server
* TFTP server
* Boot servers (root filesystem for the thin clients)
* Application servers
* Control center (PostgreSQL database + web frontend)

LTSP-Cluster can support Linux application servers as well as Windows application servers and provides a similar level of support, centralized management, high-availability, and load-balancing features for both platforms.

Also included is support for virtual desktops for remote users using NX technology. The NX protocol can allow remote Windows and Linux sessions to be accessed from a web browser with very low bandwidth (40 kbit/s) requirements and tolerance for high-latency connections. The NX client runs on various operating systems including Linux, Mac, and Windows.

==Fat clients==
LTSP v5.x added support for a thin client type known as &quot;fat clients&quot;. With the advent of inexpensive, relatively powerful computer hardware, the idea to run applications locally on the thin client while offering the manageability of a thin client solution became a reality. In the case of a LTSP fat client, the root filesystem is not a rudimentary chroot but a full Linux installation as a chroot. The fat client uses LDM to authenticate to the LTSP server and mounts user home directories using SSH and FUSE. The local CPU and RAM is used on the fat clients, which provides a few benefits.
# the LTSP server does not suffer from users abusing resources and affecting the performance and availability of the LTSP server to other users
# multimedia and 3D applications perform better and utilize less network bandwidth

LTSP is unique in offering the ability for a computer to mount its root filesystem over a network and run applications locally. On the Windows platform, the closest equivalent solution is to use a technology like Intel vPro to run a client-side hypervisor and mount the root filesystem image using iSCSI.

==See also==

* Diskless Remote Boot in Linux: similar booting system to LTSP fat clients
* Multiseat configuration
* RULE Project
* Sun Ray
* Time-sharing
* VT100
* Windows MultiPoint Server

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q530653" start="0" end="29" title="Linux Terminal Server Project" label="Linux Terminal Server Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q530653" start="31" end="35" title="Linux Terminal Server Project" label="LTSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="42" end="62" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q745602" start="63" end="78" title="terminal server" label="terminal server"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="83" end="88" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q918090" start="212" end="223" title="thin client" label="thin client"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740363" start="242" end="252" title="X terminal" label="X terminal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1278" end="1309" title="Epoptes (A Lab Management Tool)" label="Epoptes (A Lab Management Tool)"/>
<link wikidata="Q530653" start="1354" end="1367" title="Jim McQuillan (computer programmer)" label="Jim McQuillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="1416" end="1442" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q175297" start="1502" end="1508" title="chroot" label="chroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="1573" end="1586" title="X Window System" label="X environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="1620" end="1624" title="Booting" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="1718" end="1724" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063919" start="1849" end="1852" title="Preboot Execution Environment" label="PXE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640975" start="1856" end="1871" title="Network booting" label="Network booting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="1983" end="1987" title="DHCP" label="DHCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q284687" start="2076" end="2082" title="initrd" label="initrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q612640" start="2090" end="2120" title="Trivial File Transfer Protocol" label="Trivial File Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713" start="2404" end="2410" title="Mount (computing)" label="mounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q623494" start="2458" end="2483" title="Network File System" label="Network File System (NFS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684595" start="2487" end="2513" title="Network block device" label="Network Block Device (NBD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q170460" start="2798" end="2801" title="Secure Shell" label="SSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q957589" start="2802" end="2808" title="Tunnelling protocol" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781023" start="4869" end="4882" title="NX technology" label="NX technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q966451" start="5687" end="5691" title="Filesystem in Userspace" label="FUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665647" start="6215" end="6225" title="Intel vPro" label="Intel vPro"/>
<link wikidata="Q306152" start="6300" end="6305" title="iSCSI" label="iSCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090941" start="6324" end="6353" title="Diskless Remote Boot in Linux" label="Diskless Remote Boot in Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088673" start="6400" end="6423" title="Multiseat configuration" label="Multiseat configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277971" start="6426" end="6438" title="RULE Project" label="RULE Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141611" start="6441" end="6448" title="Sun Ray" label="Sun Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="6451" end="6463" title="Time-sharing" label="Time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q614302" start="6466" end="6471" title="VT100" label="VT100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322298" start="6474" end="6499" title="Windows MultiPoint Server" label="Windows MultiPoint Server"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954474" wikidata="Q6865864" url="?curid=954474" title="Minister for Health (Ireland)">
<text>The Minister for Health () is a senior minister in the Government of Ireland and leads the Department of Health. The Minister for Health is responsible for healthcare in Ireland and related services.

The current Minister for Health is Jennifer Carroll MacNeill, TD. She is assisted by:
*Mary Butler, TD – Minister of State for mental health
*Jennifer Murnane O&#x27;Connor, TD – Minister of State for public health, well-being and drugs; and
*Kieran O&#x27;Donnell, TD – Minister of State for older people

==History==
Health care formed part of the portfolio of the Minister for Local Government and Public Health until 22 January 1947. On that date, the new position of Minister for Health was created, with control of policy regarding health care provision in Ireland. In the past, it was common for the minister to also hold the position of Minister for Social Welfare.

In recent years, and especially since the tenure of Michael Noonan in 1994–1997, being appointed as minister has become somewhat of a &quot;poisoned chalice&quot; in government circles and a portfolio to be avoided by aspiring politicians, during his tenure Brian Cowen referred to the Department of Health as Angola because there were landmines everywhere. A number of scandals, mostly due to medical negligence, have meant that the minister immediately becomes identified with the scandal. For instance, the Hepatitis C scandal, the withholding of baby organs without parental consent or knowledge, the Michael Neary saga in Drogheda and other high-profile medical scandals have dogged the minister and department. Additionally the minister has to deal with logistic issues not seen in other departments such as strikes, shortages and queues which are all too familiar in clinics and hospitals around the country.

==Overview==
The Minister&#x27;s duties include the creation and assessment of policy for health services. The main policy sections of the department, together with their responsibilities, are:

===Continuing Care===
*Services for homeless adults
*Services for people with disabilities
*Services for the elderly and palliative care

===Finance===
*Health insurance
*Hospital planning
*Public-Private Partnerships

===Personnel Management and Development===
*Nursing policy
*Personnel management and development

===Primary Care===
*Community health (child health, dental services, AIDS, reproductive health)
*General medical services

===Secondary Care===
*Blood policy
*Hospital services

===Strategic Policy and Corporate Services===
*Corporate Services
*Health promotion
*Health Strategy Legislation

==List of office-holders==


==References==
==External links==
*Health Information and Quality Authority</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6865864" start="4" end="23" title="Minister for Health (Ireland)" label="Minister for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="39" end="47" title="minister (government)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="55" end="76" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294348" start="91" end="111" title="Department of Health (Ireland)" label="Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691333" start="156" end="177" title="healthcare in the Republic of Ireland" label="healthcare in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q84732712" start="236" end="261" title="Jennifer Carroll MacNeill" label="Jennifer Carroll MacNeill"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="263" end="265" title="Teachta Dála" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q23006314" start="288" end="299" title="Mary Butler (politician)" label="Mary Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q105044369" start="306" end="323" title="Minister of State at the Department of Health" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053519" start="343" end="373" title="Jennifer Murnane O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Jennifer Murnane O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405442" start="444" end="465" title="Kieran O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Kieran O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866004" start="568" end="615" title="Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage" label="Minister for Local Government and Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865958" start="846" end="873" title="Minister for Social Protection" label="Minister for Social Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390688" start="928" end="942" title="Michael Noonan (Fine Gael politician)" label="Michael Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185272" start="1134" end="1145" title="Brian Cowen" label="Brian Cowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="1186" end="1192" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565355" start="1270" end="1288" title="medical negligence" label="medical negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070544" start="1386" end="1405" title="Irish Blood Transfusion Service" label="Hepatitis C scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833033" start="1481" end="1494" title="Michael Neary (surgeon)" label="Michael Neary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954476" wikidata="Q6865750" url="?curid=954476" title="Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine">
<text>The Minister for Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and the Marine () is a senior minister in the Government of Ireland and leads the Department of Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and the Marine.

The current Minister for Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and the Marine is Martin Heydon. He is assisted by three ministers of state:
*Noel Grealish, TD – Minister of State for food promotion, new markets, research and development
*Michael Healy-Rae, TD – Minister of State for forestry, farm safety and horticulture
*Timmy Dooley, TD – Minister of State for the marine

==Functions==
The department&#x27;s functions include:
*Policy advice and development on all areas of departmental responsibility
*Representation in international especially European Union and national negotiations;
*Development and implementation of national and EU schemes in support of agriculture, fisheries, forestry and rural development.
*Monitoring and controlling aspects of food safety.
*Control and audit of public expenditure under its control.
*Regulation of the agriculture, fisheries and food industries through national and EU law.
*Monitoring and controlling animal and plant health and animal welfare.
*Monitoring and direction of state bodies engaged in the following areas:
**Research training and advice.
**Market development and promotion.
**Industry regulation and development.
**Commercial activities. 
*Direct provision of support services to agriculture, fisheries and forestry.

==List of office-holders==
;Note
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6865750" start="4" end="60" title="Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine" label="Minister for Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and the Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="76" end="84" title="minister (government)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="92" end="113" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044707" start="128" end="185" title="Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine" label="Department of Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and the Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775671" start="260" end="273" title="Martin Heydon" label="Martin Heydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325081" start="299" end="317" title="Minister of State (Ireland)" label="ministers of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635157" start="320" end="333" title="Noel Grealish" label="Noel Grealish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831036" start="417" end="434" title="Michael Healy-Rae" label="Michael Healy-Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434824" start="503" end="515" title="Timmy Dooley" label="Timmy Dooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="730" end="744" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045473" start="882" end="899" title="rural development" label="rural development"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="1096" end="1102" title="EU law" label="EU law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954481" wikidata="Q6865770" url="?curid=954481" title="Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications">
<text>The Minister for Climate, Environment and Energy () is a senior minister in the Government of Ireland and leads the Department of Climate, Environment and Energy.

The current Minister for Climate, Environment and Energy is Darragh O&#x27;Brien, TD. He is also Minister for Transport.

He is assisted by two Ministers of State:
*Alan Dillon, TD – Minister of State for the circular economy.
*Timmy Dooley, TD – Minister of State for the marine

==Overview==
The department has responsibilities in the areas of:

===Energy===
* To develop a competitive energy supply industry
* To ensure security and reliability of energy supply
* To develop energy conservation and end-use efficiency.

===Communications===
* Communications development – promotion of the provision and development of competitive high quality and world class services in the communications, electronic and mobile commerce sectors. 
* Business and technology – focusing on new business and technology applications and the development of policies, initiatives and legislation as appropriate.
* Regulatory affairs – the development of effective policies for the regulation of the electronic communications sector and management of the radio frequency spectrum. 
* Postal services – the development of an effective policy for the Irish postal sector based on open market principles.
* It is seen as a successor to the old Department of Posts and Telegraphs.

===Natural Resources===
* The Petroleum Affairs Division aims to: 
** maximise the benefits to the State from exploration for and production of indigenous oil and gas resources;
** ensure that activities are conducted safely and with due regard to their impact on the environment and other land/sea users.
* The Exploration and Mining Division of the department is charged with:
** applying the Minerals Development Act to minerals exploration and development; 
** encouraging the early identification and responsible development by private investors of the Nation&#x27;s minerals deposits in accordance with best international practice; 
** enhancing the attractiveness of Ireland for international and national minerals investment by active promotional measures. 
* The Geological Survey of Ireland is:
** Ireland&#x27;s National Earth Science Agency, and is responsible for providing geological advice and information.

==List of office-holders==

;Notes
==See also==
*Minister for Posts and Telegraphs (responsible for Communications until 1984; Minister for Communications, from 1984 to 1991)
*Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage (responsible for the Environment until 2016)
*Irish Land Commission

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6865770" start="4" end="48" title="Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications" label="Minister for Climate, Environment and Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="64" end="72" title="minister (government)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="80" end="101" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294656" start="116" end="161" title="Department of the Environment, Climate and Communications" label="Department of Climate, Environment and Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166562" start="224" end="244" title="Darragh O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Darragh O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="246" end="248" title="Teachta Dála" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865981" start="261" end="283" title="Minister for Transport (Ireland)" label="Minister for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325081" start="308" end="326" title="Minister of State (Ireland)" label="Ministers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706516" start="329" end="340" title="Alan Dillon" label="Alan Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834226" start="347" end="389" title="Minister of State at the Department of the Environment, Climate and Communications" label="Minister of State for the circular economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434824" start="392" end="404" title="Timmy Dooley" label="Timmy Dooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781521" start="1385" end="1419" title="Minister for Posts and Telegraphs" label="Department of Posts and Telegraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781521" start="2394" end="2427" title="Minister for Posts and Telegraphs" label="Minister for Posts and Telegraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866004" start="2521" end="2572" title="Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage" label="Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672859" start="2619" end="2640" title="Irish Land Commission" label="Irish Land Commission"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954482" wikidata="Q6865756" url="?curid=954482" title="Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth">
<text>The Minister for Children, Disability and Equality () is a senior minister in the government of Ireland and leads the Department of Children, Disability and Equality.

The current Minister for Children, Disability and Equality is Norma Foley, TD.
She is assisted by a minister of state:
* Hildegarde Naughton, TD – Minister of State for Disability

==Overview==
The department was created in 1956 as the Department of the Gaeltacht. Its title and functions have changed several times, with the current title adopted in 2020. An office of minister of state for children existed from 1994 to 2011. The minister for tourism, culture, arts, Gaeltacht, sport and media is currently responsible for the Gaeltacht.

==List of office-holders==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6865756" start="4" end="50" title="Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth" label="Minister for Children, Disability and Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="66" end="74" title="minister (government)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="82" end="103" title="government of Ireland" label="government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294576" start="118" end="165" title="Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth" label="Department of Children, Disability and Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q84768900" start="230" end="241" title="Norma Foley" label="Norma Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="243" end="245" title="Teachta Dála" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834117" start="268" end="285" title="Minister of State at the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth" label="minister of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761616" start="289" end="308" title="Hildegarde Naughton" label="Hildegarde Naughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004544" start="315" end="347" title="Minister of State for Disability" label="Minister of State for Disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q158490" start="422" end="431" title="Gaeltacht" label="Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866339" start="538" end="568" title="Minister of State for Children" label="minister of state for children"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865747" start="600" end="663" title="Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media" label="minister for tourism, culture, arts, Gaeltacht, sport and media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954486" wikidata="Q6866004" url="?curid=954486" title="Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage">
<text>The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage () is a senior minister in the Government of Ireland and leads the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage.

The current Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is James Browne, TD.

He is assisted by three Ministers of State:
*John Cummins, TD – Minister of State for local government and planning
*Christopher O&#x27;Sullivan, TD – Minister of State for nature, heritage and biodiversity
*Kieran O&#x27;Donnell, TD – Minister of State for housing

==Overview==
The minister is responsible for, among other matters:
*housing;
*local authorities and related services;
*the supervision of elections, including general elections and presidential elections.
==List of office-holders==
;Notes
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6866004" start="4" end="55" title="Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage" label="Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="71" end="79" title="minister (government)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="87" end="108" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294549" start="123" end="175" title="Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage" label="Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q23006311" start="245" end="257" title="James Browne (Fianna Fáil politician)" label="James Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="259" end="261" title="Teachta Dála" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q105041750" start="288" end="306" title="Minister of State at the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage" label="Ministers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384541" start="309" end="321" title="John Cummins (Irish politician)" label="John Cummins"/>
<link wikidata="Q84753822" start="381" end="408" title="Christopher O&amp;#x27;Sullivan" label="Christopher O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405442" start="472" end="493" title="Kieran O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Kieran O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074936" start="631" end="647" title="Local government in the Republic of Ireland" label="related services"/>
<link wikidata="Q765896" start="690" end="707" title="Elections in the Republic of Ireland" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q459555" start="712" end="734" title="Irish presidential election" label="presidential elections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954488" wikidata="Q721008" url="?curid=954488" title="The Bold and the Brave">
<text>The Bold and the Brave is a 1956 American World War II film written by Robert Lewin in his first screenplay based on some of his Italian Campaign experiences. It was directed by Lewis R. Foster and stars Wendell Corey, Mickey Rooney, and Don Taylor. The film was produced by Filmmakers Production Organization and released by RKO. The title song was cowritten by Mickey Rooney and Ross Bagdasarian, the creator of Alvin and the Chipmunks.

==Plot==
===Text in opening credits===
&quot;ITALY 1944&quot;&lt;br&gt;&quot;The battle is big... but some things are even bigger... sometimes the battle inside a man makes the war seem small by comparison...&quot;&lt;br&gt;&quot;This battle began at the bivouac area with the fresh troops awaiting their baptism of fire...&quot;

The film traces the destinies of three American soldiers stationed in Italy during World War II. Fairchild (Corey) is an idealist who doesn&#x27;t believe in killing. Preacher (Taylor) is a religious zealot, who can&#x27;t see anything in terms other than Good and Evil. Dooley (Rooney), an inveterate gambler who runs a floating crap game up and down the Italian front. A gambler and a World War II veteran himself, Rooney claimed to have adlibbed and directed his crap game sequence.

===Text in closing credits===
&quot;Bravery is courage in action. It produces the deed which sets the hero above the coward.&quot;&lt;br&gt;&quot;Omar N. Bradley, General of the Army.&quot;

== Cast ==
* Wendell Corey as Fairchild
* Mickey Rooney as Dooley
* Don Taylor as Preacher
* Nicole Maurey as Fiamma
* John Smith as Smith
* Race Gentry as Hendricks
* Ralph Votrian as Wilbur
* Wright King as Technician Fifth Grade
* Stanley Adams as Master Sergeant
* Bobs Watson as Bob
* Tara Summers as Tina
:;Uncredited
* Diana Darrin as Lina

==Accolades==
==See also==
*List of American films of 1956

==References==
==External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="42" end="54" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15734538" start="71" end="83" title="Robert Lewin (screenwriter)" label="Robert Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="129" end="145" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822152" start="178" end="193" title="Lewis R. Foster" label="Lewis R. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340156" start="204" end="217" title="Wendell Corey" label="Wendell Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104081" start="219" end="232" title="Mickey Rooney" label="Mickey Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q558149" start="238" end="248" title="Don Taylor (actor)" label="Don Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="326" end="329" title="RKO" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q104081" start="363" end="376" title="Mickey Rooney" label="Mickey Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176607" start="381" end="397" title="Ross Bagdasarian, Sr." label="Ross Bagdasarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q917295" start="414" end="437" title="Alvin and the Chipmunks" label="Alvin and the Chipmunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q869499" start="1237" end="1246" title="craps" label="crap game"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="1404" end="1419" title="Omar N. Bradley" label="Omar N. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340156" start="1462" end="1475" title="Wendell Corey" label="Wendell Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104081" start="1491" end="1504" title="Mickey Rooney" label="Mickey Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q558149" start="1517" end="1527" title="Don Taylor (actor/director)" label="Don Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q276328" start="1542" end="1555" title="Nicole Maurey" label="Nicole Maurey"/>
<link wikidata="Q376158" start="1568" end="1578" title="John Smith (actor)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q113568812" start="1617" end="1630" title="Ralph Votrian" label="Ralph Votrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15402259" start="1643" end="1654" title="Wright King" label="Wright King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599424" start="1683" end="1696" title="Stanley Adams (actor)" label="Stanley Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q888891" start="1718" end="1729" title="Bobs Watson" label="Bobs Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271130" start="1775" end="1787" title="Diana Darrin" label="Diana Darrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561516" start="1825" end="1855" title="List of American films of 1956" label="List of American films of 1956"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954490" wikidata="Q7672694" url="?curid=954490" title="T distribution">
<text>The phrase &quot;T distribution&quot; may refer to
* Student&#x27;s t-distribution in univariate probability theory, 
* Hotelling&#x27;s T-square distribution in multivariate statistics. 
* Multivariate Student distribution. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q576072" start="53" end="82" title="Student&amp;#x27;s t-distribution" label="Student&amp;#x27;s t-distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393230" start="120" end="158" title="Hotelling&amp;#x27;s T-square distribution" label="Hotelling&amp;#x27;s T-square distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935144" start="190" end="223" title="Multivariate Student distribution" label="Multivariate Student distribution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954491" wikidata="Q1175745" url="?curid=954491" title="David Morales">
<text>David Morales (; born August 21, 1961) is an American disc jockey (DJ) and record producer. In addition to his production and DJ work, Morales is also a remixer.

David Morales has remixed and produced over 500 releases for artists including Mariah Carey, Aretha Franklin, Michael Jackson, Janet Jackson, Spice Girls, Eric Clapton, Seal, Pet Shop Boys, U2, Donna Summer, Whitney Houston, Madonna, Selena, and Jamiroquai. Morales was nominated for his first Grammy Award in 1996 as a Producer on Mariah Carey&#x27;s album Daydream for the song “Daydream Interlude (Fantasy Sweet Dub Mix)”. He was nominated again the next year and won the 1998 Grammy Award for “Remixer of the Year”.

Morales is considered to be one of the first so-called superstar DJs. He has performed at many clubs around the globe, including numerous dates at Ibiza venues such as Pacha and Space. Morales also contributed to radio shows and released DJ mix compilations.

==Career==
===1980s–1990s===
David Morales grew up in an influential era for dance music and was a regular at his native New York&#x27;s fabled clubs such as the Loft and the Paradise Garage. He also started his own night club in Brooklyn in 1981 at the Ozone Layer, taking cues from both the Paradise Garage and The Loft. His residency at the Ozone Layer (which lasted until 1986) led him to play at the Paradise Garage in 1983.

He DJ&#x27;d at Club Zanzibar in Newark, New Jersey in the 1980s as well, home to the Jersey Sound brand of deep house or garage house.

After Morales became a regular DJ during the mid-1980s he began a remixing career, at the same time that remixing other artist became popular. Alongside Chicago house music pioneer Frankie Knuckles and For The Record DJ Pool founder Judy Weinstein, Morales founded Def Mix Productions to manage their work. 

David Morales&#x27; solo production debut came in 1993 with the Mercury Records album &quot;The Program&quot;, credited to David Morales &amp; The Bad Yard Club. In 1998, he released &quot;Needin&#x27; U&quot; on the Def Mix label, DMI Records, under the alias The Face. The track licensed to Mercury Records UK became a #1 Dance Record and video which became licensed and covered globally.

===2000s–present===
Ultra Records released Morales&#x27; second album &quot;Two Worlds Collide&quot; in 2005. The single &quot;How Would You Feel&quot; was performed by Lea Lorien. &quot;Here I Am&quot;, performed by UK artist Tamra Keenan (remixed by Kaskade), is featured in the 2006 film, &quot;The Devil Wears Prada&quot;. &quot;Feels Good&quot;, performed by Angela Hunte features in the end credits of 2008 film &quot;You Don&#x27;t Mess with the Zohan&quot;.

In 2011 Ultra Records released Morales&#x27; third album &quot;Changes&quot; featuring the vocals of Róisín Murphy (formerly of the band Moloko), Ultra Nate, Tamra Keenan and Jonathan Mendelsohn. Since then Morales has released several tracks including &quot;The Red Zone Project&quot; Volumes 1, 2 and 3 and various others on the Def Mix Music label. In 2016 Morales had a single with Janice Robinson titled &quot;There Must Be Love&quot;. He then collaborated with Luciano on the song &quot;Esperanza&quot;. In 2019 Morales started a new label with the Afrohouse label MoBlack called MoDef, and also released the single &quot;Freedom&quot; performed by Janice Robinson.

Morales was an owner of Stereo nightclub located in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. As a resident DJ, he played many 16 hour &quot;La Vie en Stereo&quot; sets, which happened monthly for 9 years from 2003 to 2012.

David was a judge on &quot;Top DJ&quot; in 2016, a national television show broadcast on Italia 1, and was a model for Italian clothing designer Iceberg in 2008.

==Personal life==
Morales was born in New York City, he is of Puerto Rican ancestry.

In October 2018, Morales was arrested in Japan after he was found with 0.3g of MDMA in his possession at Fukuoka Airport prior to scheduled performances in Fukuoka and Tokyo. He was released without charge the same month. The maximum penalty for possession of MDMA in Japan is seven years in prison and a JP¥3 million fine.

== Discography ==
=== Albums ===
* 1993: &quot;The Program&quot;
* 2004: &quot;2 Worlds Collide&quot;
* 2012: &quot;Changes&quot;

===Mixed compilations===
* 1994: &quot;United DJs of America, Vol. 4&quot;
* 1997: &quot;Ministry of Sound: Sessions Seven&quot;
* 2000: &quot;UK*USA&quot; in collaboration with Danny Rampling
* 2003: &quot;Mix The Vibe: Past-Present-Future&quot;
* 2011: &quot;Live &amp; Remastered&quot; (disc 2)

===Singles===

====David Morales====
*2001: &quot;Winners&quot;, with Jocelyn Brown
*2003: &quot;Make It Hot&quot;, with DJ Pierre
*2004: &quot;How Would U Feel&quot;, with Lea-Lorién
*2005: &quot;Feels Good&quot;, with Angela Hunte
*2005: &quot;Here I Am&quot;, with Tamra Keenan
*2006: &quot;Better That U Leave&quot;, with Lea-Lorien
*2006: &quot;How Would U Feel &#x27;06&quot;, with Lea-Lorien
*2011: &quot;You Just Don&#x27;t Love Me&quot;, with Jonathan Mendelsohn
*2011: &quot;Holiday&quot;, with Polina
*2012: &quot;Golden Era&quot;, with Róisín Murphy
*2012: &quot;Stay&quot;, with Polina
*2012: &quot;Planet Called Love&quot;, with Ultra Nate
*2013: &quot;7 Days&quot;, with Tamra Keenan
*2015: &quot;There Must Be Love&quot;, with Janice Robinson
*2019: &quot;Freedom&quot;, with Janice Robinson

====The Bad Yard Club====
; All are collaborations with Sly Dunbar and Handel Tucker.
*1993: &quot;Gimme Luv (Eenie Meeny Miny Mo)&quot;, with Papa San
*1993: &quot;Sunshine&quot;, with Stanryck
*1993: &quot;Forever Luv&quot;, with Anastacia
*1993: &quot;The Program&quot;, with Papa San
*1994: &quot;In De Ghetto&quot;, with Delta Bennett
*1996: &quot;In De Ghetto &#x27;96&quot;, with Crystal Waters and Delta Bennett

====Other aliases====
*1987: &quot;Do It Properly&quot; (as 2 Puerto Ricans, a Blackman and a Dominican, with Ralphi Rosario and Clivilles &amp; Cole)
*1989: &quot;Scandalous&quot;, (as 2 Puerto Ricans, a Blackman and a Dominican, with Ralphi Rosario and Clivilles &amp; Cole)
*1994: &quot;Congo&quot; (as The Boss)
*1995: &quot;Philadelphia&quot;, (as Brooklyn Friends)
*1998: &quot;Needin&#x27; U&quot;, (as David Morales presents The Face)
*2000: &quot;Higher&quot;, (as Moca, with Albert Cabrera and Deanna Della Cioppa)
*2001: &quot;Needin&#x27; U II&quot;, (as David Morales presents The Face, with Juliet Roberts)
*2002: &quot;Siren Of Love&quot;, (as 928)
*2006: &quot;Play&quot;, (as Brooklyn Friends)
*2006: &quot;Keep It Coming&quot;, (as The Face, with Nicki Richards)

=== Selected remixes ===

* 2 in a Room - &quot;Wiggle It&quot;
* 2 in a Room - &quot;Do What You Want&quot;
* Ace of Base - &quot;Living in Danger&quot;
* The Adventures of Stevie V - &quot;Dirty Cash (Money Talks)&quot;
* Alexander O&#x27;Neal - &quot;What Is This Thing Called Love?&quot;
* Alison Limerick - &quot;Where Love Lives&quot;
* Annie Lennox - &quot;Walking on Broken Glass&quot;
* Aretha Franklin - &quot;A Deeper Love&quot;
* Aretha Franklin - &quot;Here We Go Again (Aretha Franklin song)&quot;
* Backstreet Boys - &quot;I Want It That Way&quot;
* Basement Jaxx - &quot;Bingo Bango&quot;
* Betty Boo - &quot;Catch Me&quot;
* Bizarre Inc - &quot;Get Up (Sunshine Street)&quot;
* Björk - &quot;Big Time Sensuality&quot;
* Björk - &quot;Hyperballad&quot;
* Black Sheep - &quot;Strobelite Honey&quot;
* The Brand New Heavies - &quot;Never Stop&quot;
* The Brand New Heavies - &quot;Dream On Dreamer&quot;
* The Brand New Heavies - &quot;Stay This Way&quot;
* Brandon Flowers - &quot;Crossfire&quot;
* Britney Spears - &quot;Circus&quot;
* Burak Kut - &quot;Derdim Var&quot; (Translated: Deep Inside)
* CeCe Peniston - &quot;Finally&quot;
* CeCe Peniston - &quot;I&#x27;m In The Mood&quot;
* CeCe Peniston - &quot;Hit By Love&quot;
* CeCe Peniston - &quot;Keep Givin&#x27; Me Your Love&quot;
* CeCe Peniston - &quot;Somebody Else&#x27;s Guy&quot;
* CeCe Rogers - &quot;All Join Hands&quot;
* Celine Dion - &quot;Loved Me Back to Life&quot;
* Cerrone - &quot;Love In C Minor&quot;
* Chaka Khan - &quot;Life is a Dance&quot;
* Cher - &quot;Woman&#x27;s World&quot;
* Clubhouse - &quot;Deep In My Heart&quot;
* The Chimes - &quot;1-2-3&quot;
* Crystal Waters - &quot;What I Need&quot;
* Daft Punk - &quot;Get Lucky&quot;
* The Daou - &quot;Are You Satisfied?&quot;
* De La Soul - &quot;A Roller Skating Jam Named Saturdays&quot;
* Deborah Cox - &quot;It Could&#x27;ve Been You&quot;
* Deborah Cox - &quot;Who Do U Love&quot;
* Diana Ross - &quot;Upside Down&quot;
* Diana Ross - &quot;The Boss&quot;
* Donna Summer - &quot;Melody of Love (Wanna Be Loved)&quot;
* Doop - &quot;Doop&quot;
* Electribe 101 - &quot;You&#x27;re Walking&quot;
* Enrique Iglesias - &quot;Rhythm Divine&quot;
* Eric Clapton - &quot;(I) Get Lost
* Eve Gallagher - &quot;Love Come Down&quot;
* FCL - &quot;It&#x27;s You&quot;
* First Choice - &quot;Love Thang&quot;
* Frankie Knuckles - &quot;Rain Falls&quot;
* Gabrielle - &quot;Give Me a Little More Time&quot;
* Gloria Estefan - &quot;Oye Mi Canto&quot;
* Gloria Estefan - &quot;Reach&quot;
* Gloria Estefan - &quot;Turn The Beat Around&quot;
* Heavy D &amp; The Boyz - &quot;Now That We Found Love&quot;
* Incognito - &quot;Always There&quot;
* India - &quot;Right From The Start&quot;
* Inner City - &quot;Watcha Gonna Do With My Lovin&#x27;&quot;
* INXS - &quot;I&#x27;m Only Looking&quot;
* Jamiroquai - &quot;Cosmic Girl&quot;
* Jamiroquai - &quot;Space Cowboy&quot;
* Jane Child - &quot;Do Whatcha Do&quot;
* Janet Jackson - &quot;Because of Love&quot;
* Janet Jackson - &quot;Throb&quot;
* Janet Jackson - &quot;When I Think of You&quot; (1995 Remixes)
* Janet Jackson - &quot; Got &#x27;til It&#x27;s Gone with Frankie Knuckles
* Jaydee - &quot;Plastic Dreams&quot; (1997 Remixes)
* Jennifer Paige - &quot;Crush&quot;
* Jody Watley - &quot;I&#x27;m The One You Need&quot;
* Juliet Roberts - &quot;Free Love&quot;
* Kelis - &quot;Get Along With You&quot;
* Kristine W - &quot;One More Try&quot;
* Kylie Minogue - &quot;Where Is The Feeling?&quot;
* Kym Mazelle - &quot;Useless&quot;
* Kym Sims - &quot;We Got A Love&quot;
* Knight Time - &quot;I&#x27;ve Been Watching You&quot;
* Kuva - &quot;Isn&#x27;t It Time&quot;
* Lara Fabian - &quot;I Will Love Again&quot;
* Lisa Stansfield - &quot;What Did I Do to You?&quot;
* Lisa Stansfield - &quot;Someday (I&#x27;m Coming Back)&quot;
* Lisa Stansfield - &quot;Little Bit of Heaven&quot;
* Lisa Stansfield - &quot;8-3-1&quot;
* Lisa Fischer - &quot;Save Me&quot;
* Loose Ends - &quot;Love&#x27;s Got Me&quot;
* Lucas Frota featuring Blakkat - &quot;Change (Will Come)&quot;
* Lucrezia - &quot;Live To Tell&quot;
* Luther Vandross - &quot;Ain&#x27;t No Stoppin&#x27; Us Now&quot;
* Luther Vandross - &quot;The Mistletoe Jam (Everybody Kiss Somebody)&quot;
* Luther Vandross - &quot;The Rush&quot;
* Luther Vandross &amp; Janet Jackson - &quot;The Best Things in Life Are Free&quot;
* M People - &quot;One Night in Heaven&quot;
* M People - &quot;Fantasy Island&quot;
* M People - &quot;Dreaming&quot;
* Madonna - &quot;Deeper and Deeper&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Always Be My Baby&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Can&#x27;t Take That Away (Mariah&#x27;s Theme)&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Dreamlover&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Fantasy&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Fly Away (Butterfly Reprise)&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Honey&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;I Still Believe&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;It&#x27;s Like That&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Joy To The World&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Loverboy&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;My All&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Say Somethin&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Shake It Off&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;The Roof (Back In Time)&quot;
* Mariah Carey - &quot;Touch My Body&quot;
* Masters At Work - &quot;I Can&#x27;t Get No Sleep &#x27;95&quot;
* Michael Jackson featuring Justin Timberlake - &quot;Love Never Felt So Good&quot; (remixed by David Morales, Eric Kupper &amp; Frankie Knuckles)
* Michael Jackson featuring Janet Jackson - &quot;Scream&quot;
* Michael Jackson - &quot;This Time Around&quot;
* Michael Jackson - &quot;Thriller&quot;
* Michelle Ayers - “Respect”
* Neneh Cherry - &quot;Kisses on the Wind&quot;
* Nightcrawlers - &quot;Should I Ever Fall in Love&quot;
* P. M. Dawn - &quot;Gotta Be...Movin&#x27; On Up&quot;
* Pet Shop Boys - &quot;How Can You Expect to Be Taken Seriously?&quot;
* Pet Shop Boys - &quot;I Don&#x27;t Know What You Want but I Can&#x27;t Give It Any More&quot;
* Pet Shop Boys - &quot;New York City Boy&quot;
* Pet Shop Boys - &quot;So Hard&quot;
* Pet Shop Boys - &quot;Where the Streets Have No Name (I Can&#x27;t Take My Eyes Off You)&quot;
* Phil Perry - &quot;Amazing Love&quot;
* Photek - &quot;Mine To Give&quot;
* Reese - &quot;You&#x27;re Mine&quot;
* Richard Darbyshire - &quot;This I Swear&quot; with Frankie Knuckles
* Robert Owens - &quot;I&#x27;ll Be Your Friend&quot;
* Robin S. - &quot;I Want to Thank You&quot;
* Sandy B. - &quot;Feel Like Singin&#x27;&quot;
* Seal - &quot;Newborn Friend&quot;
* Selena - &quot;I&#x27;m Getting Used to You&quot;
* Shabba Ranks - &quot;Mr. Loverman&quot;
* Shara Nelson - &quot;Down That Road
* Sheena Easton - &quot;101&quot;
* Smoke City - &quot;Underwater Love&quot;
* Soul Shaker featuring CeCe Peniston - Shame, Shame, Shame
* Sounds of Blackness - &quot;I Believe&quot;
* Spice Girls - &quot;Spice Up Your Life&quot;
* Spice Girls - &quot;Stop&quot;
* Spice Girls - &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot;
* Suzanne Palmer - &quot;Luv 2 Luv&quot;
* Taylor Dayne - &quot;Say a Prayer&quot;
* Technotronic - &quot;Get Up!&quot;
* Technotronic - &quot;Pump Up The Jam&quot;
* Technotronic - &quot;Spin That Wheel&quot;
* Tina Turner - &quot;Goldeneye&quot;
* Toni Braxton - &quot;You&#x27;re Makin&#x27; Me High&quot;
* U2 - &quot;Discotheque&quot;
* U2 - &quot;Lemon&quot;
* Ultra Naté - &quot;New Kind of Medicine&quot;
* Utah Saints - &quot;What Can You Do for Me&quot;
* Vanessa Williams - &quot;Happiness 
* Whigfield - &quot;Think Of You&quot;
* Whigfield - &quot;Sexy Eyes&quot;
* Whitney Houston - &quot;Love Will Save the Day&quot; &quot;(remixed by David Morales &amp; John &quot;Jellybean&quot; Benitez)&quot;
* Whitney Houston - &quot;So Emotional&quot;
* Yazz - &quot;Stand Up for Your Love Rights&quot;
== See also ==
*List of Puerto Ricans
*List of number-one dance hits (United States)
*List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart

==References==
==External links==
*Official website
*Official Def Mix website
*Resident Advisor
*David Morales&#x27; on Discogs
*Spirit of House Interview with David Morales 
*Interview with &quot;DJ Times&quot;, 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1175745" start="0" end="13" title="David Morales" label="David Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="54" end="65" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="153" end="158" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="242" end="254" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="256" end="271" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="273" end="288" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="290" end="303" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="305" end="316" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="318" end="330" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q218091" start="332" end="336" title="Seal (musician)" label="Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="338" end="351" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="353" end="355" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q908933" start="357" end="369" title="Donna Summer" label="Donna Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="371" end="386" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="388" end="395" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q23543" start="397" end="403" title="Selena" label="Selena"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="409" end="419" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537720" start="852" end="857" title="Pacha Group" label="Pacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339843" start="1119" end="1134" title="Paradise Garage" label="Paradise Garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1174" end="1182" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954355" start="1391" end="1404" title="Club Zanzibar" label="Club Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="1408" end="1426" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="1693" end="1709" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="1885" end="1900" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986562" start="2010" end="2024" title="Needin&amp;#x27; U" label="Needin&amp;#x27; U"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573393" start="2233" end="2246" title="Ultra Records" label="Ultra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q595529" start="2465" end="2472" title="Kaskade" label="Kaskade"/>
<link wikidata="Q223316" start="2511" end="2532" title="The Devil Wears Prada (film)" label="The Devil Wears Prada"/>
<link wikidata="Q958417" start="2637" end="2671" title="You Don&amp;#x27;t Mess with the Zohan" label="You Don&amp;#x27;t Mess with the Zohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466158" start="2781" end="2794" title="Róisín Murphy" label="Róisín Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121732" start="2817" end="2823" title="Moloko" label="Moloko"/>
<link wikidata="Q444309" start="2826" end="2836" title="Ultra Nate" label="Ultra Nate"/>
<link wikidata="Q100041926" start="2855" end="2874" title="Jonathan Mendelsohn (singer)" label="Jonathan Mendelsohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704751" start="3147" end="3154" title="Luciano (DJ)" label="Luciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975113" start="3335" end="3350" title="Janice Robinson" label="Janice Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="3405" end="3413" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="3415" end="3421" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3763" end="3776" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3852" end="3857" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="3890" end="3894" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137465" start="3916" end="3931" title="Fukuoka Airport" label="Fukuoka Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q26600" start="3967" end="3974" title="Fukuoka" label="Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="3979" end="3984" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="4116" end="4119" title="JP¥" label="JP¥"/>
<link wikidata="Q97623539" start="4356" end="4373" title="Ministry of Sound" label="Ministry of Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220756" start="4445" end="4459" title="Danny Rampling" label="Danny Rampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654637" start="4528" end="4549" title="Live &amp;amp; Remastered" label="Live &amp;amp; Remastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q447915" start="4636" end="4649" title="Jocelyn Brown" label="Jocelyn Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154222" start="4687" end="4696" title="DJ Pierre" label="DJ Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508160" start="4739" end="4749" title="Lea-Lorien" label="Lea-Lorién"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681831" start="4834" end="4846" title="Tamra Keenan" label="Tamra Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466158" start="5114" end="5127" title="Róisín Murphy" label="Róisín Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q444309" start="5209" end="5219" title="Ultra Nate" label="Ultra Nate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681831" start="5252" end="5264" title="Tamra Keenan" label="Tamra Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975113" start="5309" end="5324" title="Janice Robinson" label="Janice Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975113" start="5358" end="5373" title="Janice Robinson" label="Janice Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050497" start="5518" end="5526" title="Papa San" label="Papa San"/>
<link wikidata="Q34584" start="5607" end="5616" title="Anastacia" label="Anastacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q249141" start="5762" end="5776" title="Crystal Waters" label="Crystal Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633367" start="5856" end="5899" title="2 Puerto Ricans, a Blackman and a Dominican" label="2 Puerto Ricans, a Blackman and a Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179367" start="5906" end="5920" title="Ralphi Rosario" label="Ralphi Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134713" start="5925" end="5945" title="Clivilles &amp;amp; Cole" label="Clivilles &amp;amp; Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986562" start="6180" end="6194" title="Needin&amp;#x27; U" label="Needin&amp;#x27; U"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308902" start="6401" end="6415" title="Juliet Roberts" label="Juliet Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028470" start="6561" end="6575" title="Nicki Richards" label="Nicki Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q222887" start="6606" end="6617" title="2 in a Room" label="2 in a Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967565" start="6626" end="6635" title="Wiggle It (2 in a Room song)" label="Wiggle It"/>
<link wikidata="Q222887" start="6644" end="6655" title="2 in a Room" label="2 in a Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q151634" start="6689" end="6700" title="Ace of Base" label="Ace of Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659405" start="6709" end="6725" title="Living in Danger" label="Living in Danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q656080" start="6734" end="6760" title="The Adventures of Stevie V" label="The Adventures of Stevie V"/>
<link wikidata="Q472895" start="6802" end="6823" title="Alexander O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Alexander O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727124" start="6872" end="6887" title="Alison Limerick" label="Alison Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993315" start="6896" end="6912" title="Where Love Lives" label="Where Love Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q151231" start="6921" end="6933" title="Annie Lennox" label="Annie Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017815" start="6942" end="6965" title="Walking on Broken Glass" label="Walking on Broken Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="6974" end="6989" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16989295" start="6998" end="7011" title="A Deeper Love" label="A Deeper Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995235" start="7044" end="7083" title="Here We Go Again (Aretha Franklin song)" label="Here We Go Again (Aretha Franklin song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="7092" end="7107" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q338796" start="7116" end="7134" title="I Want It That Way" label="I Want It That Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q544018" start="7143" end="7156" title="Basement Jaxx" label="Basement Jaxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q456125" start="7185" end="7194" title="Betty Boo" label="Betty Boo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905011" start="7220" end="7231" title="Bizarre Inc" label="Bizarre Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q42455" start="7273" end="7278" title="Björk" label="Björk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269063" start="7287" end="7306" title="Big Time Sensuality" label="Big Time Sensuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714980" start="7329" end="7340" title="Hyperballad" label="Hyperballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q258120" start="7349" end="7360" title="Black Sheep (hip hop group)" label="Black Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q608233" start="7394" end="7415" title="The Brand New Heavies" label="The Brand New Heavies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004270" start="7424" end="7434" title="Never Stop (Brand New Heavies song)" label="Never Stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q309697" start="7550" end="7565" title="Brandon Flowers" label="Brandon Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="7592" end="7606" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q681319" start="7615" end="7621" title="Circus (Britney Spears song)" label="Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010201" start="7630" end="7639" title="Burak Kut" label="Burak Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q467129" start="7693" end="7706" title="CeCe Peniston" label="CeCe Peniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449492" start="7715" end="7722" title="Finally (CeCe Peniston song)" label="Finally"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7906" end="7930" title="Somebody Else&amp;#x27;s Guy#CeCe Peniston version" label="Somebody Else&amp;#x27;s Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749597" start="7939" end="7950" title="CeCe Rogers" label="CeCe Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="7982" end="7993" title="Celine Dion" label="Celine Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14826873" start="8002" end="8023" title="Loved Me Back to Life (song)" label="Loved Me Back to Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056163" start="8032" end="8039" title="Cerrone" label="Cerrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q229498" start="8072" end="8082" title="Chaka Khan" label="Chaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="8115" end="8119" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030662" start="8128" end="8146" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s World" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103003" start="8155" end="8164" title="Clubhouse (band)" label="Clubhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520261" start="8198" end="8208" title="The Chimes (Scottish band)" label="The Chimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q249141" start="8231" end="8245" title="Crystal Waters" label="Crystal Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q52115519" start="8254" end="8265" title="Ghetto Day/What I Need" label="What I Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q185828" start="8274" end="8283" title="Daft Punk" label="Daft Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11510350" start="8292" end="8301" title="Get Lucky (Daft Punk song)" label="Get Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728888" start="8310" end="8318" title="The Daou" label="The Daou"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="8354" end="8364" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q457622" start="8418" end="8429" title="Deborah Cox" label="Deborah Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10719918" start="8492" end="8505" title="Who Do U Love" label="Who Do U Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="8514" end="8524" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511102" start="8533" end="8544" title="Upside Down (Diana Ross song)" label="Upside Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="8553" end="8563" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520065" start="8572" end="8580" title="The Boss (Diana Ross song)" label="The Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q908933" start="8589" end="8601" title="Donna Summer" label="Donna Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813498" start="8610" end="8641" title="Melody of Love (Wanna Be Loved)" label="Melody of Love (Wanna Be Loved)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242554" start="8650" end="8654" title="Doop (band)" label="Doop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357274" start="8676" end="8689" title="Electribe 101" label="Electribe 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q47122" start="8726" end="8742" title="Enrique Iglesias" label="Enrique Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q532779" start="8751" end="8764" title="Rhythm Divine" label="Rhythm Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="8773" end="8785" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19193694" start="8794" end="8806" title="(I) Get Lost" label="(I) Get Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416158" start="8809" end="8822" title="Eve Gallagher" label="Eve Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452618" start="8888" end="8900" title="First Choice (band)" label="First Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="8928" end="8944" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q242685" start="8972" end="8981" title="Gabrielle (singer)" label="Gabrielle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565720" start="8990" end="9016" title="Give Me a Little More Time" label="Give Me a Little More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q184697" start="9025" end="9039" title="Gloria Estefan" label="Gloria Estefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116258" start="9048" end="9060" title="Oye Mi Canto (Hear My Voice)" label="Oye Mi Canto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300162" start="9092" end="9097" title="Reach (Gloria Estefan song)" label="Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300072" start="9129" end="9149" title="Turn The Beat Around" label="Turn The Beat Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q450714" start="9158" end="9180" title="Heavy D &amp;amp; The Boyz" label="Heavy D &amp;amp; The Boyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q615207" start="9220" end="9229" title="Incognito (band)" label="Incognito"/>
<link wikidata="Q441805" start="9259" end="9264" title="La India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663959" start="9302" end="9312" title="Inner City (band)" label="Inner City"/>
<link wikidata="Q489801" start="9365" end="9369" title="INXS" label="INXS"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="9408" end="9418" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567912" start="9427" end="9438" title="Cosmic Girl (song)" label="Cosmic Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448352" start="9466" end="9478" title="Space Cowboy (Jamiroquai song)" label="Space Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q280092" start="9487" end="9497" title="Jane Child" label="Jane Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="9528" end="9541" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q791714" start="9550" end="9565" title="Because of Love" label="Because of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q723024" start="9596" end="9601" title="Throb (song)" label="Throb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049431" start="9632" end="9651" title="When I Think of You" label="When I Think of You"/>
<link wikidata="Q835635" start="9698" end="9726" title="Got &amp;#x27;til It&amp;#x27;s Gone" label="Got &amp;#x27;til It&amp;#x27;s Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="9732" end="9748" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088152" start="9751" end="9757" title="Jaydee" label="Jaydee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202043" start="9766" end="9780" title="Plastic Dreams" label="Plastic Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q238324" start="9804" end="9818" title="Jennifer Paige" label="Jennifer Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300731" start="9827" end="9832" title="Crush (Jennifer Paige song)" label="Crush"/>
<link wikidata="Q465897" start="9841" end="9852" title="Jody Watley" label="Jody Watley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967153" start="9861" end="9886" title="I&amp;#x27;m The One You Need" label="I&amp;#x27;m The One You Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308902" start="9895" end="9909" title="Juliet Roberts" label="Juliet Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q294979" start="9936" end="9941" title="Kelis" label="Kelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q456964" start="9977" end="9987" title="Kristine W" label="Kristine W"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="10017" end="10030" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200953" start="10069" end="10080" title="Kym Mazelle" label="Kym Mazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561991" start="10105" end="10113" title="Kym Sims" label="Kym Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473402" start="10144" end="10155" title="Knight Time" label="Knight Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q192655" start="10240" end="10251" title="Lara Fabian" label="Lara Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q235934" start="10286" end="10301" title="Lisa Stansfield" label="Lisa Stansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019244" start="10310" end="10331" title="What Did I Do to You?" label="What Did I Do to You?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559603" start="10364" end="10394" title="Someday (I&amp;#x27;m Coming Back)" label="Someday (I&amp;#x27;m Coming Back)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996658" start="10427" end="10447" title="Little Bit of Heaven" label="Little Bit of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151532" start="10480" end="10485" title="8-3-1" label="8-3-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q536198" start="10494" end="10506" title="Lisa Fischer" label="Lisa Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675941" start="10531" end="10541" title="Loose Ends (band)" label="Loose Ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698114" start="10642" end="10650" title="Lucrezia (singer)" label="Lucrezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342432" start="10659" end="10671" title="Live To Tell" label="Live To Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q311306" start="10680" end="10695" title="Luther Vandross" label="Luther Vandross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697270" start="10704" end="10738" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t No Stoppin&amp;#x27; Us Now" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t No Stoppin&amp;#x27; Us Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761872" start="10847" end="10855" title="The Rush" label="The Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q262698" start="10908" end="10940" title="The Best Things in Life Are Free (Luther Vandross and Janet Jackson song)" label="The Best Things in Life Are Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882185" start="10949" end="10957" title="M People" label="M People"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093061" start="10966" end="10985" title="One Night in Heaven" label="One Night in Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434309" start="11011" end="11025" title="Fantasy Island (M People song)" label="Fantasy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306596" start="11051" end="11059" title="Dreaming (M People song)" label="Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="11068" end="11075" title="Madonna (entertainer)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q370753" start="11084" end="11101" title="Deeper and Deeper" label="Deeper and Deeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="11110" end="11122" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q449698" start="11131" end="11148" title="Always Be My Baby" label="Always Be My Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q858072" start="11178" end="11225" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Take That Away" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Take That Away (Mariah&amp;#x27;s Theme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q909801" start="11255" end="11265" title="Dreamlover (song)" label="Dreamlover"/>
<link wikidata="Q996033" start="11295" end="11302" title="Fantasy (Mariah Carey song)" label="Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q608486" start="11332" end="11360" title="Butterfly (Mariah Carey song)" label="Fly Away (Butterfly Reprise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049293" start="11390" end="11395" title="Honey (Mariah Carey song)" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11425" end="11440" title="I Still Believe (Brenda K. Starr song)#Mariah Carey version" label="I Still Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076891" start="11470" end="11489" title="It&amp;#x27;s like That (Mariah Carey song)" label="It&amp;#x27;s Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192264" start="11519" end="11535" title="Joy To The World (Mariah Carey song)" label="Joy To The World"/>
<link wikidata="Q264859" start="11565" end="11573" title="Loverboy (Mariah Carey song)" label="Loverboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049186" start="11603" end="11609" title="My All" label="My All"/>
<link wikidata="Q257509" start="11639" end="11651" title="Say Somethin&amp;#x27; (Mariah Carey song)" label="Say Somethin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17546690" start="11681" end="11693" title="Shake It Off (Mariah Carey song)" label="Shake It Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q898009" start="11723" end="11746" title="The Roof (song)" label="The Roof (Back In Time)"/>
<link wikidata="Q221651" start="11776" end="11789" title="Touch My Body (Mariah Carey song)" label="Touch My Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758822" start="11798" end="11813" title="Masters At Work" label="Masters At Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="11865" end="11880" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="11891" end="11908" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16743287" start="11917" end="11940" title="Love Never Felt So Good" label="Love Never Felt So Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386917" start="11974" end="11985" title="Eric Kupper" label="Eric Kupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="11992" end="12008" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q107654239" start="12060" end="12066" title="Scream (Michael Jackson and Janet Jackson song)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q651901" start="12099" end="12115" title="This Time Around (Michael Jackson song)" label="This Time Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q380825" start="12148" end="12156" title="Thriller (song)" label="Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12165" end="12179" title="Michelle Ayers" label="Michelle Ayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q233342" start="12194" end="12206" title="Neneh Cherry" label="Neneh Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417188" start="12215" end="12233" title="Kisses on the Wind" label="Kisses on the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q675268" start="12242" end="12255" title="Nightcrawlers (band)" label="Nightcrawlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q937514" start="12299" end="12309" title="P. M. Dawn" label="P. M. Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="12355" end="12368" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787163" start="12377" end="12418" title="How Can You Expect to Be Taken Seriously?" label="How Can You Expect to Be Taken Seriously?"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041194" start="12449" end="12514" title="I Don&amp;#x27;t Know What You Want but I Can&amp;#x27;t Give It Any More" label="I Don&amp;#x27;t Know What You Want but I Can&amp;#x27;t Give It Any More"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984660" start="12545" end="12562" title="New York City Boy" label="New York City Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985545" start="12593" end="12600" title="So Hard" label="So Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993480" start="12631" end="12697" title="Where the Streets Have No Name (I Can&amp;#x27;t Take My Eyes Off You)" label="Where the Streets Have No Name (I Can&amp;#x27;t Take My Eyes Off You)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378828" start="12706" end="12716" title="Phil Perry" label="Phil Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349876" start="12746" end="12752" title="Photek" label="Photek"/>
<link wikidata="Q923090" start="12782" end="12787" title="Kevin Saunderson" label="Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193538" start="12821" end="12839" title="Richard Darbyshire" label="Richard Darbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="12872" end="12888" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436023" start="12891" end="12903" title="Robert Owens (musician)" label="Robert Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q470066" start="12945" end="12953" title="Robin S." label="Robin S."/>
<link wikidata="Q7417139" start="12990" end="12998" title="Sandy B." label="Sandy B."/>
<link wikidata="Q218091" start="13038" end="13042" title="Seal (musician)" label="Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23543" start="13074" end="13080" title="Selena" label="Selena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301798" start="13089" end="13117" title="I&amp;#x27;m Getting Used to You" label="I&amp;#x27;m Getting Used to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q711260" start="13126" end="13138" title="Shabba Ranks" label="Shabba Ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928858" start="13147" end="13159" title="Mr. Loverman" label="Mr. Loverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q465690" start="13168" end="13180" title="Shara Nelson" label="Shara Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302865" start="13189" end="13203" title="Down That Road (Shara Nelson song)" label="Down That Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q465977" start="13206" end="13219" title="Sheena Easton" label="Sheena Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295497" start="13240" end="13250" title="Smoke City" label="Smoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004610" start="13259" end="13274" title="Underwater Love (Smoke City song)" label="Underwater Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564928" start="13343" end="13362" title="Sounds of Blackness" label="Sounds of Blackness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996236" start="13371" end="13380" title="I Believe (Sounds of Blackness song)" label="I Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="13389" end="13400" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471051" start="13409" end="13427" title="Spice Up Your Life" label="Spice Up Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857841" start="13456" end="13460" title="Stop (Spice Girls song)" label="Stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471038" start="13489" end="13513" title="Who Do You Think You Are (Spice Girls song)" label="Who Do You Think You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q168274" start="13563" end="13575" title="Taylor Dayne" label="Taylor Dayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429061" start="13584" end="13596" title="Say a Prayer" label="Say a Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344793" start="13605" end="13617" title="Technotronic" label="Technotronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418324" start="13663" end="13678" title="Pump Up The Jam" label="Pump Up The Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="13732" end="13743" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344401" start="13752" end="13761" title="GoldenEye (song)" label="Goldeneye"/>
<link wikidata="Q155412" start="13770" end="13782" title="Toni Braxton" label="Toni Braxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q898945" start="13791" end="13822" title="You&amp;#x27;re Makin&amp;#x27; Me High" label="You&amp;#x27;re Makin&amp;#x27; Me High"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="13831" end="13833" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="13862" end="13864" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340518" start="13873" end="13878" title="Lemon (U2 song)" label="Lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q444309" start="13887" end="13897" title="Ultra Naté" label="Ultra Naté"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036827" start="13935" end="13946" title="Utah Saints" label="Utah Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991008" start="13955" end="13977" title="What Can You Do for Me" label="What Can You Do for Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q202801" start="13986" end="14002" title="Vanessa L. Williams" label="Vanessa Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652318" start="14011" end="14020" title="Happiness (Vanessa Williams song)" label="Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q237027" start="14024" end="14033" title="Whigfield" label="Whigfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784552" start="14042" end="14054" title="Think of You (Whigfield song)" label="Think Of You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458890" start="14081" end="14090" title="Sexy Eyes (Whigfield song)" label="Sexy Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="14099" end="14114" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571912" start="14123" end="14145" title="Love Will Save the Day" label="Love Will Save the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699312" start="14190" end="14224" title="John Benitez" label="John &amp;quot;Jellybean&amp;quot; Benitez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858476" start="14258" end="14270" title="So Emotional" label="So Emotional"/>
<link wikidata="Q436051" start="14279" end="14283" title="Yazz" label="Yazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598115" start="14292" end="14321" title="Stand Up for Your Love Rights" label="Stand Up for Your Love Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595198" start="14344" end="14365" title="List of Puerto Ricans" label="List of Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q105771390" start="14367" end="14412" title="List of number-one dance hits (United States)" label="List of number-one dance hits (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606235" start="14414" end="14474" title="List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart" label="List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="14596" end="14603" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954495" wikidata="Q1551604" url="?curid=954495" title="Grottasöngr">
<text>Grottasǫngr (or Gróttasǫngr; Old Norse: &#x27;The Mill&#x27;s Songs&#x27;, or &#x27;Song of Grótti&#x27;) is an Old Norse poem, sometimes counted among the poems of the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; as it appears in manuscripts that are later than the &quot;Codex Regius&quot;. The tradition is also preserved in one of the manuscripts of Snorri Sturluson&#x27;s &quot;Prose Edda&quot; along with some explanation of its context.

The myth has also survived independently in modified forms in northern European folklore. &quot;Gróttasǫngr&quot; had social and political impact in Sweden during the 20th century as it was modernized in the form of &quot;Den nya Grottesången&quot; by Viktor Rydberg, which described conditions in factories using the mill of &quot;Grottasǫngr&quot; as a literary backdrop. 

==&quot;Poetic Edda&quot;==
Though not originally included in the &quot;Codex Regius&quot;, &quot;Gróttasǫngr&quot; is included in many later editions of the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;. &quot;Gróttasǫngr&quot; is the work song of two young slave girls bought in Sweden by the Danish King Frodi (cf. &quot;Fróði&quot; in the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;). The girls are brought to a magic grindstone to grind out wealth for the king and sing for his household.

The girls ask for rest from the grinding but are commanded to continue. Undaunted in their benevolence, the girls proceed to grind and sing, wishing wealth and happiness for the King. The King, however, is still not pleased and continues to order the girls to grind without interruption.

King Frodi is ignorant of their lineage and the girls reveal that they are descended from mountain-risar. The girls recount their past deeds, including moving a flat-topped mountain and revealing that they had actually created the grinding stone they are now chained to. They tell him that they had advanced against an army in Sweden and fought &quot;bearlike warriors&quot;, had &quot;broken shields&quot;, supported troops, and overthrown one prince while supporting another. They recount that they had become well known warriors.

The girls then reflect that they have now become cold and dirty slaves, relentlessly worked, and living a life of dull grinding. The girls sing that they are tired, and call to King Frodi to wake up so that he may hear them. They announce that an army is approaching, that Frodi will lose the wealth they&#x27;ve ground for him, that he will also lose the magic grindstone, and that the army will burn the settlement and overthrow Frodi&#x27;s throne in Lejre. They are grinding this army into existence via the magic stone. They then comment that they are &quot;not yet warmed by the blood of slaughtered men&quot;.

The girls continue to grind even harder and the shafts of the mill-frame snap. They then sing a prophecy of vengeance mentioning Hrólfr Kraki, Yrsa, Fróði and Halfdan:
Now filled with a great rage, the girls grind even harder until finally the grinding mechanism collapses and the magical stone splits in two. With the impending army soon to arrive, one of the girls finishes the song with:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left:2em&quot;&gt;
Frodi, we have ground to the point where we must stop,
now the ladies have had a full stint of milling!
&lt;/poem&gt;

==&quot;Prose Edda&quot;==
Snorri relates in the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; that Skjöldr ruled the country that we today call Denmark. Skjöldr had a son named Friðleifr who succeeded him on the throne. Friðleifr had a son who was named Fróði who became king after Friðleifr, and this was at the time when Caesar Augustus proclaimed peace on earth and Christ was born. The same peace ruled in Scandinavia, but there it was called &quot;Fróði&#x27;s peace&quot;. The North was so peaceful that no man hurt another, even if he met his father&#x27;s or his brother&#x27;s killer, free or tied. No man was a robber and a golden ring could rest on the moor of Jelling for a long time.

King Fróði visited Sweden and its king Fjölnir, and from Fjölnir he bought two enslaved gýgjar named Fenja and Menja who were big and strong. In Denmark, there was a pair of magical mill stones; the man who ground with them could ask them to produce anything he wished. However, they were so big that no man was strong enough to use them. This mill was called &quot;Grótti&quot; and it had been given to Fróði by Hengikjopt.

Fróði had Fenja and Menja tied to the mill and asked them to grind gold, peace and happiness for himself. Then he gave them neither rest nor sleep longer than the time of a song or the silence of the cuckoo. In revenge Fenja and Menja started to sing a song named the &quot;song of Grótti&quot; (the poem itself) and before they ended it, they had produced a host led by a sea-king named Mysing. Mysing attacked Fróði during the night, killed him, and left with rich booty. This was the end of the Fróði peace.

Mysing took Grótti as well as Fenja and Menja and asked them to grind salt. At midnight, they asked Mysing if he did not have salt enough, but he asked them to grind more. They only ground for a short while before the ships sank. A giant whirlpool (&quot;maelstrom&quot; from &quot;mal&quot; &quot;mill&quot; and &quot;ström&quot; &quot;stream&quot;) was formed as the sea started rushing through the center of the mill stone. Then the sea begun turning salt.

==Post-Christianisation folklore==
Modified forms of the tale are found as stories such as &quot;Why the Sea Is Salt&quot;, collected by Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe in their &quot;Norske Folkeeventyr&quot;.

In Orcadian and Shetlandic folklore, the are renamed &#x27;Grotti Finnie&#x27; and &#x27;Grotti Minnie&#x27; who are two witches that create a whirlpool in the Pentland Firth, named the Swelkie.

==Modern cultural references==
Viktor Rydberg&#x27;s apprehension of unregulated capitalism at the dawn of the industrial age is most fully expressed in his acclaimed poem &quot;Den nya Grottesången&quot; (&quot;The New Grotti Song&quot;) in which he delivered a fierce attack on the miserable working conditions in factories of the era, using the mill of &quot;Grottasöngr&quot; as his literary backdrop.

Grottasǫngr appears as part of Johannes V. Jensen&#x27;s novel &quot;The Fall of the King&quot;.
The author edited his prose text into a prose poem that was included in his first poetry collection published in 1906.
Jensen later reflected on the Grottasǫngr in his book &quot;Kvinden i Sagatiden&quot;.

The Raven Tower by Ann Leckie also draws inspiration from the Grottasǫngr in the character of the Strength and Patience of the Hill.

Verses of the poem were used for the song &quot;Grótti&quot; by French neofolk group Skáld in 2020.

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* Tolley, Clive (ed. and trans.), &quot;Gróttasǫngr: The Song of Grotti&quot;. Viking Society for Northern Research, 2008.

===External links===

*Gróttasǫngr in Old Norse
*Den nya Grottesången in Swedish from «Kulturformidlingen norrøne tekster og kvad» Norway.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="29" end="38" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084639" start="112" end="126" title="Old Norse poetry" label="Old Norse poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="175" end="186" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106244" start="252" end="264" title="Codex Regius" label="Codex Regius"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="333" end="349" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="363" end="373" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="487" end="504" title="northern European" label="northern European"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="505" end="513" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q432129" start="677" end="691" title="Viktor Rydberg" label="Viktor Rydberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106244" start="873" end="885" title="Codex Regius" label="Codex Regius"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="965" end="976" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="1632" end="1646" title="Jötunn" label="mountain-risar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689028" start="2530" end="2535" title="Lejre" label="Lejre"/>
<link wikidata="Q662533" start="2823" end="2835" title="Hrólfr Kraki" label="Hrólfr Kraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437950" start="2837" end="2841" title="Yrsa" label="Yrsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101151" start="2843" end="2848" title="Fróði" label="Fróði"/>
<link wikidata="Q47520069" start="2853" end="2860" title="Halfdan" label="Halfdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="3306" end="3316" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771470" start="3328" end="3335" title="Skjöldr" label="Skjöldr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503581" start="3406" end="3415" title="Friðleifr" label="Friðleifr"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101151" start="3483" end="3488" title="Fróði" label="Fróði"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="3552" end="3567" title="Caesar Augustus" label="Caesar Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933500" start="3682" end="3700" title="Fróði&amp;#x27;s Peace" label="Fróði&amp;#x27;s peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q835708" start="3901" end="3908" title="Jelling" label="Jelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400296" start="3966" end="3973" title="Fjölnir" label="Fjölnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="4015" end="4021" title="Jötunn" label="gýgjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568073" start="4038" end="4043" title="Menja" label="Menja"/>
<link wikidata="Q670985" start="4109" end="4119" title="mill stone" label="mill stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311920" start="4726" end="4734" title="sea-king" label="sea-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997920" start="5423" end="5442" title="Why the Sea Is Salt" label="Why the Sea Is Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q355485" start="5463" end="5488" title="Peter Christen Asbjørnsen" label="Peter Christen Asbjørnsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q470002" start="5493" end="5503" title="Jørgen Moe" label="Jørgen Moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026385" start="5519" end="5538" title="Norske Folkeeventyr" label="Norske Folkeeventyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q115290" start="5550" end="5558" title="Orcadians" label="Orcadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="5563" end="5573" title="Shetland" label="Shetlandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860233" start="5707" end="5721" title="Pentland Firth" label="Pentland Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q432129" start="5774" end="5788" title="Viktor Rydberg" label="Viktor Rydberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159552" start="6181" end="6199" title="Johannes V. Jensen" label="Johannes V. Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758876" start="6219" end="6239" title="The Fall of the King" label="The Fall of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q69566723" start="6454" end="6469" title="The Raven Tower" label="The Raven Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204354" start="6473" end="6483" title="Ann Leckie" label="Ann Leckie"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6652" end="6658" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q775614" start="6659" end="6666" title="neofolk" label="neofolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65158644" start="6673" end="6678" title="Skáld (band)" label="Skáld"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954499" wikidata="Q7447672" url="?curid=954499" title="Select committee (United Kingdom)">
<text>In British politics, parliamentary select committees are cross-party groups of MPs or Lords which investigate specific issues or scrutinise the work of the Government of the United Kingdom. 

They can be appointed from the House of Commons, from the House of Lords, or as a joint committee of Parliament drawn from both. Committees may be constituted as &quot;sessional&quot; committees – i.e. be near-permanent – or as &quot;ad-hoc&quot; committees with a specific deadline by which to complete their work, after which they cease to exist.

House of Commons select committees are generally responsible for overseeing the work of government departments and agencies, whereas Lords select committees look at general issues, such as the constitution or the economy. Select committees are also one of parliament&#x27;s mechanisms for holding the private sector to account.

Following the 2024 United Kingdom general election, most of the new chairs of the 26 select committees were elected in September 2024. 

Some English local authorities also have a select committee system, as part of their Overview and Scrutiny arrangements.

==How select committees work and governing rules==
Committees often open investigations, called inquiries, into topics within their remit. As part of these inquiries they gather information from government officials and interested people, groups, and organisations. At the end of inquiries they often publish a report with their findings. The government must issue a written response to each select committee report.

Select committees in the House of Commons are governed by the Standing Orders. The powers of departmental select committees are set out in standing order 152.

Political parties divide committee chair positions based on their number of seats in the House of Commons. Party managers negotiate which party chairs each committee. By tradition, the Public Accounts Committee is led by a member of the opposition party, while a member of the governing party leads the Treasury Select Committee. Committee membership reflects each party’s size in the House, and members are elected within their parties.

Typically, a departmental committee has 11 members, though some, like Public Accounts, are larger.

The Osmotherly Rules set out guidance on how civil servants should respond to parliamentary select committees.

Following general elections, chairs and members of select committees have to be reappointed.

Committees have no legal power to compel people to appear before them. Rupert Murdoch and Mike Ashley are two examples of witnesses who initially declined before agreeing to appear. Mark Zuckerberg, for example, declined to appear in front of a committee at all.

==Types of select committees==
===House of Commons select committees===
Following the dissolution of parliament that preceded the 2024 election, all select committees were disbanded. The House of Commons allocated which parties would hold each Chair in advance of the summer recess on 30 July 2024. Nominations for Chairs ran until 9 September. Ballots took place on 11 September.

==== Departmental select committees ====
==== Cross-cutting select committees ====
==== Internal select committees ====
===House of Lords select committees===

House of Lords select committees include:

* The Constitution Committee
* The Economic Affairs Committee
* The Science and Technology Committee (House of Lords)
* The Communications and Digital Committee

These committees run inquiries into and publish reports on topics within their remit.

==History==

Specialised committees of investigation existed within Parliament since the Tudor period. In the sixteenth century, committees revised bills and considered constitutional and religious questions.

The committees system was further developed during the mid-1960s by Richard Crossman as Leader of the House of Commons.

The modern system of departmental select committees in the UK came into being in 1979, following the recommendations of a 1978 Procedure Select Committee report. It recommended the appointment of a series of select committees covering all the main departments of state, with wide terms of reference, and with power to appoint specialist advisers as the committees deemed appropriate. It also suggested that committee members should be selected independently of the party whips, as chosen by the Select Committee of Selection. The fourteen new committees began working in 1980 after the 1979 general election.

Since then, Parliament has organised House of Commons committees into three main types:
* Departmental committees: Each committee scrutinises a specific government department. For example, the Education Select Committee watches over the Department for Education.
* Cross-cutting committees: These committees focus on broader topics that don’t belong to any single department. For example, the Science and Technology Select Committee, and Women and Equalities Select Committee.
* Domestic committees: These committees manage issues within Parliament itself, like procedures and standards.

In July 2005, the Administration Select Committee was created to replace five previous committees. It covers services in the House, including catering, the House of Commons Library, digital services, and visitor services.

Sometimes, committees from the House of Commons or joint standing committees (which include members of both Houses) review individual bills in detail. Most bills go to public bill committees. Before 2006, these were called standing committees.

In 2009, the Wright Committee was formed to improve the procedures and relevance of Parliament. Changes made based on the committee&#x27;s recommendations included limiting the number of members per committee to 11, requiring those members and chairs to be appointed to their positions by the House, and a reduction in the number of committees.

The Backbench Business Committee was created in 2010 as a non-ministerial committee to cover non-government business, following recommendations from the Reform the House of Commons report under the Wright Committee.

Since June 2010, most committee chairs are elected by the whole House. Before this, each party appointed members and chose chairs within the group.

==Impact and influence==
Select committees recommendations often focus on changes to government policy. One study estimates that 30–40% of select committee recommendations become policy.

==In popular culture==
A select committee evidence session is featured in season 3, episode 5 of &quot;Industry&quot;. In the episode, Robert is sent to represent Pierpoint as part of the committee&#x27;s inquiry into the collapse and bailout of Lumi, a green energy tech company.

A 2015 select committee inquiry into the Horizon computer system features in &quot;Mr Bates vs The Post Office&quot;.

== See also ==
*Parliamentary committees of the United Kingdom

==References==
==External links==
* How Parliament works: Committees UK Parliament
*UK Parliament: Committees 
*Democracywiki Unlock Democracy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q678363" start="3" end="19" title="British politics" label="British politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447671" start="21" end="51" title="parliamentary select committee" label="parliamentary select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="156" end="188" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="223" end="239" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="250" end="264" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081496" start="274" end="303" title="Joint committee of the Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="joint committee of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="735" end="747" title="British constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="885" end="921" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114075" start="1093" end="1114" title="Overview and Scrutiny" label="Overview and Scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1573" end="1589" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="1815" end="1829" title="whip (politics)" label="Party managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257298" start="1893" end="1918" title="Public Accounts Committee (United Kingdom)" label="Public Accounts Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241049" start="2011" end="2036" title="Treasury Select Committee" label="Treasury Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257298" start="2217" end="2232" title="Public Accounts Committee (United Kingdom)" label="Public Accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107229" start="2251" end="2267" title="Osmotherly Rules" label="Osmotherly Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="2524" end="2538" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q554077" start="2543" end="2554" title="Mike Ashley (businessman)" label="Mike Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q36215" start="2635" end="2650" title="Mark Zuckerberg" label="Mark Zuckerberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164091" start="3308" end="3330" title="Constitution Committee" label="Constitution Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333350" start="3337" end="3363" title="Economic Affairs Committee (House of Lords)" label="Economic Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433635" start="3370" end="3419" title="Science and Technology Committee (House of Lords)" label="Science and Technology Committee (House of Lords)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105503254" start="3426" end="3462" title="Communications Select Committee" label="Communications and Digital Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="3640" end="3652" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor period"/>
<link wikidata="Q328681" start="3829" end="3845" title="Richard Crossman" label="Richard Crossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636053" start="3849" end="3879" title="Leader of the House of Commons" label="Leader of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153025" start="4384" end="4406" title="Committee of Selection (House of Commons)" label="Committee of Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="4468" end="4489" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340923" start="4685" end="4711" title="Education Select Committee" label="Education Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612019" start="4729" end="4753" title="Department for Education" label="Department for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433639" start="4885" end="4924" title="Science and Technology Committee" label="Science and Technology Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052835" start="4930" end="4967" title="Women and Equalities Committee" label="Women and Equalities Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683419" start="5099" end="5130" title="Administration Committee" label="Administration Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226006" start="5237" end="5261" title="House of Commons Library" label="House of Commons Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="5438" end="5442" title="bill (proposed law)" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257706" start="5472" end="5493" title="public bill committee" label="public bill committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038195" start="5562" end="5578" title="Wright Committee" label="Wright Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839559" start="5899" end="5927" title="Backbench Business Committee" label="Backbench Business Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038195" start="6093" end="6109" title="Wright Committee" label="Wright Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047096" start="6552" end="6560" title="Industry (TV series)" label="Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q107287943" start="6772" end="6795" title="British Post Office scandal" label="Horizon computer system"/>
<link wikidata="Q123690397" start="6814" end="6841" title="Mr Bates vs The Post Office" label="Mr Bates vs The Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612046" start="6866" end="6912" title="Parliamentary committees of the United Kingdom" label="Parliamentary committees of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="6983" end="6996" title="UK Parliament" label="UK Parliament"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954508" wikidata="Q501778" url="?curid=954508" title="Translation studies">
<text>Translation studies is an academic interdiscipline dealing with the systematic study of the theory, description and application of translation, interpreting, and localization. As an interdiscipline, translation studies borrows much from the various fields of study that support translation. These include comparative literature, computer science, history, linguistics, philology, philosophy, semiotics, and terminology.

The term “translation studies” was coined by the Amsterdam-based American scholar James S. Holmes in his 1972 paper “The name and nature of translation studies” which is considered a foundational statement for the discipline. Writers in English occasionally use the term &quot;translatology&quot; (and less commonly &quot;traductology&quot;) to refer to translation studies, and the corresponding French term for the discipline is usually (as in the ). In the United States, there is a preference for the term &quot;translation and interpreting studies&quot; (as in the American Translation and Interpreting Studies Association), although European tradition includes interpreting within translation studies (as in the European Society for Translation Studies).

==History==
===Early studies===
Historically, translation studies has long been &quot;prescriptive&quot; (telling translators how to translate), to the point that discussions of translation that were not prescriptive were generally not considered to be about translation at all. When historians of translation studies trace early Western thought about translation, for example, they most often set the beginning at the renowned orator Cicero&#x27;s remarks on how he used translation from Greek to Latin to improve his oratorical abilities—an early description of what Jerome ended up calling sense-for-sense translation. The descriptive history of interpreters in Egypt provided by Herodotus several centuries earlier is typically not thought of as translation studies—presumably because it does not tell translators how to translate. In China, the discussion on how to translate originated with the translation of Buddhist sutras during the Han dynasty.

===Calls for an academic discipline===
In 1958, at the Fourth Congress of Slavists in Moscow, the debate between linguistic and literary approaches to translation reached a point where it was proposed that the best thing might be to have a separate science that was able to study all forms of translation, without being wholly within linguistics or wholly within literary studies. Within comparative literature, translation workshops were promoted in the 1960s in some American universities like the University of Iowa and Princeton.

During the 1950s and 1960s, systematic linguistic-oriented studies of translation began to appear. In 1958, the French linguists Jean-Paul Vinay and Jean Darbelnet carried out a contrastive comparison of French and English. In 1964, Eugene Nida published &quot;Toward a Science of Translating&quot;, a manual for Bible translation influenced to some extent by Harris&#x27;s transformational grammar. In 1965, J. C. Catford theorized translation from a linguistic perspective. In the 1960s and early 1970s, the Czech scholar Jiří Levý and the Slovak scholars Anton Popovič and František Miko worked on the stylistics of literary translation.

These initial steps toward research on literary translation were collected in James S. Holmes&#x27; paper at the Third International Congress of Applied Linguistics held in Copenhagen in 1972. In that paper, &quot;The name and nature of translation studies&quot;, Holmes asked for the consolidation of a separate discipline and proposed a classification of the field. A visual &quot;map&quot; of Holmes&#x27; proposal was later presented by Gideon Toury in his 1995 &quot;Descriptive Translation Studies and beyond&quot;.

Before the 1990s, translation scholars tended to form particular schools of thought, particularly within the prescriptive, descriptive and Skopos paradigms. Since the &quot;cultural turn&quot; in the 1990s, the discipline has tended to divide into separate fields of inquiry, where research projects run parallel to each other, borrowing methodologies from each other and from other academic disciplines.

==Schools of thought==
The main schools of thought on the level of research have tended to cluster around key theoretical concepts, most of which have become objects of debate.

===Equivalence===
Through to the 1950s and 1960s, discussions in translation studies tended to concern how best to attain &quot;equivalence&quot;. The term &quot;equivalence&quot; had two distinct meanings, corresponding to different schools of thought. In the Russian tradition, &quot;equivalence&quot; was usually a one-to-one correspondence between linguistic forms, or a pair of authorized technical terms or phrases, such that &quot;equivalence&quot; was opposed to a range of &quot;substitutions&quot;. However, in the French tradition of Vinay and Darbelnet, drawing on Bally, &quot;equivalence&quot; was the attainment of equal functional value, generally requiring &quot;changes&quot; in form. Catford&#x27;s notion of equivalence in 1965 was as in the French tradition. In the course of the 1970s, Russian theorists adopted the wider sense of &quot;equivalence&quot; as something &quot;resulting&quot; from linguistic transformations.

At about the same time, the &quot;Interpretive Theory of Translation&quot; introduced the notion of deverbalized sense into translation studies, drawing a distinction between word correspondences and sense equivalences, and showing the difference between dictionary definitions of words and phrases (word correspondences) and the sense of texts or fragments thereof in a given context (sense equivalences).

The discussions of equivalence accompanied typologies of translation solutions (also called &quot;procedures&quot;, &quot;techniques&quot; or &quot;strategies&quot;), as in Fedorov (1953) and Vinay and Darbelnet (1958). In 1958, Loh Dianyang&#x27;s &quot;Translation: Its Principles and Techniques&quot; (英汉翻译理论与技巧) drew on Fedorov and English linguistics to present a typology of translation solutions between Chinese and English.

In these traditions, discussions of the ways to attain equivalence have mostly been prescriptive and have been related to translator training.

===Descriptive translation studies===
Descriptive translation studies aims at building an empirical descriptive discipline, to fill one section of the Holmes map. The idea that scientific methodology could be applicable to cultural products had been developed by the Russian Formalists in the early years of the 20th century, and had been recovered by various researchers in comparative literature. It was now applied to literary translation. Part of this application was the theory of polysystems (Even-Zohar 1990) in which translated literature is seen as a sub-system of the receiving or target literary system. Gideon Toury bases his theory on the need to consider translations as &quot;facts of the target culture&quot; for the purposes of research. The concepts of &quot;manipulation&quot; and &quot;patronage&quot; have also been developed in relation to literary translations.

===Skopos theory===
Another discovery in translation theory can be dated from 1984 in Europe and the publication of two books in German: &quot;Foundation for a General Theory of Translation&quot; by Katharina Reiss (also written Reiß) and Hans Vermeer, and &quot;Translatorial Action&quot; (Translatorisches Handeln) by Justa Holz-Mänttäri. From these two came what is known as Skopos theory, which gives priority to the purpose to be fulfilled by the translation instead of prioritizing equivalence.

===Cultural translation===
The cultural turn meant still another step forward in the development of the discipline. It was sketched by Susan Bassnett and André Lefevere in &quot;Translation - History - Culture&quot;, and quickly represented by the exchanges between translation studies and other area studies and concepts: gender studies, cannibalism, post-colonialism or cultural studies, among others.

The concept of &quot;cultural translation&quot; largely ensues from Homi Bhabha&#x27;s reading of Salman Rushdie in &quot;The Location of Culture&quot;. Cultural translation is a concept used in cultural studies to denote the process of transformation, linguistic or otherwise, in a given culture. The concept uses linguistic translation as a tool or metaphor in analyzing the nature of transformation and interchange in cultures.

==Fields of inquiry==
===Translation history===
Translation history concerns the history of translators as a professional and social group, as well as the history of translations as indicators of the way cultures develop, interact and may die. Some principles for translation history have been proposed by Lieven D&#x27;hulst and Pym. Major projects in translation history have included the &quot;Oxford History of Literary Translation in English&quot; and &quot;Histoire des traductions en langue française&quot;.

Historical anthologies of translation theories have been compiled by Robinson (2002) for Western theories up to Nietzsche; by D&#x27;hulst (1990) for French theories, 1748–1847; by Santoyo (1987) for the Spanish tradition; by Edward Balcerzan (1977) for the Polish experience, 1440–1974; and by Cheung (2006) for Chinese.

===Sociologies of translation===
The sociology of translation includes the study of who translators are, what their forms of work are (workplace studies) and what data on translations can say about the movements of ideas between languages.

===Post-colonial translation studies===
Post-colonial studies look at translations between a metropolis and former colonies, or within complex former colonies. They radically question the assumption that translation occurs between cultures and languages that are radically separated.

===Gender studies===
Gender studies look at the sexuality of translators, at the gendered nature of the texts they translate, at the possibly gendered translation processes employed, and at the gendered metaphors used to describe translation. Pioneering studies are by Luise von Flotow, Sherry Simon and Keith Harvey. The effacement or inability to efface threatening forms of same-sex sexuality is a topic taken up, when for instance ancient writers are translated by Renaissance thinkers in a Christian context.

===Ethics===
In the field of ethics, much-discussed publications have been the essays of Antoine Berman and Lawrence Venuti that differ in some aspects but agree on the idea of emphasizing the differences between source and target language and culture when translating. Both are interested in how the &quot;cultural other [...] can best preserve [...] that otherness&quot;. In more recent studies, scholars have applied Emmanuel Levinas&#x27; philosophical work on ethics and subjectivity on this issue. As his publications have been interpreted in different ways, various conclusions on his concept of ethical responsibility have been drawn from this. Some have come to the assumption that the idea of translation itself could be ethically doubtful, while others receive it as a call for considering the relationship between author or text and translator as more interpersonal, thus making it an equal and reciprocal process.

Parallel to these studies, the general recognition of the translator&#x27;s responsibility has increased. More and more translators and interpreters are being seen as active participants in geopolitical conflicts, which raises the question of how to act ethically independent from their own identity or judgement. This leads to the conclusion that translating and interpreting cannot be considered solely as a process of language transfer, but also as socially and politically directed activities.

There is general agreement on the need for an ethical code of practice providing some guiding principles to reduce uncertainties and improve professionalism, as having been stated in other disciplines (for example military medical ethics or legal ethics). However, as there is still no clear understanding of the concept of ethics in this field, opinions about the particular appearance of such a code vary considerably.

===Audiovisual translation studies===
Audiovisual translation studies (AVT) is concerned with translation that takes place in audio and/or visual settings, such as the cinema, television, video games and also some live events such as opera performances. The common denominator for studies in this field is that translation is carried out on multiple semiotic systems, as the translated texts (so-called polysemiotic texts) have messages that are conveyed through more than one semiotic channel, i.e. not just through the written or spoken word, but also via sound and/or images. The main translation modes under study are subtitling, film dubbing and voice-over, but also surtitling for the opera and theatre.

Media accessibility studies is often considered a part of this field as well, with audio description for the blind and partially sighted and subtitles for the deaf or hard-of-hearing being the main objects of study. The various conditions and constraints imposed by the different media forms and translation modes, which influence how translation is carried out, are often at the heart of most studies of the product or process of AVT. Many researchers in the field of AVT Studies are organized in the European Association for Studies in Screen Translation, as are many practitioners in the field.

===Non-professional translation===
Non-professional translation refers to the translation activities performed by translators who are not working professionally, usually in ways made possible by the Internet. These practices have mushroomed with the recent democratization of technology and the popularization of the Internet. Volunteer translation initiatives have emerged all around the world, and deal with the translations of various types of written and multimedia products.

Normally, it is not required for volunteers to have been trained in translation, but trained translators could also participate, such as the case of Translators without Borders.

Depending on the feature that each scholar considers the most important, different terms have been used to label &quot;non-professional translation&quot;. O&#x27;Hagan has used &quot;user-generated translation&quot;, &quot;fan translation&quot; and &quot;community translation&quot;. Fernández-Costales and Jiménez-Crespo prefer &quot;collaborative translation&quot;, while Pérez-González labels it &quot;amateur subtitling&quot;. Pym proposes that the fundamental difference between this type of translation and professional translation relies on monetary reward, and he suggests it should be called &quot;volunteer translation&quot;.

Some of the most popular fan-controlled non-professional translation practices are fansubbing, fandubbing, ROM hacking or fan translation of video games, and scanlation. These practices are mostly supported by a strong and consolidated fan base, although larger non-professional translation projects normally apply crowdsourcing models and are controlled by companies or organizations. Since 2008, &quot;Facebook&quot; has used crowdsourcing to have its website translated by its users and TED conference has set up the open translation project TED Translators in which volunteers use the Amara platform to create subtitles online for TED talks.

===Localization===
Studies of localization concern the way the contemporary language industries translate and adapt (&quot;localize&quot;) technical texts across languages, tailoring them for a specific &quot;locale&quot; (a target location defined by language variety and various cultural parameters). Localization usually concerns software, product documentation, websites and video games, where the technological component is key.

A key concept in localization is internationalization, in which the start product is stripped of its culture-specific features in such a way that it can be simultaneously localized into several languages.

===Translator education===
The field refers to the set of pedagogical approaches used by academic educators to teach translation, train translators, and endeavor to develop the translation discipline thoroughly. Moreover, translation learners face many difficulties in trying to come up with the right equivalence of a particular source text. For these reasons, translation education is an important field of study that encompasses a number of questions to be answered in research.

===Interpreting Studies===
The discipline of interpreting studies is often referred to as the sister of translation studies. This is due to the similarities between the two disciplines, consisting in the transfer of ideas from one language into another. Indeed, interpreting as an activity was long seen as a specialized form of translation, before scientifically founded interpreting studies emancipated gradually from translation studies in the second half of the 20th century. While they were strongly oriented towards the theoretic framework of translation studies, interpreting studies have always been concentrating on the practical and pedagogical aspect of the activity. This led to the steady emancipation of the discipline and the consecutive development of a separate theoretical framework based—as are translation studies—on interdisciplinary premises. Interpreting studies have developed several approaches and undergone various paradigm shifts, leading to the most recent surge of sociological studies of interpreters and their work(ing conditions).

===Metaphor===
Metaphorical usage can challenge translators striving to balance the idiomatic with a natural style; and translation can unmask hidden metaphors.
The study of translation &quot;can reveal new insights into the relationship between images and culture&quot;.

===Cognition and process studies===
===Translation technologies===

===Children’s Literature Translation Studies (CLTS)===
The study of translating for younger audiences constitutes a relatively young research field that has developed profoundly in the four decades, ever since Göte Klingberg, Swedish researcher and pedagogue, organized an International Research in Children’s Literature (IRSCL) conference in Södertälje in Sweden 1976 on the translation of children’s literature. Since then, the field has attempted to build its own research area and to gain independence and recognition from other fields. Indeed, children’s literature had itself suffered from low prestige globally and its combination with translation studies had made it considered a minor research interest in disciplines of greater standing at the time, such as comparative literature, linguistics and even translation studies. 
 However, due to the recent economic success of children’s and young adult literature, the establishment of international literary prizes like the Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award (ALMA), and the existence of a large number of institutions such as IRSCL (International Research Society for Children’s Literature), in addition to IBBY (International Board on Books for Young People), established scientific research/journals (&quot;The Lion and the Unicorn: A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature&quot;, Hopkins Press or &quot;Barnboken&quot;, The Swedish Institute for Children’s Books), as well as courses in children’s literature at the university level, children’s literature has gained enough prestige since the beginning of the century to be considered its own discipline. 

 Translation studies is also a relatively new and established scientific discipline, having been grouped together with linguistics or the study of literature after World War II. Despite the seminal work of Zohar Shavit (1986), who studied children’s literature through the lens of polysystem theory, children’s literature only began to get traction in translation studies around the turn of the century. According to Borodo, “it was not before 2000 that the term “children’s literature translation studies” (CLTS) seems to have first appeared in [an] article by Fernández López (cited in Borodo 2017:36). At the beginning of the 2000s, the field grew fast, but still, few researchers identified with this field, as the discipline was not distinct (See Borodo’s Children’s Literature Translation Studies survey from 2007 in Borodo 2017:40). At this point things picked up with the publication of some fundamental books for the discipline such as Riita Oittinen’s &quot;Translating for Children&quot; (2000) and Gillian Lathey’s &quot;The Translation of Children’s Literature. A Reader&quot; (2006). Then, the discipline finally got its own entries in, e.g., &quot;The Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies&quot; (2009) by Lathey, &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies&quot; (2010) by Alvstad, then (2013) by O’Sullivan, and much later in &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Literary Translation&quot; (2018) by Alvstad – showing a recognition of the intersection between those two disciplines. 
 Some international conferences on translation and children’s literature were organized: in 2004 in Brussels there was “Children’s Literature in Translation: Challenges and Strategies”; in 2005 in London, “No Child is an Island: The Case of Children’s Books in Translation” (IBBY- International Board on Books for Young People); in 2012 in London “Crossing Boundaries: Translations and Migrations’ (IBBY) and in Brussels and Antwerp in 2017 by the Center of Reception Studies (CERES): “Translation Studies and Children’s Literature” (KU Leuven/Antwerp University), which resulted in a notable publication &quot;Children’s Literature in Translation, Texts and Contexts&quot; (2020) by Jan van Coillie and Jack McMartin. This publication won the IRSCL Edited Book Award 2021, providing official recognition of CLTS. 
 The pandemic put a stop to international events meeting face-to-face, but to compensate for the need of scholars to meet and interact, Pilar Alderete Diez from the University of Galway (IR) with the support of Owen Harrington from Heriot-Watt University (UK) created the Children in Translation Network (CITN) in 2021 and a webinar series on translation studies and children’s literature. The success was immediate, providing evidence of the interest in the discipline, and gathering more than 150 participants from 21 different countries.
The most recent international conference in CLTS was organized 2024 The Institute of Interpreting and Translation Studies (TÖI) of Stockholm University in Sweden under the banner of “New Voices in Children’s Literature in Translation: Culture, Power and Transnationalism”. The conference was held 22-23 August 2024 in Stockholm in Sweden, and around 120 persons attended from around 40 different countries with more than 80 presentations in two days.
 As attested by the number of scientific articles/books in this specific area (e.g., 17,400 results on Google Scholar for the period 2017-2023; 3,338 results on EBSCO host for the same period), the creation of courses at the university level devoted solely to translation and children’s literature, the number of theses and dissertations being defended in this area, recent international conferences and networks like CITN identifying the growing interest for this discipline.

==Future prospects==
Translation studies has developed alongside the growth in translation schools and courses at the university level. In 1995, a study of 60 countries revealed there were 250 bodies at university level offering courses in translation or interpreting. In 2013, the same database listed 501 translator-training institutions. Accordingly, there has been a growth in conferences on translation, translation journals and translation-related publications. The visibility acquired by translation has also led to the development of national and international associations of translation studies. Ten of these associations formed the International Network of Translation and Interpreting Studies Associations in September 2016.

The growing variety of paradigms is mentioned as one of the possible sources of conflict in the discipline. As early as 1999, the conceptual gap between non-essentialist and empirical approaches came up for debate at the Vic Forum on Training Translators and Interpreters: New Directions for the Millennium. The discussants, Rosemary Arrojo and Andrew Chesterman, explicitly sought common shared ground for both approaches.

Interdisciplinarity has made the creation of new paradigms possible, as most of the developed theories grew from contact with other disciplines like linguistics, comparative literature, cultural studies, philosophy, sociology or historiography. At the same time, it might have provoked the fragmentation of translation studies as a discipline on its own right.

A second source of conflict rises from the breach between theory and practice. As the prescriptivism of the earlier studies gives room to descriptivism and theorization, professionals see less applicability of the studies. At the same time, university research assessment places little if any importance on translation practice.

Translation studies has shown a tendency to broaden its fields of inquiry, and this trend may be expected to continue. This particularly concerns extensions into adaptation studies, intralingual translation, translation between semiotic systems (image to text to music, for example), and translation as the form of all interpretation and thus of all understanding, as suggested in Roman Jakobson&#x27;s work, &quot;On Linguistic Aspects of Translation&quot;.

==See also==
*European Society for Translation Studies
*International Doctorate in Translation Studies
*Language interpretation
*Skopos theory
*Translation
*Translation criticism
*Translation project
*Translation scholars
*Post-translation studies

==References==

Alvstad, Cecilia. 2010. Children’s literature and translation. In: &quot;Handbook of Translation Studies&quot; 1: 22-27. 
Alvstad, Cecilia. 2018. Children&#x27;s literature and translation. In &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Literary Translation&quot;, Van Wyke, B. &amp; Washbourne, K. (red.) London: Routledge. S.159-180. 
Borodo, Michal. 2017. &quot;Translation, Globalization and Younger Audiences: The Situation in Poland&quot;. Oxford: Peter Lang
Children in Translation network (CITN). website: https://childrenintranslation.wordpress.com/ 
Even-Zohar, Itamar, 1990. Polysystem Studies. &quot;Poetics Today&quot; special issue, Durham: Duke University Press, 11:1. 
Klingberg, Göte (red.). 1978 (1976). &quot;Children&#x27;s Books in Translation - The Situation and the Problems: Proceedings of the Third Symposium of the International Research Society for Children&#x27;s Literature&quot;, held at Södertälje, August 26-29, 1976. International Research Society for Children’s Literature: IRSCL. Stockholm: Almqvist &amp; Wiksell international.
Lathey, Gillian (red.). 2006. &quot;The Translation of Children&#x27;s Literature: A Reader&quot;. Clevedon, [England]: Multilingual Matters
Lathey, Gillian. 2009. &quot;Children’s literature&quot;. In: Baker, Mona &amp; Saldanha (red.) The Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies. London: Routledge. 31-33
Oittinen, Riitta. 2000. &quot;Translating for Children&quot;. New York: Garland
O’Sullivan, Emer. 2013. Children’s literature and translation studies. &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies&quot;. Abingdon: Routledge. 451-463
Shavit, Zohar, 1986. &quot;Poetics of Children’s Literature&quot;. Athens &amp; London: University of Georgia Press. 

Homepages:
New voices in children’s literature. www.tolk.su.se/CLTS, Stockholm University, 22-23 August 2024
Children in Translation Network (CITN): https://mariadelpilaralderetediez.wordpress.com/

==Further reading==
* Baker, Mona ed. (2001). &quot;Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies&quot;. New York and London: Routledge.
* Bassnett, Susan (1980/1991/2002). &quot;Translation Studies&quot;. New York and London: Routledge.
* Benjamin, Walter (1923). &quot;The Task of the Translator&quot;, an introduction to the translation of &quot;Les fleurs du mal&quot; by Baudelaire.
* Berman, Antoine (1991). &quot;La traduction et la lettre ou l&#x27;auberge du lointain&quot;. Paris: Seuil.
* Berman, Antoine (1994). &quot;Pour une critique des traductions: John Donne&quot;, Paris: Gallimard.
* Gentzler, Edwin (2001). &quot;Contemporary Translation Theories&quot;. 2nd Ed. London: Routledge.
* House, Juliane (1997) &quot;A Model for Translation Quality Assessment&quot;. Germany
* Munday, Jeremy (2008). &quot;Introducing Translation Studies&quot;. London and New York: Routledge
* Pym, Anthony (2010/2014). &quot;Exploring Translation Theories&quot;. London: Routledge.
* Robinson, Douglas. (1991). &quot;The Translator’s Turn&quot;. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
* Steiner, George (1975). &quot;After Babel&quot;. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
* Venuti, Lawrence (2008). &quot;The Translator&#x27;s Invisibility: A History of Translation&quot; (2nd ed.). Abingdon, Oxon, U.K.: Routledge.
* Venuti, Lawrence. (2012). &quot;The Translation Studies Reader&quot;, 3rd ed. London: Routledge.
* Sandeep Sharma (2017). &quot;Translation and Translation Studies&quot;, 2nd ed. India: ICDEOL. https://www.academia.edu/37029973/Translation_Studies_2nd_Edition_

==External links==
* American Translation and Interpreting Studies Association
* Bibliography for newcomers to translation &amp; interpreting studies
* European Association for Studies in Screen Translation
* Indonesian Translation and Interpreting Studies Association
* European Society for Translation Studies
* International Association for Translation and Intercultural Studies
* Société Française de Traductologie
* 4 Practical Reasons to Use a Professional Translation Service
* Translation and Interpreting Services</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q501778" start="0" end="19" title="Translation studies" label="Translation studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16061764" start="35" end="50" title="interdiscipline" label="interdiscipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="131" end="142" title="translation" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="144" end="156" title="interpreting" label="interpreting"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543" start="162" end="174" title="Language localisation" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q834903" start="305" end="327" title="comparative literature" label="comparative literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="329" end="345" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="347" end="354" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="356" end="367" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="369" end="378" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="380" end="390" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="392" end="401" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725664" start="407" end="418" title="terminology" label="terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680568" start="503" end="518" title="James S. Holmes" label="James S. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q501778" start="698" end="711" title="Translation studies" label="translatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q501778" start="743" end="755" title="Translation studies" label="traductology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413210" start="1139" end="1179" title="European Society for Translation Studies" label="European Society for Translation Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1618" end="1624" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="1752" end="1758" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450967" start="1776" end="1803" title="sense-for-sense translation" label="sense-for-sense translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="1866" end="1875" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2022" end="2027" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100951" start="2047" end="2063" title="Chinese translation theory" label="how to translate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515193" start="2099" end="2114" title="Silk Road transmission of Buddhism" label="Buddhist sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="2126" end="2137" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="2640" end="2658" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2663" end="2672" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685150" start="2804" end="2819" title="Jean-Paul Vinay" label="Jean-Paul Vinay"/>
<link wikidata="Q716492" start="2908" end="2919" title="Eugene Nida" label="Eugene Nida"/>
<link wikidata="Q86860" start="2988" end="3005" title="Bible translation" label="Bible translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189047" start="3035" end="3041" title="Zellig Harris" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411840" start="3049" end="3073" title="transformational grammar" label="transformational grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981156" start="3084" end="3097" title="J. C. Catford" label="J. C. Catford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689801" start="3199" end="3208" title="Jiří Levý" label="Jiří Levý"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995958" start="3233" end="3246" title="Anton Popovič" label="Anton Popovič"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="3490" end="3500" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404865" start="3758" end="3770" title="Gideon Toury" label="Gideon Toury"/>
<link wikidata="Q13236" start="5001" end="5006" title="Charles Bally" label="Bally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981156" start="5127" end="5134" title="J. C. Catford" label="Catford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5341" end="5366" title="linguistic transformation" label="linguistic transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404053" start="5404" end="5438" title="The Interpretive Theory of Translation" label="Interpretive Theory of Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q834903" start="6730" end="6752" title="comparative literature" label="comparative literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q109330811" start="6831" end="6852" title="theory of polysystems" label="theory of polysystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376140" start="7440" end="7455" title="Katharina Reiss" label="Katharina Reiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q947921" start="7480" end="7492" title="Hans Vermeer" label="Hans Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488070" start="7619" end="7632" title="Skopos theory" label="Skopos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890502" start="7878" end="7892" title="Susan Bassnett" label="Susan Bassnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616472" start="7897" end="7911" title="André Lefevere" label="André Lefevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662673" start="8066" end="8080" title="gender studies" label="gender studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193419" start="8169" end="8189" title="cultural translation" label="cultural translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q325741" start="8216" end="8227" title="Homi K. Bhabha" label="Homi Bhabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="8246" end="8260" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143546" start="8343" end="8359" title="cultural studies" label="cultural studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="8437" end="8444" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773311" start="8910" end="8913" title="Anthony Pym" label="Pym"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301940" start="9165" end="9173" title="Douglas Robinson (academic)" label="Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719927" start="9322" end="9338" title="Edward Balcerzan" label="Edward Balcerzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20273477" start="9391" end="9397" title="Martha Cheung" label="Cheung"/>
<link wikidata="Q15434402" start="10232" end="10244" title="Sherry Simon" label="Sherry Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384842" start="10549" end="10563" title="Antoine Berman" label="Antoine Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778254" start="10568" end="10583" title="Lawrence Venuti" label="Lawrence Venuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q153034" start="10880" end="10896" title="Emmanuel Levinas" label="Emmanuel Levinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="11286" end="11292" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11305" end="11315" title="Translation#Translators" label="translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501364" start="11809" end="11826" title="language transfer" label="language transfer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11941" end="11957" title="Ethical code#Code of practice (professional ethics)" label="code of practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857699" start="12101" end="12124" title="military medical ethics" label="military medical ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655952" start="12128" end="12140" title="legal ethics" label="legal ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="12211" end="12217" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934797" start="12347" end="12370" title="Multimedia translation" label="Audiovisual translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="12659" end="12667" title="semiotic" label="semiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204028" start="12931" end="12941" title="subtitling" label="subtitling"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="12943" end="12955" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="film dubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="12960" end="12970" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q334058" start="12981" end="12991" title="surtitling" label="surtitling"/>
<link wikidata="Q653542" start="13103" end="13156" title="Audio description" label="audio description for the blind and partially sighted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13161" end="13202" title="subtitling#Subtitles for the deaf or hard-of-hearing (SDH)" label="subtitles for the deaf or hard-of-hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255903" start="13876" end="13905" title="democratization of technology" label="democratization of technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002660" start="14502" end="14517" title="fan translation" label="fan translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q506787" start="14999" end="15009" title="fansubbing" label="fansubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395505" start="15011" end="15021" title="fandubbing" label="fandubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204356" start="15023" end="15034" title="ROM hacking" label="ROM hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q844236" start="15038" end="15068" title="fan translation of video games" label="fan translation of video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q557923" start="15074" end="15084" title="scanlation" label="scanlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="15231" end="15244" title="crowdsourcing" label="crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="15320" end="15328" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q189021" start="15406" end="15420" title="TED conference" label="TED conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543" start="15593" end="15605" title="language localization" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202471" start="15772" end="15778" title="Locale (computer software)" label="locale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519945" start="15942" end="15953" title="Game localization" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q41271" start="16031" end="16051" title="localization and internationalization" label="internationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="17767" end="17775" title="Metaphor" label="Metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18303" end="18317" title=":sv:G%C3%B6te Klingberg" label="Göte Klingberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q430035" start="19075" end="19112" title="Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award" label="Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award (ALMA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947571" start="24591" end="24608" title="Andrew Chesterman" label="Andrew Chesterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091038" start="25778" end="25814" title="On Linguistic Aspects of Translation" label="On Linguistic Aspects of Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413210" start="25837" end="25877" title="European Society for Translation Studies" label="European Society for Translation Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q48967459" start="25879" end="25925" title="International Doctorate in Translation Studies" label="International Doctorate in Translation Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="25927" end="25950" title="Language interpretation" label="Language interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488070" start="25952" end="25965" title="Skopos theory" label="Skopos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="25967" end="25978" title="Translation" label="Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878612" start="25980" end="26001" title="Translation criticism" label="Translation criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14866035" start="26003" end="26022" title="Translation project" label="Translation project"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26024" end="26044" title=":Category:Translation scholars" label="Translation scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q119348104" start="26046" end="26070" title="Post-translation studies" label="Post-translation studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q603543" start="28032" end="28043" title="Mona Baker" label="Baker, Mona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890502" start="28149" end="28164" title="Susan Bassnett" label="Bassnett, Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="28250" end="28266" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Benjamin, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q216578" start="28359" end="28376" title="Les fleurs du mal" label="Les fleurs du mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="28386" end="28396" title="Baudelaire" label="Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384842" start="28400" end="28415" title="Antoine Berman" label="Berman, Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935856" start="28430" end="28486" title="La traduction et la lettre ou l&amp;#x27;auberge du lointain" label="La traduction et la lettre ou l&amp;#x27;auberge du lointain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384842" start="28510" end="28525" title="Antoine Berman" label="Berman, Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28540" end="28585" title="Pour une critique des traductions: John Donne" label="Pour une critique des traductions: John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346442" start="28613" end="28628" title="Edwin Gentzler" label="Gentzler, Edwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307802" start="28713" end="28727" title="Juliane House" label="House, Juliane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773311" start="28902" end="28914" title="Anthony Pym" label="Pym, Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301940" start="28993" end="29010" title="Douglas Robinson (academic)" label="Robinson, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q453288" start="29111" end="29126" title="George Steiner" label="Steiner, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690472" start="29141" end="29152" title="After Babel" label="After Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778254" start="29208" end="29224" title="Lawrence Venuti" label="Venuti, Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778254" start="29352" end="29368" title="Lawrence Venuti" label="Venuti, Lawrence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954510" wikidata="Q8021445" url="?curid=954510" title="Willie Crawford">
<text>Willie Murphy Crawford (September 7, 1946 – August 27, 2004) was an American professional baseball outfielder. He played in the major leagues with the Los Angeles Dodgers (1964–1975), St. Louis Cardinals (1976), Houston Astros (1977) and Oakland Athletics (1977). Crawford was born in Los Angeles, California. He batted and threw left-handed, and was the father of UCLA football player Willie Crawford who graduated from Beverly Hills High School in 1988.

At Fremont High School in Los Angeles, Crawford was All-City in both football (1963) and baseball. Able to run 100 yards in 9.7 seconds, he was a highly recruited to play college football as a running back. Al Campanis signed Crawford for the Dodgers for $100,000 two days after he graduated from high school in 1964. Because of the Bonus Rule in existence at the time, Crawford had to play for the Dodgers&#x27; major league team in both 1964 and 1965.

As a major league baseball player, defensively, he played in a shallow manner, so as to cut down on potential Texas Leaguers. Crawford&#x27;s strong arm was able to cut down ambitious baserunners. Also, he was able to get a good jump on the ball and used his full speed to track down deep fly balls.

==Career==
Crawford debuted on September 16, 1964, at the age of 18. As a rookie, he batted .313 (5-for-16) with three runs, one double, and stole a base. He had a pinch-hit single in Game 1 of the 1965 World Series. The Dodgers lost that game, although in seven games they defeated the Minnesota Twins in the Series.

On April 7, 1970, Reds pitcher Gary Nolan defeated the Dodgers, 4–0, on a 2-hitter. Both hits were by Crawford, in the 4th and 9th innings.

In his best season, 1973, he hit .295, with 14 home runs and 66 runs batted in, playing in 145 games. In 1974, after hitting .295 again with 11 home runs and 61 runs batted in during the season, he hit .333 and belted a home run against Oakland in the World Series.

Crawford played for the Dodgers through the end of the 1975 season, compiling a .268 average, with 74 home runs and 335 runs batted in during 989 games. He was traded to the St. Louis Cardinals in March 1976, where he hit .304 in 120 games with nine home runs and 50 runs batted in. He was traded again after the 1976 season. The Cardinals sent Crawford to the San Francisco Giants. He never appeared in a regular-season game with the Giants, who dealt him along with Rob Sperring to the Astros for Rob Andrews and cash during spring training on March 26, 1977. He played 42 games for the Astros and 59 games for Oakland Athletics that season, his last in the major leagues.

During his 12-year career, Crawford appeared in 1,210 games and had a .268 batting average with 86 home runs and 419 runs batted in. His career numbers included 507 runs, 152 doubles, 35 triples, 47 stolen bases, and 431 walks for a .349 on-base percentage. His fielding percentage was .975 at all three outfield positions.

At age 57, Willie Crawford died at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, apparently of kidney disease. He was buried in the Forest Lawn – Hollywood Hills Cemetery.

==References==
==External links==

* Helms Athletic Foundation-Football 1963
* Seventeen-year old Willie Crawford, signing his baseball contract with Los Angeles Dodgers scout Al Campanis, 1964, in Los Angeles Times Photographic Archive (Collection 1429). UCLA Library Special Collections, Charles E. Young Research Library, University of California, Los Angeles.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8021445" start="0" end="22" title="Willie Crawford" label="Willie Murphy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142885" start="99" end="109" title="outfielder" label="outfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="151" end="170" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="184" end="203" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="212" end="226" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="238" end="255" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="285" end="308" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864004" start="365" end="378" title="UCLA Bruins football" label="UCLA football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185037" start="421" end="446" title="Beverly Hills High School" label="Beverly Hills High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224415" start="460" end="479" title="John C. Fremont High School" label="Fremont High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="650" end="662" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829309" start="664" end="675" title="Al Campanis" label="Al Campanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942663" start="790" end="800" title="Bonus rule" label="Bonus Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q174493" start="1096" end="1106" title="baserunner" label="baserunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455523" start="1201" end="1209" title="Batted ball" label="fly ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373320" start="1287" end="1293" title="rookie (baseball)" label="rookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="1298" end="1304" title="Batting average (baseball)" label="batted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="1332" end="1336" title="Run (baseball statistics)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194630" start="1342" end="1348" title="Double (baseball)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="1354" end="1359" title="Stolen base" label="stole"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="1416" end="1428" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="1500" end="1515" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="1550" end="1554" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="1555" end="1562" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525665" start="1563" end="1573" title="Gary Nolan (baseball)" label="Gary Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="1720" end="1728" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="1737" end="1751" title="runs batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q892516" start="1925" end="1937" title="1974 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="2301" end="2321" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340572" start="2408" end="2420" title="Rob Sperring" label="Rob Sperring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577662" start="2428" end="2434" title="1977 Houston Astros season" label="Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339946" start="2439" end="2450" title="Rob Andrews (baseball)" label="Rob Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="2467" end="2482" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="2781" end="2785" title="Run (baseball statistics)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q581390" start="2803" end="2810" title="Triple (baseball)" label="triples"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="2837" end="2842" title="Base on balls" label="walks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154654" start="2854" end="2872" title="on-base percentage" label="on-base percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q859741" start="2878" end="2897" title="fielding percentage" label="fielding percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052562" start="2976" end="3003" title="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center" label="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="3034" end="3048" title="kidney disease" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302545" start="3071" end="3109" title="Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills)" label="Forest Lawn – Hollywood Hills Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="3262" end="3281" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829309" start="3288" end="3299" title="Al Campanis" label="Al Campanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="3310" end="3327" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077208" start="3402" end="3435" title="Charles E. Young Research Library" label="Charles E. Young Research Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="3437" end="3474" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954515" wikidata="Q39029" url="?curid=954515" title=".bg">
<text>.bg is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) in the Domain Name System of the Internet for Bulgaria. It is currently operated by Register.BG.

The .bg domain name registry was first established in 1991 by Bulgarian internet service provider Digital Systems. As the country&#x27;s digital landscape evolved, the responsibility for domain registration and management transitioned in 2001 to Register.BG, a newly formed entity dedicated to overseeing the .bg domain space.

During the initial years, the .bg registry underwent significant transformations. Initially, domain registration and support were entirely free for the first seven years, with an open registration model available for the first four. Despite this accessibility, fewer than 1,000 domain names were registered during that time. These early years were marked by challenges such as low internet adoption in business and government, limited public engagement, and an overall lack of digital infrastructure—all compounded by a prolonged economic downturn.

.bg domains can be registered by European Union citizens, companies or foreign companies that have registered branches or commercial representatives in Bulgaria. The price of domain registration is €30 per year (€36 including VAT). 

Until mid-2006, the price was a one-time registration fee of US$50 plus US$50 per year (total of US$120 including VAT for the first year). For local standards this was a very high price, and many Bulgarian sites were registered under .com (esp -bg.com), .org, or .net domains, as the registration costs were significantly lower (US$8–12 per year) and less of a bureaucratic hassle.

From August 25, 2008, Register.BG simplified the procedures, allowing the registration of domain names in the .bg zone without providing documented grounds (trademarks, company names) for the name. Eventual disputes are to be solved via the newly established Arbitration committee.

Since September 18, 2006, Register.bg proposes new, third-level domains in the a.bg, b.bg, etc., subdomains (a Latin letter or a digit +.bg), lower cost (€12/year incl. VAT), with less restrictions and no dispute resolution. They are targeted mainly at private individuals.

The domain has been enabled with Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC) since October 2007.

On September 5, 2009, Register.bg started accepting second- and third-level domain names in Cyrillic with letters found in the Bulgarian language only.

== See also ==
*.бг

== References ==
== External links ==
* IANA .bg whois information
* Register.bg
* Whois service</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39029" start="0" end="3" title=".bg" label=".bg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="11" end="40" title="country code top-level domain" label="country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="56" end="74" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="82" end="90" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="95" end="103" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="133" end="144" title="Register.BG" label="Register.BG"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="1251" end="1254" title="VAT" label="VAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q159371" start="1493" end="1497" title=".com" label=".com"/>
<link wikidata="Q41609" start="2233" end="2271" title="Domain Name System Security Extensions" label="Domain Name System Security Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="2394" end="2402" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q140775" start="2471" end="2474" title=".бг" label=".бг"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954522" wikidata="Q38900" url="?curid=954522" title=".cn">
<text>.cn is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Introduced on 28 November 1990, the domain is administered by China Internet Network Information Center, a public institution affiliated with the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. The domain is the largest ccTLD in the world.

The Chinese script internationalized country codes are &quot;&quot; (&quot;China&quot; in Simplified Chinese) and &quot;&quot; (&quot;China&quot; in Traditional Chinese). Entities connected to Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan typically use .hk, .mo, and .tw, respectively, despite the availability of corresponding second-level domains under .cn for those regions.

==Second-level domains==
===Generic second-level domains===
According to the &quot;China Internet Domain Name System&quot; published by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, there are 9 generic second-level domains, two of which are internationalized:

* &quot;ac&quot;.cn : Scientific research institutions
* &quot;com&quot;.cn : Industrial, commercial, financial, and other enterprises
* &quot;edu&quot;.cn : Education institutions &quot;(registration restricted)&quot;
* &quot;gov&quot;.cn : Chinese government organizations &quot;(registration restricted)&quot;
* &quot;mil&quot;.cn : Chinese national defense organizations &quot;(registration restricted)&quot;
* &quot;net&quot;.cn : Organizations providing Internet services
* &quot;org&quot;.cn : Not-for-profit organizations
* .cn : Party and government services &quot;(registration restricted)&quot;
* .cn : Not-for-profit organizations &quot;(non-profit organization registration required)&quot;

===Second-level domains of Administrative Divisions===
The two-letter abbreviations correlate with ISO 3166-2 &quot;Codes for the representation of names of countries and their subdivisions—Part 2: Country subdivision code&quot; (adapted locally as National Standard GB/T 2659.2). According to the &quot;China Internet Domain Name System&quot; published by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, there are 34 administrative division second-level domains:
* &quot;ah&quot;.cn : Anhui Province
* &quot;bj&quot;.cn : Beijing Municipality
* &quot;cq&quot;.cn : Chongqing Municipality
* &quot;fj&quot;.cn : Fujian Province
* &quot;gd&quot;.cn : Guangdong Province
* &quot;gs&quot;.cn : Gansu Province
* &quot;gz&quot;.cn : Guizhou Province
* &quot;gx&quot;.cn : Guangxi Province
* &quot;ha&quot;.cn : Henan Province
* &quot;hb&quot;.cn : Hubei Province
* &quot;he&quot;.cn : Hebei Province
* &quot;hi&quot;.cn : Hainan Province
* &quot;hk&quot;.cn : Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
* &quot;hl&quot;.cn : Heilongjiang Province
* &quot;hn&quot;.cn : Hunan Province
* &quot;jl&quot;.cn : Jilin Province
* &quot;js&quot;.cn : Jiangsu Province
* &quot;jx&quot;.cn : Jiangxi Province
* &quot;ln&quot;.cn : Liaoning Province
* &quot;mo&quot;.cn : Macao Special Administrative Region
* &quot;nm&quot;.cn : Nei Mongol Autonomous Region
* &quot;nx&quot;.cn : Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region
* &quot;qh&quot;.cn : Qinghai Province
* &quot;sc&quot;.cn : Sichuan Province
* &quot;sd&quot;.cn : Shandong Province
* &quot;sh&quot;.cn : Shanghai Municipality
* &quot;sn&quot;.cn : Shaanxi Province
* &quot;sx&quot;.cn : Shanxi Province
* &quot;tj&quot;.cn : Tianjin Municipality
* &quot;tw&quot;.cn : Taiwan Province
* &quot;xj&quot;.cn : Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region
* &quot;xz&quot;.cn : Xizang Autonomous Region
* &quot;yn&quot;.cn : Yunnan Province
* &quot;zj&quot;.cn : Zhejiang Province

== Internationalized domain names ==
Internationalized domain names with Chinese characters may be registered at the second level under the .cn top-level domain.

On 25 June 2010, ICANN approved the use of the internationalized country code top-level domains &quot;.&quot; (&quot;China&quot; in simplified Chinese characters, DNS name &quot;xn--fiqs8s&quot;) and &quot;.&quot; (&quot;China&quot; in traditional Chinese characters, DNS name &quot;xn--fiqz9s&quot;) by CNNIC. These two TLDs were added to the DNS in July 2010.

CNNIC proposed around this time Chinese domain names in &quot;.&quot; (&quot;.com&quot; in Chinese) and &quot;.&quot; (&quot;.net&quot; in Chinese). However, these have not been recognized by ICANN yet and are only available via domestic domain name registrars.

Around 15 other generic domain names with Chinese characters have later been registered. See List of Internet top-level domains#Chinese characters.

==See also==
* .hk (Hong Kong)
* .mo (Macau)
* .tw (Taiwan)

==References==

* China Internet Domain Name Regulations

==External links==
* Ministry of Industry and Information Technology Domain Name Industry Management Information Public Notice
* China Internet Network Information Center
* Accredited Registrar List
* IANA WHOIS for .cn</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38900" start="0" end="3" title=".cn" label=".cn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="11" end="40" title="country code top-level domain" label="country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="42" end="47" title="ccTLD" label="ccTLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="57" end="88" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099744" start="152" end="193" title="China Internet Network Information Center" label="China Internet Network Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002010" start="236" end="283" title="Ministry of Industry and Information Technology" label="Ministry of Industry and Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="336" end="350" title="written Chinese" label="Chinese script"/>
<link wikidata="Q843214" start="351" end="382" title="Internationalized country code top-level domain" label="internationalized country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="525" end="534" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="536" end="541" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="547" end="553" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41639" start="568" end="571" title=".hk" label=".hk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43539" start="573" end="576" title=".mo" label=".mo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43824" start="582" end="585" title=".tw" label=".tw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002010" start="834" end="881" title="Ministry of Industry and Information Technology" label="Ministry of Industry and Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q133153" start="1765" end="1775" title="ISO 3166-2" label="ISO 3166-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q834575" start="1915" end="1932" title="National Standards of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="National Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002010" start="2027" end="2074" title="Ministry of Industry and Information Technology" label="Ministry of Industry and Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="2157" end="2171" title="Anhui Province" label="Anhui Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="2194" end="2214" title="Beijing Municipality" label="Beijing Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="2237" end="2259" title="Chongqing Municipality" label="Chongqing Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="2282" end="2297" title="Fujian Province" label="Fujian Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="2320" end="2338" title="Guangdong Province" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="2361" end="2375" title="Gansu Province" label="Gansu Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="2398" end="2414" title="Guizhou Province" label="Guizhou Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="2437" end="2453" title="Guangxi Province" label="Guangxi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="2476" end="2490" title="Henan Province" label="Henan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="2513" end="2527" title="Hubei Province" label="Hubei Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="2550" end="2564" title="Hebei Province" label="Hebei Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="2587" end="2602" title="Hainan Province" label="Hainan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="2625" end="2664" title="Hong Kong Special Administrative Region" label="Hong Kong Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="2687" end="2708" title="Heilongjiang Province" label="Heilongjiang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="2731" end="2745" title="Hunan Province" label="Hunan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q45208" start="2768" end="2782" title="Jilin Province" label="Jilin Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="2805" end="2821" title="Jiangsu Province" label="Jiangsu Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="2844" end="2860" title="Jiangxi Province" label="Jiangxi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="2883" end="2900" title="Liaoning Province" label="Liaoning Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="2923" end="2958" title="Macao Special Administrative Region" label="Macao Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="2981" end="3009" title="Nei Mongol Autonomous Region" label="Nei Mongol Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q57448" start="3032" end="3061" title="Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region" label="Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="3084" end="3100" title="Qinghai Province" label="Qinghai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="3123" end="3139" title="Sichuan Province" label="Sichuan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="3162" end="3179" title="Shandong Province" label="Shandong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3202" end="3223" title="Shanghai Municipality" label="Shanghai Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="3246" end="3262" title="Shaanxi Province" label="Shaanxi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="3285" end="3300" title="Shanxi Province" label="Shanxi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="3323" end="3343" title="Tianjin Municipality" label="Tianjin Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q57251" start="3366" end="3381" title="Taiwan Province, People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Taiwan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="3404" end="3436" title="Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region" label="Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="3459" end="3483" title="Xizang Autonomous Region" label="Xizang Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="3506" end="3521" title="Yunnan Province" label="Yunnan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="3544" end="3561" title="Zhejiang Province" label="Zhejiang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q756903" start="3600" end="3629" title="Internationalized domain name" label="Internationalized domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="3707" end="3723" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="3743" end="3748" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q843214" start="3773" end="3820" title="internationalized country code top-level domain" label="internationalized country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="3858" end="3887" title="simplified Chinese characters" label="simplified Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="3962" end="3992" title="traditional Chinese characters" label="traditional Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="4129" end="4140" title="domain name" label="domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="4281" end="4286" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073015" start="4327" end="4348" title="domain name registrar" label="domain name registrar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4445" end="4498" title="List of Internet top-level domains#Chinese characters" label="List of Internet top-level domains#Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q41639" start="4516" end="4519" title=".hk" label=".hk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="4521" end="4530" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q43539" start="4534" end="4537" title=".mo" label=".mo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="4539" end="4544" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q43824" start="4548" end="4551" title=".tw" label=".tw"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="4553" end="4559" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954524" wikidata="Q707969" url="?curid=954524" title="Greg Osby">
<text>Greg Osby (born August 3, 1960) is an American saxophonist and composer.

==Biography==
Born in St. Louis, Missouri, Osby studied at Howard University, then at the Berklee College of Music. He moved to New York City in 1982, where he played with Jaki Byard, Jim Hall, Muhal Richard Abrams, Andrew Hill, Jack DeJohnette, Dizzy Gillespie, and Herbie Hancock. In 1985, he joined DeJohnette&#x27;s group Special Edition. With Geri Allen, Steve Coleman, Gary Thomas, and Cassandra Wilson, he was a founding member of the M-Base Collective.

Osby began recording albums under his own name for JMT Records in the mid-1980s, then signed with Blue Note in 1989. In 2007, he formed his own label, Inner Circle Music. He gave exposure to young pianist Jason Moran, who appeared on most of Osby&#x27;s 1990s albums, including &quot;Further Ado&quot;, &quot;Zero&quot;, &quot;Banned in New York&quot; and &quot;Symbols of Light&quot;, a double quartet featuring the addition of a string quartet to the band.

He has also played with Phil Lesh and Friends, and he has toured with the Dead, a reincarnation of the Grateful Dead. He received the &quot;Playboy Magazine&quot; Jazz Artist of the Year award for 2004 and 2009.

Nate Chinen, writing for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, called Osby &quot;a mentor and a pacesetter, one of the sturdier bridges between jazz generations,&quot; and stated that he has &quot;a keen, focused tone on alto saxophone and a hummingbird&#x27;s phrasing, an equilibrium of hover and flutter.&quot;

==Discography==
=== As leader ===
=== As sideman ===
With Franco Ambrosetti
* &quot;Movies Too&quot; (Enja, 1988)
* &quot;Music for Symphony and Jazz Band&quot; (Enja, 1991) – recorded in 1990

With Uri Caine
* &quot;Cipher Syntax&quot; (JMT, 1989) as Strata Institute
* &quot;The Goldberg Variations&quot; (Winter &amp; Winter, 2000)

With Gary Thomas
* &quot;By Any Means Necessary&quot; (JMT, 1989)
* &quot;Pariah&#x27;s Pariah&quot; (Winter &amp; Winter, 1998)

With Andrew Hill
* 1989: &quot;Eternal Spirit&quot; (Blue Note, 1989)
* 1990: &quot;But Not Farewell&quot; (Blue Note, 1991)

With others
* Cecil Brooks III, &quot;The Collective&quot; (Muse, 1989)
* Terri Lyne Carrington, &quot;Structure&quot; (ACT Music, 2004)
* Steve Coleman, &quot;Drop Kick&quot; (Novus, 1992)
* Andrew Cyrille, &quot;Low Blue Flame&quot; (Tum, 2006) – recorded in 2005
* Robin Eubanks, &quot;Karma&quot; (JMT, 1991)
* Jimmy Herring, &quot;Lifeboat&quot; (Abstract Logix, 2008)
* Jason Moran, &quot;Soundtrack to Human Motion&quot; (Blue Note, 1999) – recorded in 1998
* Tineke Postma, &quot;Sonic Halo&quot; (Challenge Records, 2014)
* Project Z, &quot;Lincoln Memorial&quot; (Abstract Logix, 2005) – recorded in 2002
* Sam Rivers&#x27; Rivbea All-star Orchestra, &quot;Inspiration&quot; (BMG France, 1999)
* Sam Rivers&#x27; Rivbea All-star Orchestra, &quot;Culmination&quot; (BMG France, 1999)
==References==
==External links==
* – official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q707969" start="0" end="9" title="Greg Osby" label="Greg Osby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="133" end="150" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="164" end="188" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="202" end="215" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346401" start="246" end="256" title="Jaki Byard" label="Jaki Byard"/>
<link wikidata="Q433054" start="258" end="266" title="Jim Hall (musician)" label="Jim Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q729293" start="268" end="288" title="Muhal Richard Abrams" label="Muhal Richard Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q505138" start="290" end="301" title="Andrew Hill (jazz musician)" label="Andrew Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q349146" start="303" end="318" title="Jack DeJohnette" label="Jack DeJohnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="320" end="335" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="341" end="355" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q448163" start="422" end="432" title="Geri Allen" label="Geri Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q524953" start="434" end="447" title="Steve Coleman" label="Steve Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q350892" start="449" end="460" title="Gary Thomas (musician)" label="Gary Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q239860" start="466" end="482" title="Cassandra Wilson" label="Cassandra Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q871571" start="587" end="598" title="JMT Records" label="JMT Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q885833" start="634" end="643" title="Blue Note Records" label="Blue Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q122216424" start="687" end="705" title="Inner Circle Music" label="Inner Circle Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q978467" start="741" end="752" title="Jason Moran (musician)" label="Jason Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205372" start="863" end="881" title="Banned in New York" label="Banned in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085676" start="1020" end="1041" title="Phil Lesh and Friends" label="Phil Lesh and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282779" start="1066" end="1074" title="The Dead (band)" label="the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="1099" end="1112" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="1136" end="1152" title="Playboy Magazine" label="Playboy Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1240" end="1258" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q349482" start="1576" end="1593" title="Franco Ambrosetti" label="Franco Ambrosetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623963" start="1602" end="1612" title="Movies Too" label="Movies Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624215" start="1640" end="1672" title="Music for Symphony and Jazz Band" label="Music for Symphony and Jazz Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343710" start="1717" end="1726" title="Uri Caine" label="Uri Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19601365" start="1735" end="1748" title="Cipher Syntax" label="Cipher Syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687104" start="1795" end="1818" title="The Goldberg Variations (Uri Caine album)" label="The Goldberg Variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q873677" start="1826" end="1845" title="Winter &amp;amp; Winter" label="Winter &amp;amp; Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q350892" start="1859" end="1870" title="Gary Thomas (musician)" label="Gary Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19601363" start="1879" end="1901" title="By Any Means Necessary (Gary Thomas album)" label="By Any Means Necessary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895035" start="1928" end="1948" title="Pariah&amp;#x27;s Pariah" label="Pariah&amp;#x27;s Pariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q505138" start="1989" end="2000" title="Andrew Hill (jazz musician)" label="Andrew Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402693" start="2015" end="2029" title="Eternal Spirit" label="Eternal Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002318" start="2068" end="2084" title="But Not Farewell" label="But Not Farewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052286" start="2124" end="2140" title="Cecil Brooks III" label="Cecil Brooks III"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988939" start="2148" end="2162" title="The Collective (Cecil Brooks III album)" label="The Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q466966" start="2184" end="2205" title="Terri Lyne Carrington" label="Terri Lyne Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517872" start="2213" end="2222" title="Structure (Terri Lyne Carrington, Jimmy Haslip, Greg Osby, and Adam Rogers album)" label="Structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q524953" start="2249" end="2262" title="Steve Coleman" label="Steve Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507928" start="2270" end="2279" title="Drop Kick (album)" label="Drop Kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318721" start="2287" end="2292" title="Novus Records" label="Novus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504337" start="2302" end="2316" title="Andrew Cyrille" label="Andrew Cyrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933276" start="2324" end="2338" title="Low Blue Flame" label="Low Blue Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q328275" start="2378" end="2391" title="Robin Eubanks" label="Robin Eubanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18809111" start="2399" end="2404" title="Karma (Robin Eubanks album)" label="Karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179055" start="2425" end="2438" title="Jimmy Herring" label="Jimmy Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q113954337" start="2446" end="2454" title="Lifeboat (album)" label="Lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q978467" start="2486" end="2497" title="Jason Moran (musician)" label="Jason Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633538" start="2505" end="2531" title="Soundtrack to Human Motion" label="Soundtrack to Human Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q28550" start="2577" end="2590" title="Tineke Postma" label="Tineke Postma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2598" end="2608" title="Sonic Halo" label="Sonic Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176895" start="2616" end="2633" title="Challenge Records (1994)" label="Challenge Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794690" start="2643" end="2652" title="Project Z (band)" label="Project Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570346" start="2660" end="2676" title="Lincoln Memorial (album)" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q722432" start="2727" end="2737" title="Sam Rivers (jazz musician)" label="Sam Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123018752" start="2777" end="2788" title="Inspiration (Sam Rivers album)" label="Inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q116257448" start="2866" end="2877" title="Culmination (album)" label="Culmination"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954525" wikidata="Q6712656" url="?curid=954525" title="M. Herbert Hoover">
<text>Marion Herbert Hoover (known as M. Herbert Hoover or Herbert Hoover; April 29, 1891 – March 12, 1952) of Akron, Ohio, was an American politician of the Republican party who ran unsuccessfully for a number of elective offices in Ohio. In 1944, Hoover was the Republican nominee in the election for Lieutenant Governor of Ohio.

Despite his name, he was not related to Herbert Hoover, the president of the United States from 1929 to 1933. Starting with the 1940 campaign, he dropped his first initial for campaign purposes, calling himself only &quot;Herbert Hoover&quot;.

==Early life==
Marion Herbert Hoover was born on April 29, 1891, in Pickaway County, Ohio.

==Career==
Hoover was a Republican. In 1925, Hoover lost a race for a seat on the Akron city council. In 1926, he declared his intention to run for Ohio State Treasurer, but failed to get the Republican nomination. In 1934 and 1936, Hoover ran for an at-large seat in the United States House of Representatives but lost in the Republican party primary. From 1937 to 1938, Hoover worked as an inspector for the Ohio liquor control department. In 1938, he again failed to get his party&#x27;s nomination for Ohio State Treasurer. From 1939 to 1940, Hoover worked as an examiner for Ohio&#x27;s Department of Taxation. In 1940, Hoover unsuccessfully ran for Ohio State Auditor. In 1942, Hoover was working for a pension office. He lost his job when he failed to sit for the civil service examination. Hoover attempted to unseat his fellow Republican, the incumbent Governor of Ohio John W. Bricker, by entering the Republican primary. However, Hoover&#x27;s petitions failed to meet state election standards when many of the signatures were ruled unacceptable. It is rumored that Hoover challenged the popular, four-term incumbent in retaliation for the civil service rules that had cost him his pension office job. 

By 1944, Hoover had moved to Columbus, Ohio, and that year he won the Republican nomination for Lieutenant Governor of Ohio, but he lost in the general election to George D. Nye. In 1946, he failed to get the Republican nomination for Ohio Secretary of State. In 1950, he ran again for Ohio State Treasurer and lost. At the time of his death, he was a salesman for Modern Roofing Company in Columbus.

==Personal life==
Hoover married Julia in 1914. He did not divorce his wife before marrying Lois C. in 1937. He divorced both in 1952. He had a son and daughter, Jack and Mrs. Kenneth Tarkington. He was a member of the Broad Street Christian Church.

Hoover died on March 12, 1952, in Columbus. He was buried at South Bloomfield Cemetery in South Bloomfield.

==References==
==See also==
* List of Ohio lieutenant gubernatorial elections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6712656" start="0" end="21" title="M. Herbert Hoover" label="Marion Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712656" start="32" end="49" title="M. Herbert Hoover" label="M. Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712656" start="53" end="67" title="M. Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="105" end="116" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="152" end="162" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="228" end="232" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081057" start="284" end="292" title="Election Results, Ohio Lieutenant Governor" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660669" start="297" end="324" title="Lieutenant Governor of Ohio" label="Lieutenant Governor of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="367" end="381" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="387" end="417" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q386271" start="640" end="661" title="Pickaway County, Ohio" label="Pickaway County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="688" end="698" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080958" start="812" end="832" title="Ohio State Treasurer" label="Ohio State Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="936" end="974" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080905" start="1319" end="1337" title="Ohio State Auditor" label="Ohio State Auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q878581" start="1526" end="1542" title="Governor of Ohio" label="Governor of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q885374" start="1543" end="1558" title="John W. Bricker" label="John W. Bricker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="1908" end="1922" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660669" start="1975" end="2002" title="Lieutenant Governor of Ohio" label="Lieutenant Governor of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538318" start="2043" end="2056" title="George D. Nye" label="George D. Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080891" start="2114" end="2137" title="Ohio Secretary of State" label="Ohio Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930809" start="2622" end="2638" title="South Bloomfield, Ohio" label="South Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081057" start="2671" end="2718" title="List of Ohio lieutenant gubernatorial elections" label="List of Ohio lieutenant gubernatorial elections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954536" wikidata="Q3789976" url="?curid=954536" title="Ixi">
<text>IXI or Ixi can refer to:

* (born 1962), German singer
* IXI Limited, a British software company that existed from 1987 to 1993
* Ixi software, an experimental project for generative music begun in 2001
* code for Lilabari Airport in North Lakhimpur, Assam, India
* IXI (digital audio player), a prototype for a digital music player invented in 1979
* &quot;1 × 1&quot;, a 1944 book of poetry by E. E. Cummings, sometimes stylized &quot;I × I&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17037593" start="57" end="68" title="IXI Limited" label="IXI Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101075" start="130" end="142" title="Ixi software" label="Ixi software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631773" start="214" end="230" title="Lilabari Airport" label="Lilabari Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457870" start="266" end="292" title="IXI (digital audio player)" label="IXI (digital audio player)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28133183" start="358" end="363" title="1 × 1" label="1 × 1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954539" wikidata="Q898252" url="?curid=954539" title="Dini test">
<text>In mathematics, the Dini and Dini–Lipschitz tests are highly precise tests that can be used to prove that the Fourier series of a function converges at a given point. These tests are named after Ulisse Dini and Rudolf Lipschitz.

== Definition ==

Let be a function on [0,2], let be some point and let be a positive number. We define the local modulus of continuity at the point by

:formula_1

Notice that we consider here to be a periodic function, e.g. if and is negative then we define . 

The global modulus of continuity (or simply the modulus of continuity) is defined by

:formula_2

With these definitions we may state the main results:

:Theorem (Dini&#x27;s test): Assume a function satisfies at a point that
::formula_3
:Then the Fourier series of converges at to .

For example, the theorem holds with but does not hold with .

:Theorem (the Dini–Lipschitz test): Assume a function satisfies
::formula_4
:Then the Fourier series of converges uniformly to .

In particular, any function that obeys a Hölder condition satisfies the Dini–Lipschitz test.

==Precision==

Both tests are the best of their kind. For the Dini-Lipschitz test, it is possible to construct a function with its modulus of continuity satisfying the test with instead of, i.e.

:formula_5

and the Fourier series of diverges. For the Dini test, the statement of precision is slightly longer: it says that for any function Ω such that 

:formula_6

there exists a function such that 

:formula_7

and the Fourier series of diverges at 0.

==See also==

* Convergence of Fourier series
* Dini continuity
* Dini criterion

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q898252" start="20" end="24" title="Dini test" label="Dini"/>
<link wikidata="Q898252" start="29" end="49" title="Dini test" label="Dini–Lipschitz tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="110" end="124" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="130" end="138" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q707148" start="195" end="206" title="Ulisse Dini" label="Ulisse Dini"/>
<link wikidata="Q77322" start="211" end="227" title="Rudolf Lipschitz" label="Rudolf Lipschitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144872" start="542" end="563" title="modulus of continuity" label="modulus of continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q91259930" start="1012" end="1028" title="Hölder condition" label="Hölder condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="1243" end="1253" title="Big O notation" label="instead of"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166386" start="1537" end="1566" title="Convergence of Fourier series" label="Convergence of Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278323" start="1569" end="1584" title="Dini continuity" label="Dini continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278324" start="1587" end="1601" title="Dini criterion" label="Dini criterion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954541" wikidata="Q5152129" url="?curid=954541" title="Commandant's Letter of Commendation Ribbon (United States Coast Guard)">
<text>The Commandant&#x27;s Letter of Commendation Ribbon is a personal military award of the United States Coast Guard. The award was established in March 1979 by Admiral John B. Hayes.

==Criteria==
The Commandant&#x27;s Letter of Commendation Ribbon is awarded to any member of the Coast Guard who receives a Letter of Commendation from the Commandant of the United States Coast Guard. The decoration is retroactive to August 12, 1921 which was when the Commandant&#x27;s Commendation Letter was first issued by Admiral William E. Reynolds.

Additional awards of the Commandant&#x27;s Letter of Commendation Ribbon are denoted by 5/16 inch stars. The Commandant&#x27;s Letter of Commendation Ribbon with the Operational Distinguishing Device may be authorized for operational and field condition achievements. Considering Coast Guard awards and decorations only, the Commandant&#x27;s Letter of Commendation Ribbon is below the Coast Guard Achievement Medal in order of precedence.
==See also==
* Awards and decorations of the United States military

==References==

===Citations===

===Sources===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5152129" start="4" end="51" title="Commandant&amp;#x27;s Letter of Commendation Ribbon (United States Coast Guard)" label="Commandant&amp;#x27;s Letter of Commendation Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042875" start="66" end="80" title="Awards and decorations of the United States Coast Guard" label="military award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="88" end="113" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="158" end="165" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219984" start="166" end="179" title="John B. Hayes" label="John B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962768" start="517" end="536" title="William E. Reynolds" label="William E. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189410" start="627" end="641" title="5/16 inch star" label="5/16 inch star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097741" start="705" end="738" title="Operational Distinguishing Device" label="Operational Distinguishing Device"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823025" start="925" end="954" title="Coast Guard Achievement Medal" label="Coast Guard Achievement Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q784242" start="994" end="1046" title="Awards and decorations of the United States military" label="Awards and decorations of the United States military"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954542" wikidata="Q540056" url="?curid=954542" title="Joe Lovano">
<text>Joseph Salvatore Lovano (born December 29, 1952) is an American jazz multi-instrumentalist. Though best known as a tenor saxophonist, Lovano has also recorded on alto clarinet, flute and drums, amongst other instruments. He has earned a Grammy Award and several mentions in &quot;Down Beat&quot; magazine&#x27;s critics&#x27; &amp; readers&#x27; polls. His wife is singer Judi Silvano, with whom he records and performs. Lovano was a longtime member of the late drummer Paul Motian‘s trio alongside guitarist Bill Frisell.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Lovano was born in Cleveland, Ohio, United States, to Sicilian-American parents; his father was the tenor saxophonist Tony (&quot;Big T&quot;) Lovano. His father&#x27;s family came from Alcara Li Fusi in Sicily, and his mother&#x27;s family came from Cesarò, also in Sicily. In Cleveland, Lovano&#x27;s father exposed him to jazz throughout his early life, teaching him the standards, as well as how to lead a gig, pace a set, and be versatile enough to find work. Lovano started on alto saxophone at age six and switched to tenor saxophone five years later. John Coltrane, Dizzy Gillespie, and Sonny Stitt were among his earlier influences. After graduating from Euclid High School in 1971, he went to Berklee College of Music, where he studied under Herb Pomeroy and Gary Burton. Lovano received an honorary doctorate of music from the college in 1998.

===Career===
After Berklee he worked with Jack McDuff and Lonnie Smith. He spent three years with the Woody Herman orchestra, then moved to New York City, where he played with the big band of Mel Lewis. He often plays lines that convey the rhythmic drive and punch of an entire horn section. In the mid 1980s Lovano began working in a quartet with John Scofield and in a trio with Bill Frisell and Paul Motian. 

In 1990 Lovano joined Blue Note Records. Many outstanding releases followed, including the highly diverse &quot;Rush Hour&quot; (tracks range from solo to big band), collaborations with saxophonists Joshua Redman (&quot;Tenor Legacy&quot;) and Greg Osby (&quot;Friendly Fire&quot;), &quot;52nd Street Themes&quot; (with a nonet), and four albums featuring the classic pianist Hank Jones. 
In the late 1990s, he formed the Saxophone Summit with Dave Liebman and Michael Brecker (later replaced by Ravi Coltrane). &quot;Streams of Expression&quot; (2006) was a tribute to both cool jazz and free jazz. Lovano and pianist Hank Jones released an album together in June 2007, entitled &quot;Kids&quot;. 

In 2008 Lovano formed the quintet Us Five with Esperanza Spalding on bass, pianist James Weidman, and two drummers, Francisco Mela and Otis Brown III. &quot;Folk Art&quot; was an album of compositions by Lovano that the band hoped to interpret in the spirit of the avant-garde jazz and loft jazz of the 1960s. &quot;Bird Songs&quot; (2011) was a tribute to Charlie Parker. West African guitarist Lionel Loueke appeared on the album &quot;Cross Culture&quot; (Blue Note, 2013). Lovano played reed and percussion instruments he had collected since the 1970s. Peter Slavov replaced Esperanza Spalding on six tracks, all of them written by Lovano except for &quot;Star Crossed Lovers&quot; by Billy Strayhorn. &quot;The idea [...] wasn&#x27;t just to play at the same time, but to collectively create music within the music,&quot; Lovano wrote in the liner notes to &quot;Cross Culture.&quot; &quot;Everyone is leading and following,&quot; and &quot;the double drummer configuration adds this other element of creativity.&quot;

In recent years Lovano has released three records with trumpeter Dave Douglas in a co-led group called Sound Prints. He has also moved over to ECM records, largely adopting the mellow vibe and use of space characteristic of the label. He is a high-profile guest on the acclaimed &quot;Arctic Riff&quot; (2020) by Polish pianist Marcin Wasilewski.

Lovano has taught at the Berklee College of Music. He taught Jeff Coffin after Coffin was given a NEA Jazz Studies Grant in 1991. He also taught Melissa Aldana, who graduated in 2009.

&quot;Downbeat&quot; magazine gave its Jazz Album of the Year Award to Lovano for &quot;&quot;.

===Instruments===
Lovano has played Borgani saxophones since 1991 and exclusively since 1999. He has his own series called Borgani-Lovano, with a pearl silver body and 24K gold keys.

==Discography==

=== As leader ===
* 1985: &quot;Tones, Shapes &amp; Colors&quot; (Soul Note, 1985) – live
* 1986: &quot;Hometown Sessions&quot; (JSL, 1986)
* 1986: &quot;Solid Steps&quot; (Jazz Club, 1986)
* 1988: &quot;Village Rhythm&quot; (Soul Note, 1989)
* 1989: &quot;Worlds&quot; (Evidence, 1989) – live
* 1989: &quot;Ten Tales&quot; with Aldo Romano (Sunnyside, 1994)
* 1990: &quot;Landmarks&quot; (Blue Note, 1990)
* 1991: &quot;Sounds of Joy&quot; (Enja, 1991)
* 1991: &quot;From the Soul&quot; (Blue Note, 1992)
* 1992: &quot;Universal Language&quot; (Blue Note, 1992)
* 1993: &quot;Tenor Legacy&quot; (Blue Note, 1993)
* 1994: &quot;Rush Hour&quot; (Blue Note, 1995)
* 1994–95: &quot;&quot; (Blue Note, 1995) – live
* 1996: &quot;Celebrating Sinatra&quot; (Blue Note, 1996)
* 1996: &quot;Tenor Time&quot; (Somethin&#x27; Else, 1997)
* 1997: &quot;Trio Fascination: Edition One&quot; (Blue Note, 1998)
* 1999: &quot;52nd Street Themes&quot; (Blue Note, 2000)
* 2000: &quot;Flights of Fancy: Trio Fascination Edition Two&quot; (Blue Note, 2001)
* 2001: &quot;Viva Caruso&quot; (Blue Note, 2002)
* 2002: &quot;On This Day ... at the Vanguard&quot; (Blue Note, 2003) – live
* 2003: &quot;I&#x27;m All For You&quot; (Blue Note, 2004)
* 2004: &quot;Joyous Encounter&quot; (Blue Note, 2005)
* 2005: &quot;Streams of Expression&quot; (Blue Note, 2006)
* 2005: &quot;Symphonica&quot; (Blue Note, 2008) – live
* 2005: &quot;Classic! Live at Newport&quot; feat. Hank Jones, George Mraz &amp; Lewis Nash (Blue Note, 2016) – live
* 2008: &quot;Folk Art&quot; (Blue Note, 2009)
* 2010: &quot;Bird Songs&quot; with Us Five (Blue Note, 2011)
* 2012: &quot;Cross Culture&quot; with Us Five (Blue Note, 2013)
* 2018: &quot;Trio Tapestry&quot; with Marilyn Crispell &amp; Carmen Castaldi (ECM, 2019)
* 2019: &quot;Garden of Expression&quot; with Marilyn Crispell &amp; Carmen Castaldi (ECM, 2021)
* 2022: &quot;Our Daily Bread&quot; with Marilyn Crispell &amp; Carmen Castaldi (ECM, 2023)

=== As co-leader ===
With Dave Douglas
* &quot;Sound Prints&quot; (Blue Note, 2015) – recorded in 2013

With James Emery, Judi Silvano and Drew Gress
* &quot;Fourth World&quot; (Between the Lines, 2001)

With Jim Hall, George Mraz, and Lewis Nash
* &quot;Grand Slam: Live at the Regatta Bar&quot; (Telarc, 2000)

With Hank Jones
* &quot;&quot; (Blue Note, 2007) – live recorded in 2006

With Benjamin Koppel
* &quot;The Mezzo Sax Encounter&quot; (Cowbell, 2016)

With Greg Osby
* &quot;Friendly Fire&quot; (Blue Note, 1999) – recorded in 1998

With Gonzalo Rubalcaba
* &quot;Flying Colors&quot; (Blue Note, 1997)

With Enrico Rava
* &quot;Roma&quot; (ECM, 2019)

With Marcin Wasilewski Trio
*&quot;Arctic Riff&quot; (ECM, 2020)

=== As group ===
Saxophone Summit (with Michael Brecker, Dave Liebman)
* &quot;Gathering of Spirits&quot; (Telarc, 2004)

ScoLoHoFo (with John Scofield, Dave Holland, Al Foster)
* &quot;Oh!&quot; (Blue Note, 2003)

SFJAZZ Collective
* &quot;Live 2008: 5th Annual Concert Tour - The Works of Wayne Shorter&quot; (SFJAZZ, 2008)[3CD]
* &quot;Live 2009: 6th Annual Concert Tour - The Music of McCoy Tyner&quot; (SFJAZZ, 2009)[2CD]

=== As sideman ===
With John Abercrombie
* 1998: &quot;Open Land&quot; (ECM, 1999)
* 2011: &quot;Within a Song&quot; (ECM, 2012)

With Marc Johnson
* 2004: &quot;Shades of Jade&quot; (ECM, 2005)
* 2010: &quot;Swept Away&quot; (ECM, 2012)

With Paul Motian
* &quot;Psalm&quot; with Ed Schuller and Billy Drewes (ECM, 1982) – recorded in 1981
* &quot;The Story of Maryam&quot; with Ed Schuller and Jim Pepper (Soul Note, 1984)
* &quot;Jack of Clubs&quot; with Ed Schuller and Jim Pepper (Soul Note, 1985)
* &quot;It Should&#x27;ve Happened a Long Time Ago&quot; (ECM, 1985)
* &quot;Misterioso&quot; with Ed Schuller and Jim Pepper (Soul Note, 1986)
* &quot;One Time Out&quot; (Soul Note, 1989) – recorded in 1987
* &quot;Monk in Motian&quot; (JMT, 1989) – recorded in 1988
* &quot;On Broadway Volume 1&quot; (JMT, 1989)
* &quot;Bill Evans&quot; (JMT, 1990)
* &quot;On Broadway Volume 2&quot; (JMT, 1990)
* &quot;Motian in Tokyo&quot; (JMT, 1991)
* &quot;On Broadway Volume 3&quot; (JMT, 1993)
* &quot;Trioism&quot; (JMT, 1993) trio + guest
* &quot;At the Village Vanguard&quot; (JMT, 1995) – trio
* &quot;Sound of Love&quot; (JMT, 1995) – trio live
* &quot;I Have the Room Above Her&quot; (ECM, 2004) – trio
* &quot;Time and Time Again&quot; (ECM, 2006) – trio

With John Scofield
* 1989: &quot;Time on My Hands&quot; (Blue Note, 1990)
* 1990: &quot;Meant to Be&quot; (Blue Note, 1991)
* 1992: &quot;What We Do&quot; (Blue Note, 1993)
* 2015: &quot;Past Present&quot; (Impulse!, 2015)

With Steve Slagle
* &quot;New New York, Omnitone, 12005 (2000)&quot;
* &quot;Alto Manhattan, Panorama 1006, (2016)&quot;

With Lonnie Smith
* &quot;Afro–desia&quot; (Groove Merchant, 1975)
* &quot;Keep on Lovin&#x27;&quot; (Groove Merchant, 1976)

With Bill Stewart
* &quot;Snide Remarks&quot; (Blue Note, 1995)
* &quot;Think Before You Think&quot; (Evidence, 1998)

With Roseanna Vitro
* &quot;Reaching for the Moon&quot; (Chase Music Group, 1991)
* &quot;Tropical Postcards&quot; (A Records, 2004)

With Yōsuke Yamashita
* &quot;Kurdish Dance&quot; (Verve, 1992)
* &quot;Dazzling Days&quot; (Verve, 1993)

With others
* Cindy Blackman, &quot;Another Lifetime&quot; (4Q, 2010) – recorded in 2005–09
* Michael Bocian, &quot;For This Gift&quot; (Gunmar, 1982) 
* Furio di Castri, &quot;Unknown Voyage&quot; (A Témpo, 1985)
* Ray Drummond, &quot;Excursion&quot; (Arabesque, 1993) – recorded in 1992
* Peter Erskine, &quot;Sweet Soul&quot; (Novus/BMG, 1991) 
* Antonio Faraò, &quot;Evan&quot; (Cristal, 2013)
* Sonny Fortune, &quot;From Now On&quot; (Blue Note, 1996)
* Paul Grabowsky, &quot;Tales of time and Space&quot; (Sanctuary Records, 2005) 
* Charlie Haden, &quot;The Montreal Tapes: Liberation Music Orchestra&quot; (Verve, 1999) – recorded in 1989
* Tom Harrell, &quot;Sail Away&quot; (Contemporary, 1989)
* Steve Kuhn, &quot;Mostly Coltrane&quot; (ECM, 2009) – recorded in 2008
* Abbey Lincoln, &quot;Over the Years&quot; (Verve, 2000)
* Pat Martino, &quot;Think Tank&quot; (Blue Note, 2003)
* Masada Quintet, &quot;&quot; (Tzadik, 2009)
* John Patitucci, &quot;Remembrance&quot; (Concord, 2009)
* Chris Potter, &quot;Vertigo&quot; (Concord, 1998)
* Dan Silverman, &quot;Silverslide&quot; (Around the Slide, 2007)
* Tommy Smith, &quot;Evolution&quot; (Spartacus, 2003)
* Steve Swallow, &quot;Real Book&quot; (Xtra Watt, 1994) – recorded in 1993
* McCoy Tyner, &quot;Quartet&quot; (McCoy Tyner Music, 2007) – live
==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* Joe Lovano at NPR Music
* Podcast featuring &quot;The One You Love to Hate&quot; performed by Joe Lovano
* NAMM Oral History Interview October 15, 2014</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q540056" start="0" end="23" title="Joe Lovano" label="Joseph Salvatore Lovano"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="64" end="68" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="115" end="132" title="tenor saxophone" label="tenor saxophonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q656766" start="162" end="175" title="alto clarinet" label="alto clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="177" end="182" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="237" end="249" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253128" start="280" end="289" title="Down Beat" label="Down Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q545185" start="372" end="384" title="Judi Silvano" label="Judi Silvano"/>
<link wikidata="Q740581" start="470" end="481" title="Paul Motian" label="Paul Motian"/>
<link wikidata="Q434968" start="509" end="521" title="Bill Frisell" label="Bill Frisell"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="574" end="583" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="585" end="589" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507476" start="609" end="626" title="Sicilian-American" label="Sicilian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q495734" start="741" end="755" title="Alcara Li Fusi" label="Alcara Li Fusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q492631" start="806" end="812" title="Cesarò" label="Cesarò"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="1114" end="1127" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="1129" end="1144" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q502311" start="1150" end="1161" title="Sonny Stitt" label="Sonny Stitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406107" start="1219" end="1237" title="Euclid High School" label="Euclid High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="1258" end="1282" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412239" start="1307" end="1319" title="Herb Pomeroy" label="Herb Pomeroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q353096" start="1324" end="1335" title="Gary Burton" label="Gary Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677123" start="1453" end="1464" title="Jack McDuff" label="Jack McDuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253980" start="1469" end="1481" title="Lonnie Smith (organist)" label="Lonnie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q349357" start="1513" end="1525" title="Woody Herman" label="Woody Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q955597" start="1603" end="1612" title="Mel Lewis" label="Mel Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q357176" start="1759" end="1772" title="John Scofield" label="John Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q434968" start="1792" end="1804" title="Bill Frisell" label="Bill Frisell"/>
<link wikidata="Q740581" start="1809" end="1820" title="Paul Motian" label="Paul Motian"/>
<link wikidata="Q24807557" start="2113" end="2131" title="52nd Street Themes" label="52nd Street Themes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637758" start="2246" end="2262" title="Saxophone Summit" label="Saxophone Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175237" start="2268" end="2280" title="Dave Liebman" label="Dave Liebman"/>
<link wikidata="Q347023" start="2285" end="2300" title="Michael Brecker" label="Michael Brecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353845" start="2320" end="2333" title="Ravi Coltrane" label="Ravi Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622709" start="2342" end="2363" title="Streams of Expression" label="Streams of Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q327547" start="2399" end="2408" title="cool jazz" label="cool jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q211781" start="2413" end="2422" title="free jazz" label="free jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q447907" start="2443" end="2453" title="Hank Jones" label="Hank Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q238705" start="2571" end="2589" title="Esperanza Spalding" label="Esperanza Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551817" start="2607" end="2620" title="James Weidman" label="James Weidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29048565" start="2640" end="2654" title="Francisco Mela" label="Francisco Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464408" start="2681" end="2689" title="Folk Art (album)" label="Folk Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666682" start="2810" end="2819" title="loft jazz" label="loft jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915902" start="2840" end="2850" title="Bird Songs (Joe Lovano album)" label="Bird Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="2881" end="2895" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q550663" start="2920" end="2933" title="Lionel Loueke" label="Lionel Loueke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952893" start="2962" end="2975" title="Cross Culture (album)" label="Cross Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q380626" start="3213" end="3228" title="Billy Strayhorn" label="Billy Strayhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="3922" end="3946" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807777" start="3958" end="3969" title="Jeff Coffin" label="Jeff Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18411604" start="4042" end="4056" title="Melissa Aldana" label="Melissa Aldana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820882" start="4412" end="4438" title="Tones, Shapes &amp;amp; Colors" label="Tones, Shapes &amp;amp; Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q105886171" start="4446" end="4455" title="Soul Note" label="Soul Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078419" start="4484" end="4501" title="Hometown Sessions" label="Hometown Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078422" start="4534" end="4545" title="Solid Steps" label="Solid Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930678" start="4584" end="4598" title="Village Rhythm" label="Village Rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598439" start="4637" end="4643" title="Worlds (Joe Lovano album)" label="Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826415" start="4651" end="4659" title="Evidence Music" label="Evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450298" start="4688" end="4697" title="Ten Tales" label="Ten Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650952" start="4709" end="4720" title="Aldo Romano" label="Aldo Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842004" start="4722" end="4731" title="Sunnyside Records" label="Sunnyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484819" start="4753" end="4762" title="Landmarks (Joe Lovano album)" label="Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q885833" start="4770" end="4779" title="Blue Note Records" label="Blue Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964975" start="4801" end="4814" title="Sounds of Joy" label="Sounds of Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466785" start="4822" end="4826" title="Enja Records" label="Enja"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505704" start="4848" end="4861" title="From the Soul" label="From the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893993" start="4900" end="4918" title="Universal Language (Joe Lovano album)" label="Universal Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700560" start="4957" end="4969" title="Tenor Legacy (Joe Lovano album)" label="Tenor Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380705" start="5008" end="5017" title="Rush Hour (Joe Lovano album)" label="Rush Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450302" start="5105" end="5124" title="Celebrating Sinatra" label="Celebrating Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26709244" start="5163" end="5173" title="Tenor Time" label="Tenor Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5222" end="5251" title="Trio Fascination: Edition One" label="Trio Fascination: Edition One"/>
<link wikidata="Q24807557" start="5290" end="5308" title="52nd Street Themes" label="52nd Street Themes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5347" end="5393" title="Flights of Fancy: Trio Fascination Edition Two" label="Flights of Fancy: Trio Fascination Edition Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937447" start="5432" end="5443" title="Viva Caruso" label="Viva Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091166" start="5482" end="5513" title="On This Day ... Live at The Vanguard" label="On This Day ... at the Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966104" start="5559" end="5579" title="I&amp;#x27;m All For You" label="I&amp;#x27;m All For You"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297776" start="5618" end="5634" title="Joyous Encounter" label="Joyous Encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622709" start="5673" end="5694" title="Streams of Expression" label="Streams of Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661435" start="5733" end="5743" title="Symphonica (Joe Lovano album)" label="Symphonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859299" start="5789" end="5813" title="Classic! Live at Newport" label="Classic! Live at Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464408" start="5906" end="5914" title="Folk Art (album)" label="Folk Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915902" start="5953" end="5963" title="Bird Songs (Joe Lovano album)" label="Bird Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952893" start="6015" end="6028" title="Cross Culture (album)" label="Cross Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064301" start="6080" end="6093" title="Trio Tapestry" label="Trio Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q311439" start="6145" end="6148" title="ECM Records" label="ECM"/>
<link wikidata="Q105296259" start="6170" end="6190" title="Garden of Expression" label="Garden of Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q120881213" start="6267" end="6282" title="Our Daily Bread (album)" label="Our Daily Bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173180" start="6372" end="6384" title="Dave Douglas (trumpeter)" label="Dave Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20735612" start="6393" end="6405" title="Sound Prints" label="Sound Prints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680344" start="6455" end="6466" title="James Emery (musician)" label="James Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q545185" start="6468" end="6480" title="Judi Silvano" label="Judi Silvano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116147" start="6485" end="6495" title="Drew Gress" label="Drew Gress"/>
<link wikidata="Q433054" start="6555" end="6563" title="Jim Hall (musician)" label="Jim Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389764" start="6565" end="6576" title="George Mraz" label="George Mraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q357622" start="6582" end="6592" title="Lewis Nash" label="Lewis Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142419" start="6644" end="6650" title="Telarc International Corporation" label="Telarc"/>
<link wikidata="Q447907" start="6664" end="6674" title="Hank Jones" label="Hank Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q707969" start="6814" end="6823" title="Greg Osby" label="Greg Osby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504058" start="6832" end="6845" title="Friendly Fire (Joe Lovano &amp;amp; Greg Osby album)" label="Friendly Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349890" start="6895" end="6912" title="Gonzalo Rubalcaba" label="Gonzalo Rubalcaba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6921" end="6934" title="Flying Colors (Joe Lovano album)" label="Flying Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339427" start="6965" end="6976" title="Enrico Rava" label="Enrico Rava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569754" start="7014" end="7036" title="Marcin Wasilewski (pianist)" label="Marcin Wasilewski Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q347023" start="7115" end="7130" title="Michael Brecker" label="Michael Brecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175237" start="7132" end="7144" title="Dave Liebman" label="Dave Liebman"/>
<link wikidata="Q357176" start="7213" end="7226" title="John Scofield" label="John Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q504671" start="7228" end="7240" title="Dave Holland (bassist)" label="Dave Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341043" start="7242" end="7251" title="Al Foster" label="Al Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080337" start="7261" end="7264" title="Oh! (ScoLoHoFo album)" label="Oh!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205901" start="7290" end="7307" title="SFJAZZ Collective" label="SFJAZZ Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q438092" start="7527" end="7543" title="John Abercrombie (guitarist)" label="John Abercrombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096106" start="7558" end="7567" title="Open Land" label="Open Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q311439" start="7575" end="7578" title="ECM Records" label="ECM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710499" start="7600" end="7613" title="Within a Song" label="Within a Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375699" start="7638" end="7650" title="Marc Johnson (musician)" label="Marc Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460328" start="7665" end="7679" title="Shades of Jade" label="Shades of Jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q311439" start="7687" end="7690" title="ECM Records" label="ECM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027117" start="7712" end="7722" title="Swept Away (Marc Johnson album)" label="Swept Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q740581" start="7747" end="7758" title="Paul Motian" label="Paul Motian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253911" start="7767" end="7772" title="Psalm (Paul Motian album)" label="Psalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282491" start="7784" end="7795" title="Ed Schuller" label="Ed Schuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766774" start="7852" end="7871" title="The Story of Maryam" label="The Story of Maryam"/>
<link wikidata="Q329661" start="7899" end="7909" title="Jim Pepper" label="Jim Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115987" start="7936" end="7949" title="Jack of Clubs (album)" label="Jack of Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092017" start="8014" end="8056" title="It Should&amp;#x27;ve Happened a Long Time Ago" label="It Should&amp;#x27;ve Happened a Long Time Ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880354" start="8083" end="8093" title="Misterioso (Paul Motian album)" label="Misterioso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093289" start="8158" end="8170" title="One Time Out" label="One Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900650" start="8222" end="8236" title="Monk in Motian" label="Monk in Motian"/>
<link wikidata="Q871571" start="8244" end="8247" title="JMT Records" label="JMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090925" start="8282" end="8302" title="On Broadway Volume 1" label="On Broadway Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908924" start="8329" end="8339" title="Bill Evans (album)" label="Bill Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090926" start="8366" end="8386" title="On Broadway Volume 2" label="On Broadway Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917672" start="8413" end="8428" title="Motian in Tokyo" label="Motian in Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090927" start="8455" end="8475" title="On Broadway Volume 3" label="On Broadway Volume 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843129" start="8502" end="8509" title="Trioism" label="Trioism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812590" start="8549" end="8572" title="At the Village Vanguard" label="At the Village Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564774" start="8606" end="8619" title="Sound of Love (album)" label="Sound of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977564" start="8658" end="8683" title="I Have the Room Above Her" label="I Have the Room Above Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805264" start="8717" end="8736" title="Time and Time Again (album)" label="Time and Time Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q357176" start="8768" end="8781" title="John Scofield" label="John Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805415" start="8796" end="8812" title="Time on My Hands (John Scofield album)" label="Time on My Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804094" start="8851" end="8862" title="Meant to Be (John Scofield album)" label="Meant to Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991411" start="8901" end="8911" title="What We Do" label="What We Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210915" start="8950" end="8962" title="Past Present (John Scofield album)" label="Past Present"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524530" start="8970" end="8978" title="Impulse! Records" label="Impulse!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306712" start="8992" end="9004" title="Steve Slagle" label="Steve Slagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253980" start="9114" end="9126" title="Lonnie Smith (organist)" label="Lonnie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603422" start="9135" end="9145" title="Afro–desia" label="Afro–desia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615778" start="9184" end="9203" title="Keep on Lovin&amp;#x27;" label="Keep on Lovin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q740525" start="9240" end="9252" title="Bill Stewart (musician)" label="Bill Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826415" start="9337" end="9345" title="Evidence Music" label="Evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166788" start="9359" end="9373" title="Roseanna Vitro" label="Roseanna Vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895388" start="9382" end="9403" title="Reaching for the Moon (album)" label="Reaching for the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20814269" start="9444" end="9462" title="Tropical Postcards" label="Tropical Postcards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9470" end="9479" title="Challenge Records (1994)#Imprints" label="A Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139446" start="9493" end="9509" title="Yōsuke Yamashita" label="Yōsuke Yamashita"/>
<link wikidata="Q447642" start="9609" end="9623" title="Cindy Blackman Santana" label="Cindy Blackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q114414873" start="9631" end="9647" title="Another Lifetime (album)" label="Another Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379426" start="9811" end="9823" title="Ray Drummond" label="Ray Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611261" start="9831" end="9840" title="Excursion (album)" label="Excursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q713202" start="9886" end="9899" title="Peter Erskine" label="Peter Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q601918" start="9945" end="9958" title="Antonio Faraò" label="Antonio Faraò"/>
<link wikidata="Q491089" start="9995" end="10008" title="Sonny Fortune" label="Sonny Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121349" start="10016" end="10027" title="From Now On (Sonny Fortune album)" label="From Now On"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379286" start="10054" end="10068" title="Paul Grabowsky" label="Paul Grabowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347984" start="10107" end="10124" title="Sanctuary Records" label="Sanctuary Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q319283" start="10135" end="10148" title="Charlie Haden" label="Charlie Haden"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10156" end="10202" title="The Montreal Tapes: Liberation Music Orchestra" label="The Montreal Tapes: Liberation Music Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q427035" start="10244" end="10255" title="Tom Harrell" label="Tom Harrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128607" start="10280" end="10292" title="Contemporary Records" label="Contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q529822" start="10302" end="10312" title="Steve Kuhn" label="Steve Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226811" start="10320" end="10335" title="Mostly Coltrane" label="Mostly Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q231071" start="10375" end="10388" title="Abbey Lincoln" label="Abbey Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q124694968" start="10396" end="10410" title="Over the Years (Abbey Lincoln album)" label="Over the Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q31959" start="10433" end="10444" title="Pat Martino" label="Pat Martino"/>
<link wikidata="Q111945004" start="10452" end="10462" title="Think Tank (Pat Martino album)" label="Think Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q932475" start="10489" end="10503" title="Masada (band)" label="Masada Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297757" start="10519" end="10525" title="Tzadik Records" label="Tzadik"/>
<link wikidata="Q504646" start="10535" end="10549" title="John Patitucci" label="John Patitucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q476598" start="10593" end="10605" title="Chris Potter (jazz saxophonist)" label="Chris Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814032" start="10613" end="10620" title="Vertigo (Chris Potter album)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770763" start="10711" end="10722" title="Tommy Smith (saxophonist)" label="Tommy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q708266" start="10766" end="10779" title="Steve Swallow" label="Steve Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101750" start="10787" end="10796" title="Real Book (album)" label="Real Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q318619" start="10842" end="10853" title="McCoy Tyner" label="McCoy Tyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269340" start="10861" end="10868" title="Quartet (McCoy Tyner album)" label="Quartet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954543" wikidata="Q7641341" url="?curid=954543" title="Sunset Records">
<text>Sunset Records was a record label started in 1965 as the budget album subsidiary of Liberty Records to reissue and issue material originally recorded for Liberty, Imperial, Minit and other Liberty subsidiaries as well as leased material from other entities.

==History==
Sunset Records was started by Liberty Records in 1965 as a budget line, with Ed Barsky at the helm. The label was named for the location of Liberty&#x27;s corporate offices, and possibly a sly acknowledgement that the material was towards the end of its economic usefulness to Liberty.

The Sunset label was introduced to the United Kingdom in February, 1968, which also included licensing from Hanna-Barbera. Later in 1968, Liberty was acquired by Transamerica Corporation, an insurance company who then merged Liberty with its United Artists Records subsidiary. Sunset was retained as the budget imprint for the combined operation, and United Artist&#x27;s brands Tale Spinners, True Action and UnArt subsequently appeared as Sunset releases, all under the direction of Ed Barsky.

The label was discontinued in early 1970 in the United States, but remained in operation in the United Kingdom until 1978.

The Sunset Records catalog is currently owned by the Capitol Records subsidiary of the Universal Music Group.

==Content==
Material released on the Sunset label consisted primarily of tracks that had been previously included on other, full priced albums on labels under the control of Liberty. Sunset also released material leased from other companies, such as Vee-Jay Records. Rarely were any charting hits included, although songs appearing at the lower reaches of the charts might be incorporated.

Sunset albums generally consist of a wide diversity of a given artist&#x27;s output, which could disappoint a buyer looking for the artist&#x27;s current sound, but is of value to collectors because some of the material is otherwise very difficult to locate. Liberty owner Simon Waronker considered it a &quot;way to keep money flowing in&quot; because there were no production costs associated with the releases, it was material already in the vaults.

In keeping with industry practice regarding budget labels, Sunset albums lacked paper inner sleeves and were pressed on lower-quality material, usually polystyrene. However, the album covers were usually full cover portraits of the artist, and liner notes were included on the back.

==Labels==
Both United States pressings and United Kingdom pressings consisted of a black label with silver printing, and the Sunset logo on the left side. However, United States pressings are colored light blue on the far left side, while the United Kingdom product contains an orange area instead. The logo was a &quot;modernistic&quot; sun setting in rainbow-colored clouds, all depicted in undulating lines.

==Artists==
Notable artists whose material appears on Sunset include:
==References==
==See also==
* List of record labels</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7641341" start="0" end="14" title="Sunset Records" label="Sunset Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="21" end="33" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417779" start="45" end="49" title="1965 in music" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985019" start="57" end="69" title="budget album" label="budget album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392321" start="84" end="99" title="Liberty Records" label="Liberty Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660305" start="163" end="171" title="Imperial Records" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467665" start="173" end="178" title="Minit Records" label="Minit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985019" start="330" end="341" title="Budget album" label="budget line"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="666" end="679" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567477" start="720" end="744" title="Transamerica Corporation" label="Transamerica Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679103" start="937" end="950" title="Tale Spinners for Children" label="Tale Spinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="1232" end="1247" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="1266" end="1287" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q679007" start="1540" end="1555" title="Vee-Jay Records" label="Vee-Jay Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519979" start="1954" end="1968" title="Simon Waronker" label="Simon Waronker"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="2932" end="2953" title="List of record labels" label="List of record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954544" wikidata="Q5525664" url="?curid=954544" title="Gary Nolan">
<text>Gary Nolan may refer to:

*Gary Nolan (baseball) (born 1948), baseball player
*Gary Nolan (radio host) (born 1954), radio host
*Gary Nolan (rugby league), English rugby league player
*Gary Nolan (politician), American politician

==See also==
*Garry Nolan, immunologist</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5525664" start="0" end="10" title="Gary Nolan" label="Gary Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525665" start="27" end="48" title="Gary Nolan (baseball)" label="Gary Nolan (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525666" start="79" end="102" title="Gary Nolan (radio host)" label="Gary Nolan (radio host)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525667" start="128" end="153" title="Gary Nolan (rugby league)" label="Gary Nolan (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531011" start="184" end="207" title="Gary Nolan (politician)" label="Gary Nolan (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q89180933" start="244" end="255" title="Garry Nolan" label="Garry Nolan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954546" wikidata="Q507926" url="?curid=954546" title="Owen Luder">
<text>Harold Owen Luder (7 August 1928 – 8 October 2021) was a British architect who designed a number of notable and sometimes controversial buildings in the United Kingdom in the 1960s and 1970s, many in an uncompromising brutalist design, and many now demolished. He served as chairman of the Architects Registration Board and twice as President of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1981–1983 and 1995–1997. He established his own practice Owen Luder Partnership in 1957, and left in 1987 to form the consultancy Communication In Construction.

Luder was president of RIBA when Charles III, then Prince of Wales, attacked what he saw as the ugliness of modernism. Luder told colleagues to ignore him and just say &quot;sod you&quot;, leading to some critics of brutalist buildings dubbing them &quot;sod you architecture&quot;.

==Early life and career==
Luder was born in London in 1928, the son of an unknown father and Ellen Clara Mason, who married Edward Charles Luder in 1931. He grew up on the Old Kent Road in south London. As a boy he wanted to design aircraft but after the Second World War decided to become an architect, and trained at the Brixton School of Building. In 1945, he joined the practice of architect Henry C. Smith, before being called up for military service. 

In the early and mid-1950s, he worked for several small architectural practices, as well as undertaking private work. He set up his own practice, Owen Luder Partnership, in 1957.

==Works==
* Hendon Hall Court, London, England (1963)
* Eros House, Catford, Lewisham, London, England (1965)
* Tricorn Centre, Portsmouth, England (1966) – demolished in 2004
* Trinity Square, Gateshead, England (1967) – demolished in 2010
* Consort House, London, England (1970)
* SouthGate Shopping Centre, Bath, England (1971) – demolished in 2007
* Derwent Tower, Gateshead, England (1972) – demolished in 2012
* Catford Shopping Centre, Catford, Lewisham, London, England (1974)
* Milford Towers, Catford, Lewisham, London, England (1974)

Luder&#x27;s designs included some of the most powerful and raw examples of Brutalist architecture, with massive bare concrete sculptural forms devoid of claddings or decoration – other than their moulded shape and texture. The British climate, with abundant rain and damp winters, is unsuited to such unclad concrete buildings, which rapidly become a shabby grey–brown colour and streaked with marks where rainwater has run down the façades. The difficulty and cost of maintenance has often exacerbated these problems.

Some of the Owen Luder Partnership&#x27;s (OLP) best known buildings are the Tricorn Centre in Portsmouth, Derwent Tower in Gateshead, and Catford Shopping Centre in London. Trinity Square in Gateshead (whose landmark multi-storey car park and its architecture featured prominently in violent scenes in the cult 1971 gangster film &quot;Get Carter&quot; and became nicknamed after the film) was another one of the practice&#x27;s major schemes but, despite its cinematic fame, demolition began in July 2010. Luder also designed the much-derided Southgate shopping centre in Bath, Somerset, which was demolished in 2007 to make way for a new multimillion-pound development.

Despite receiving awards when built, the Tricorn Centre was voted the third ugliest building in Britain and was demolished in 2004 to mixed reactions and protests from an unrepentant Luder. The Trinity Square car park has also been subject to a number of redevelopment proposals and featured in the Channel 4 series &quot;Demolition&quot; in 2005. Luder was later given a Rubble Club award for having the best building to be demolished during the architect&#x27;s lifetime.

Luder featured in the 2005 BBC Radio 3 broadcast &quot;Gateshead Multi-Storey Car Park&quot;. A radiophonic tribute to Trinity Square, produced by Langham Research Centre, the programme was made entirely from the sounds of the car park, processed and treated on quarter-inch tape.

Luder also designed the conversion of a Victorian fire station into the South London Theatre in 1967. In addition he designed a number of small houses in the borough of Lambeth including 26–28 Groveway (1953) and 76–78 Herne Hill Road (1954), one of the latter was occupied by Luder upon completion.

Some of the less controversial OLP buildings have escaped attention. In their housing and mixed use developments, for example, they display a consistent formal language and many continue to be well used to the present. Examples of these include Harrogate House, Harrogate (1963), Hendon Hall Court in North London (1963), and 16 Grand Avenue in Hove (1965).

The OLP built many buildings around South London, where Luder lived for some time, but also much wider in the UK. The OLP also developed unbuilt schemes for Nigeria, Belgium, Saudi Arabia, and Greece where partnership practices were started.

Trinity Square in Gateshead was demolished in 2010, and Derwent Tower in 2012. The Catford Centre, Luder&#x27;s last surviving town centre of the Tricorn type, was purchased by the local council in 2010 for &quot;regeneration&quot;, which may involve demolition of the housing on the site. Roxby House in Sidcup survives as an example of his later work.

National Life Stories conducted an oral history interview (C467/128) with Owen Luder in 2015-16 for its Architects Lives&#x27; collection held by the British Library.

==Death==
Luder died on 8 October 2021, at the age of 93.

==See also==
*Rodney Gordon, design director at Owen Luder Partnership.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q507926" start="0" end="17" title="Owen Luder" label="Harold Owen Luder"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="153" end="167" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="218" end="227" title="brutalist" label="brutalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787008" start="290" end="319" title="Architects Registration Board" label="Architects Registration Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="350" end="387" title="Royal Institute of British Architects" label="Royal Institute of British Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="593" end="604" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820036" start="1016" end="1029" title="Old Kent Road" label="Old Kent Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="1033" end="1045" title="south London" label="south London"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1099" end="1115" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1167" end="1193" title="London South Bank University#History" label="Brixton School of Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162774" start="1269" end="1299" title="conscription in the United Kingdom" label="called up for military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1514" end="1520" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1522" end="1529" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q10488340" start="1539" end="1549" title="Eros House" label="Eros House"/>
<link wikidata="Q305029" start="1551" end="1558" title="Catford" label="Catford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537297" start="1560" end="1568" title="Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841295" start="1595" end="1609" title="Tricorn Centre" label="Tricorn Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="1611" end="1621" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656064" start="1661" end="1675" title="Trinity Square, Gateshead" label="Trinity Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="1677" end="1686" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565317" start="1766" end="1791" title="SouthGate, Bath" label="SouthGate Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="1793" end="1797" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263347" start="1837" end="1850" title="Derwent Tower" label="Derwent Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q305029" start="1901" end="1908" title="Catford" label="Catford"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="2105" end="2127" title="Brutalist architecture" label="Brutalist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841295" start="2627" end="2641" title="Tricorn Centre" label="Tricorn Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="2645" end="2655" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263347" start="2657" end="2670" title="Derwent Tower" label="Derwent Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="2674" end="2683" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q305029" start="2689" end="2696" title="Catford" label="Catford"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2716" end="2722" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656064" start="2724" end="2738" title="Trinity Square, Gateshead" label="Trinity Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="2742" end="2751" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218805" start="2768" end="2789" title="multi-storey car park" label="multi-storey car park"/>
<link wikidata="Q511591" start="2887" end="2897" title="Get Carter" label="Get Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="3124" end="3138" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565317" start="3185" end="3221" title="SouthGate, Bath" label="a new multimillion-pound development"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="3523" end="3532" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256162" start="3546" end="3556" title="Demolition (television)" label="Demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="3726" end="3737" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486074" start="3846" end="3869" title="Langham Research Centre" label="Langham Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567851" start="4053" end="4073" title="South London Theatre" label="South London Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q148349" start="4150" end="4157" title="Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="4677" end="4689" title="South London" label="South London"/>
<link wikidata="Q15960719" start="5239" end="5260" title="National Life Stories" label="National Life Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="5389" end="5404" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764955" start="5480" end="5493" title="Rodney Gordon" label="Rodney Gordon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954547" wikidata="Q1209145" url="?curid=954547" title="Kiko">
<text>Kiko or KIKO may refer to:

==People==
*Kiko (given name), a list of individuals with the name
*Kiko Pangilinan (born 1963), Filipino senator and farmer
*Kiko, Princess Akishino (born 1966), the wife of Prince Fumihito
*Kiko (footballer, born 1972), Spanish footballer
*Kiko Charana (born 1976), Portuguese footballer
*Kiko (footballer, born 1978), Brazilian footballer
*Kheireddine &quot;Kiko&quot; Zarabi (born 1984), Algerian footballer
*Kiko (footballer, born 1988), Spanish footballer
*Kiko (footballer, born 1993), Portuguese footballer
*Kiko (footballer, born 1998), Andorran footballer
*Kiko (footballer, born 2002), Francisco Miguel Teixeira Domingues, Portuguese football left-back for Benfica B
*Kiko Bejines, (1962–1983), Mexican boxer

==Other uses==
*&quot;Kikō&quot;, the Japanese form of the Chinese term &quot;qigong&quot;
*&quot;KIKO&quot;, a 2015 compilation album by Panda Eyes
*&quot;Kiko&quot; (album), by Los Lobos
*Kiko (TV series), a children&#x27;s animated series
*Kiko goat, a breed of goat from New Zealand
*KIKO (AM), a radio station (1340 AM) licensed to Apache Junction, Arizona, United States
*KIKO-FM, a radio station (96.5 FM) licensed to Claypool, Arizona, United States
*Kikō-ji, a Buddhist temple in Nara, Japan

==See also==
*Keiko (disambiguation)
*Kikos (disambiguation)
*Quico (disambiguation)
*Tropical Storm Kiko (disambiguation), hurricanes, typhoons and a tropical storm</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1209145" start="0" end="4" title="Kiko" label="Kiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209145" start="8" end="12" title="Kiko" label="KIKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q21286008" start="40" end="57" title="Kiko (given name)" label="Kiko (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q984265" start="96" end="111" title="Francis Pangilinan" label="Kiko Pangilinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232636" start="154" end="177" title="Kiko, Princess Akishino" label="Kiko, Princess Akishino"/>
<link wikidata="Q263391" start="220" end="248" title="Kiko (footballer, born 1972)" label="Kiko (footballer, born 1972)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752667" start="270" end="282" title="Kiko Charana" label="Kiko Charana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291164" start="319" end="347" title="Kiko (footballer, born 1978)" label="Kiko (footballer, born 1978)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196132" start="371" end="406" title="Kheireddine Zarabi" label="Kheireddine &amp;quot;Kiko&amp;quot; Zarabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318645" start="441" end="469" title="Kiko (footballer, born 1988)" label="Kiko (footballer, born 1988)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483638" start="491" end="519" title="Kiko (footballer, born 1993)" label="Kiko (footballer, born 1993)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50874941" start="544" end="572" title="Kiko (footballer, born 1998)" label="Kiko (footballer, born 1998)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802352" start="595" end="623" title="Kiko (footballer, born 2002)" label="Kiko (footballer, born 2002)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711575" start="707" end="719" title="Francisco Bejines" label="Kiko Bejines"/>
<link wikidata="Q204368" start="827" end="833" title="qigong" label="qigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q29913371" start="887" end="897" title="Panda Eyes" label="Panda Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406324" start="899" end="923" title="Kiko (album)" label="&amp;quot;Kiko&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19727735" start="939" end="955" title="Kiko (TV series)" label="Kiko (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196543" start="992" end="1001" title="Kiko goat" label="Kiko goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330837" start="1037" end="1046" title="KIKO (AM)" label="KIKO (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330833" start="1127" end="1134" title="KIKO-FM" label="KIKO-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419051" start="1208" end="1215" title="Kikō-ji" label="Kikō-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q362346" start="1265" end="1287" title="Keiko (disambiguation)" label="Keiko (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33077415" start="1289" end="1311" title="Kikos (disambiguation)" label="Kikos (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414460" start="1313" end="1335" title="Quico (disambiguation)" label="Quico (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846022" start="1337" end="1373" title="Tropical Storm Kiko (disambiguation)" label="Tropical Storm Kiko (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954548" wikidata="Q16828938" url="?curid=954548" title="Dartmoor longhouse">
<text>The Dartmoor longhouse is a type of traditional stone-built home, typically found on the high ground of Dartmoor, in Devon, England and belonging to a wider tradition of combining human residences with those of livestock (cattle or sheep) under a single roof specific to western Britain; Wales, Cornwall and Devon, where they are more usually referred to simply as longhouses and in general housebarns.

== History ==
The earliest are thought to have been built in the 13th century, and they continued to be constructed throughout the mediaeval period and into the Early Modern, using local granite or other stone. One particular longhouse near Carreg Cennen Castle in Wales is dated to the 11th century. Many longhouses are still inhabited today (although adapted over the centuries), while others have been converted into farm buildings. Forms of longhouses identical to those on Dartmoor are found in Cornwall, particularly on Bodmin Moor and in Wales where they are commonly called &quot;tyddyn&quot; meaning &#x27;homestead&#x27;, or specifically &quot;Ty Hir&quot; meaning &#x27;long-house&#x27; in the Welsh language. A near identical type called the &quot;(Maison) Longère&quot; can also be found in northwestern (Brittany, Normandy) and central France.

Higher Uppacott, one of very few remaining longhouses to retain its original unaltered shippon (cattle-shed) and medieval thatch, is a Grade I listed building, and is now owned by the Dartmoor National Park Authority.
 Another fine example of a 16th-century longhouse, extended and enlarged can be found at Cullacott near Launceston in Cornwall.

The longhouse consists of a long, single-storey gable-ended granite structure built lengthwise down the slope of a hill, with a central &#x27;cross-passage&#x27; dividing it into two rooms, sometimes partitioned with a screen. The higher end of the building was occupied by the human inhabitants; their animals were tethered in the lower, especially during the cold winter months. The animal quarters, called the &#x27;shippon&#x27; or &#x27;shippen&#x27;; a word still used by many locals to describe a farm building used for livestock, were located down the slope to allow slurry to drain out through the end wall. In Wales, the upper end was known as &quot;pen uchaf&quot;, the lower end &quot;pen isaf&quot; and the passage &quot;penllawr&quot; meaning &#x27;head of the floor&#x27;.

Early longhouses would have had no chimney – the smoke from a central fire simply filtered through the thatched roof and the whole space was open to the rafters, without a ceiling, as in a medieval English hall, to benefit from the heat of the open peat or furze hearth. Windows were very small or non-existent, so the interior would have been dark. The cross-passage had a door at either end, and with both of these open a breeze was often created which made it an ideal location for winnowing. Later in the medieval period, separation from the animals was increased with the introduction of enclosed stone fireplaces and upper floors inserted to create private bedrooms, while the roofspace above the shippen was often used as a hayloft or store.

The medieval Welsh tale The Dream of Rhonabwy from the 12th or 13th century vividly describes the interior of &quot;an old pitch black hall&quot;:

This simple floorplan is clearly visible at the abandoned mediaeval village at Hound Tor, which was inhabited from the mid-13th to the mid-15th centuries corresponding with the establishment of the Ancient Tenements on the high moorlands and abandoned as a result of depopulation following the Black Death after 1340. Excavations during the 1960s revealed four longhouses, many featuring a central drainage channel, and several smaller houses and barns. Peter Herring notes in his discussion of a medieval hamlet of six longhouses at Brown Willy in Cornwall dating from the mid-thirteenth century, that the shippons were typically orientated toward a common livestock holding area or &#x27;townplace&#x27;, whilst the raised human portion was carefully positioned away from the communal area for privacy. Roofs were originally thatched, with gardens and various agricultural outbuildings including communal corn-driers.

In later centuries, the longhouses were adapted and expanded, often with the addition of an upper floor and a granite porch to protect against the elements. Substantial inglenook fireplaces and chimneys were also added, along with adjoining dairies, staircases and linhays and can be seen at many of the surviving Dartmoor longhouses today (see Ancient Tenements) which often have roofs replaced with local or Welsh slate, mainly in the nineteenth century. The ownership of an extensive longhouse is regarded as a sign of the relative prosperity of the rural region and longhouses would usually have been occupied by land-owning families rather than tenant peasants who would have occupied much humbler dwellings.

==Gallery==
== Notes and references ==
==External links==
*The Dartmoor Longhouse Dartmoor National Park</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16828938" start="4" end="22" title="Dartmoor longhouse" label="Dartmoor longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="104" end="112" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="117" end="122" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q504106" start="365" end="374" title="longhouse" label="longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588110" start="391" end="400" title="housebarn" label="housebarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="591" end="598" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="904" end="912" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q889885" start="930" end="941" title="Bodmin Moor" label="Bodmin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="1109" end="1123" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259190" start="1173" end="1180" title="Longère" label="Longère"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="1222" end="1230" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="1385" end="1391" title="thatch" label="thatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1406" end="1421" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q287590" start="1585" end="1595" title="Launceston, Cornwall" label="Launceston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161370" start="1658" end="1663" title="gable" label="gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925154" start="2185" end="2191" title="slurry" label="slurry"/>
<link wikidata="Q240854" start="2605" end="2609" title="hall" label="hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="2648" end="2652" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q393278" start="2656" end="2661" title="furze" label="furze"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="2662" end="2668" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q961751" start="2884" end="2893" title="winnowing" label="winnowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q911120" start="3173" end="3194" title="The Dream of Rhonabwy" label="The Dream of Rhonabwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913229" start="3376" end="3385" title="Hound Tor" label="Hound Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752920" start="3495" end="3512" title="Ancient Tenements" label="Ancient Tenements"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="3591" end="3602" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q335390" start="3831" end="3842" title="Brown Willy" label="Brown Willy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032582" start="4387" end="4396" title="inglenook" label="inglenook"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="4459" end="4466" title="dairies" label="dairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507387" start="4483" end="4489" title="linhay" label="linhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752920" start="4563" end="4580" title="Ancient Tenements" label="Ancient Tenements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478550" start="4628" end="4639" title="Welsh slate" label="Welsh slate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954550" wikidata="Q1550225" url="?curid=954550" title="Mining accident">
<text>A mining accident is an accident that occurs during the process of mining minerals or metals. Thousands of miners die from mining accidents each year, especially from underground coal mining, although accidents also occur in hard rock mining. Coal mining is considered much more hazardous than hard rock mining due to flat-lying rock strata, generally incompetent rock, the presence of methane gas, and coal dust. Most of the deaths these days occur in developing countries, and rural parts of developed countries where safety measures are not practiced as fully. A mining disaster is an incident where there are five or more fatalities.

== Causes ==
Mining accidents can occur from a variety of causes, including leaks of poisonous gases such as hydrogen sulfide or explosive natural gases, especially firedamp or methane, dust explosions, collapsing of mine stopes, mining-induced seismicity, flooding, or general mechanical errors from improperly used or malfunctioning mining equipment (such as safety lamps or electrical equipment). The use of improper explosives underground can also cause methane and coal dust explosions.

== Worst mining disaster in history ==

On April 26, 1942, in the Benxihu (Honkeiko) coal mine in Liaoning Province, China, what is believed to be the worst mining disaster in history occurred when a coal dust explosion killed over 1,500 people.

The disaster occurred in an area that is now within the borders of modern-day China but was at the time part of the puppet state of Manchukuo established by Japan after it invaded and occupied northeast China in the 1930s. The Japanese administrators of the mine forced Chinese labourers to conduct the mining work under harsh conditions. The disaster began with a fire in the mine. In order to suppress it, the Japanese operators cut off the air in the ventilation shafts and blocked off the mine so as to deprive the blaze of oxygen. Most workers were not evacuated before these actions, and they were trapped within the sealed-off area of the mine; they suffocated to death as the fire burned off oxygen and led to carbon monoxide poisoning. Once the fire died out and the mine was re-opened, ten days were required for workers to remove debris and reach the bodies of those who had been trapped inside the mine. 

The dead consisted of 1,518 Chinese and 31 Japanese. Most of the bodies were later buried in a mass grave. After the war and liberation of China by the Soviet Union, the disaster was investigated. The Soviet report concluded that the majority of the deaths were not caused directly by the initial fire but were the result of carbon monoxide poisoning and suffocation resulting from the decisions of the Japanese.

==Accidents by year==

This is an incomplete list of notable mining accidents and disasters that have killed at least 10 persons:

===19th century===

===20th century===

*May 19, 1902: 216 miners were killed in the Fraterville Mine disaster in Fraterville, Tennessee
*January 25, 1904: 179 miners and two aid workers were killed in the Harwick mine disaster, Harwick, Pennsylvania
*April 28, 1904: 63 people were killed in Villanueva del Río, Sevilla; it was the worst mining accident recorded in Spain.
*October 28, 1904; 19 miners were killed in Tercio, Colorado by a coal dust explosion. 
*February 20, 1905 Virginia City Mine explosion (Alabama), 112 killed. 
*March 10, 1906: Courrières mine disaster in Courrières, France. 1,099 workers died in the worst mine accident in European history.
*December 1, 1907: Naomi Mine Explosion in Fayette City, Pennsylvania. 34 workers died.
*December 4, 1907 Giroux Mining Accidents Ely, Nevada. 2 dead; 3 trapped.
*December 6, 1907: Monongah Mining disaster in Monongah, West Virginia. Official death toll is 362, but due to inadequate record keeping, the true death toll could be around 500. Victims were mostly Italian immigrant workers, including children. The disaster is widely considered the worst coal mining accident in American history.
*December 16, 1907: Yolande mine explosion near Birmingham, Alabama. Fifty-seven killed.
*December 19, 1907: Darr Mine disaster in Rostraver Township, Pennsylvania. 239 workers died, including children.
*August 18, 1908: Maypole Colliery disaster in Abram, Greater Manchester, England. 75 men and boys died.
*November 28, 1908: Marianna mine explosion near Marianna, Pennsylvania. 154 men killed, one survivor.
*November 13, 1909: Cherry Mine disaster in Cherry, Illinois. 259 workers, some as young as eleven, died in this mine fire, which had the most fatalities of any mine fire in the United States. 
*December 21, 1910: The Pretoria Pit disaster in Westhoughton, Lancashire, 344 men and boys lost their lives in this explosion, which is the worst mining disaster on one day in England.
*January 20, 1911: 40 coal miners die in Sosnowiec, Russian Poland.
*April 8. 1911 Banner Mine disaster near Littleton, Alabama. Of the 128 men killed, most were leased Black convicts. 
*August 24, 1911 Giroux Mining Accidents Ely, Nevada 7 dead 2 injured
*December 9, 1911: Cross Mountain Mine disaster killed 84 miners in Briceville, Tennessee
*October 14, 1913: Senghenydd colliery disaster, the worst mining accident in the United Kingdom; 439 workers died in Wales.
*October 22, 1913: Dawson Stag Canon Number 2 Mine disaster, near Dawson, New Mexico, where 263 workers were killed due to illegal use of dynamite.
*April 28, 1914: The Eccles mine disaster was an explosion of coal-seam, in Eccles, West Virginia. The explosion took the lives of at least 180 men and boys
*June 8, 1917: Speculator Mine disaster in Butte, Montana. An electric cable being lowered into the mine was accidentally ignited at 2,500 feet below the surface. The fire quickly climbed the cable and ignited the mine&#x27;s wooden shaft. The shaft became a chimney, eliminating the mine&#x27;s primary source of oxygen. Nearly all of the 168 fatalities were due to asphyxia, from carbon monoxide poisoning. This is the deadliest underground hard rock mining disaster in United States history.
*January 12, 1918 Minnie Pit disaster in Staffordshire, England was a coal mining accident in which 155 men and boys died (144 from carbon monoxide poisoning and 11 from violence, plus carbon monoxide poisoning). The disaster, which was caused by an explosion due to firedamp, is the worst ever recorded in the North Staffordshire Coalfield. An official investigation never established what caused the ignition of flammable gases in the pit. 
*February 8, 1923 The Dawson Stag Canon #1 Mine Explosion killed 123; many were descendants of men killed in the 1913 explosion at the same mine. As a mine car derailed, it caused sparks and ignited coal dust, causing the explosion.
*February 20, 1925 The City Mine Disaster, Sullivan County, Indiana, United States. An explosion occurred at this coal mine, killing 51.
* November 3, 1926 The Barnes-Hecker Mine Disaster, near Ishpeming, Michigan, United States. A stope collapse allowed water and quicksand to fill most of the mine within 15 minutes, and 51 miners drowned.
* 1927–1932: Hawks Nest Tunnel Disaster, near Gauley Bridge, West Virginia, United States. Over several years, 476 workers died from silicosis.
*January 3, 1934: Nelson III Coal Mine, Osek u Duchcova, Czechoslovakia, Accumulated coal dust explosion. 142 dead miners including one woman. In June 1934, the accumulated gases knocked out the masonry cover above the pit and killed two more workers - the number of victims thus rose to 144. 
*April 21, 1934: 1934 Kakanj mine disaster. 127 miners died in an explosion in the Kakanj coal mine in Kakanj, Kingdom of Yugoslavia. 
*July 2, 1937 The Holditch (also known as Brymbo) Colliery disaster was a coal mining accident in Chesterton, Staffordshire, England, in which 30 men died and eight were injured. It was caused due to a fire and subsequent explosions. Fatalities were exacerbated because management chose to try to save the coal seam, and risked the lives of mine workers while delaying evacuation.
*November 11, 1937: According to Japanese government official confirmed report, a long period heavy rain contiue, a huge landslide hit in Ogushi sulfur mine, followed to landslide and a smelter fire at Tsumagoi, Gunma Prefecture, Japan, as resulting to 245 person were human fatalities and 32 persons were wounded.
*May 10, 1938: Explosion in Markham No. 1 Colliery near Staveley, Derbyshire, England. 79 workers died and 40 were seriously injured.
*July 15, 1940: Sonman Explosion near Portage, Pennsylvania. 63 workers died.
*April 26, 1942: Benxihu Colliery disaster in Benxi, Liaoning, China. 1,549 workers died, in the worst coal mine accident ever in the world. At the time, during World War II, this area was occupied by Japan and the mine was under control of Japanese managers. The overwhelming number of dead were Chinese forced labourers.
*June 19, 1945: 1945 El Teniente mining accident in El Teniente, Chile. 355 workers died and another 747 were injured.
* February 20, 1946: disaster in Bergkamen, Ruhr, Germany. 405 died.
*March 25, 1947: Coal dust explosion in Centralia, Illinois, mine killed 111 miners. 
*July 14th, 1949: firedamp explosion at the María Luisa pit (Langreo, Asturias, Spain), killing 17 miners and 4 mules. 
*September 7, 1950: Knockshinnoch Mine Disaster: Ayrshire Scotland: Liquid peat and moss flooded the mine, trapping over 100 men underground. It took days to reach the trapped men of whom 13 died. 
*December 21, 1951: Orient 2 coal mine explosion in West Frankfort, Illinois. 119 workers died.
*December 10, 1954: Newton Chikli Colliery disaster, Chhindwara (M.P.), India. Flooding of the mine was caused by inrush of water from old workings of the same mine. There were 112 persons inside the mine when it was flooded. 49 persons managed to escape through the incline; the remaining 63 persons were trapped and drowned.
*August 8, 1956: &quot;Bois du Cazier&quot; disaster in Marcinelle, Belgium. A fire in the mines resulted in 262 deaths; of the 274 people working in &quot;Bois du Cazier&quot; on that morning, only twelve survived. 138 of the victims were Italian migrant workers.
*October 28, 1958: Oglebay-Norton mine, Craigsville, West Virginia 14 died.
*January 22, 1959: Knox Mine disaster at River Slope Mine, Port Griffith Luzerne County, Pennsylvania – flooding from the riverbed above works killed 12 miners
*January 21, 1960: Coalbrook mining disaster, South Africa, 437 died.
*May 9, 1960: Laobaidong colliery coal dust explosion Datong, China, 682 died.
*July 7, 1961: Dukla Coal Mine, Dolní Suchá, Czechoslovakia, Fire and carbon monoxide poisoning caused the deaths of 108 miners. 
*November 5, 1962: Kings Bay in Ny-Ålesund on the Norwegian territory of Svalbard 21 miners killed in an explosion. 
*November 9, 1963: Mitsui Miike Coal Mine disaster Mitsui Miike, Ōmuta, Fukuoka, Japan; 458 died.
*March 28, 1965: Several tailing dams at a copper mine failed during an earthquake, releasing water and slag which wiped out the town of El Cobre in Valparaíso Region, Chile; 350–400 miners and residents died.
*May 17, 1965: Cambrian Colliery in South Wales; 31 died. 
*May 28, 1965: Dhanbad coal mine disaster took place in Jharkhand, India, killing over 300 miners.
*June 7, 1965: 1965 Kakanj mine disaster. 128 miners died in an explosion in the Kakanj coal mine in Kakanj,SR Bosnia and Herzegovina, SFR Yugoslavia.
*October 21, 1966: Aberfan Disaster was a catastrophic collapse of a colliery spoil-tip that caused an avalanche in the Welsh village of Aberfan, engulfing Pantglas Junior School, killing 116 children and 28 adults.
*November 20, 1968: Farmington Mine Disaster in Farmington, West Virginia. 78 workers died. As a result of the disaster, the U.S. Congress passed the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969.
*December 30, 1970: Hurricane Creek mine disaster in Hyden, Kentucky. 39 miners died due to unsafe mine conditions. Occurred exactly one year after the passage of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969.
*June 6, 1972: Wankie coal mine disaster Wankie, Rhodesia/Zimbabwe, 426 fatalities.
*March 21, 1973: Lofthouse Colliery disaster, West Yorkshire, England, seven fatalities.
*July 30, 1973: Markham Colliery disaster near Staveley, Derbyshire, England. 18 workers were killed and 11 seriously injured when a descending cage failed to slow at the bottom of the mine shaft.
*December 27, 1974: An explosion and a fire in a coal mine near Liévin, France kills 41 and injures a further six in the worst mining disaster in France since World War II.
*December 27, 1975: Chasnala mining disaster, Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India, 372 miners died and another 130 contract workers are claimed to have died when water from adjacent mine gusted after the wall in between collapsed. 
*October 16, 1981: A methane explosion in a coal mine owned by Kokutan Yubari Mining Company near Yūbari, Hokkaido resulted in 93 deaths including 10 rescuers.
*December 8, 1981: No. 21 Mine explosion near Whitwell, Tennessee. 13 coal miners died as a result of the explosion.
*January 18, 1984: Miike coal mine A fire in a mine owned by Mitsui Mining Company near Ōmuta, Fukuoka resulted in 83 deaths and an additional 13 injuries.
*July 19, 1985: Val di Stava dam collapse took place in the village of Stava, near Tesero, Italy, when two tailings dams failed that had been used for sedimenting the mud from the nearby Prestavel mine. It resulted in one of Italy&#x27;s worst disasters, killing 268 people, destroying 63 buildings, and demolishing eight bridges.
*September 16, 1986 Kinross mining disaster. In South Africa an underground fire killed 177 people.
*June 2, 1988 in Borken, Hesse. A lignite mine devastated by an explosion, 57 fatalities.
*November 18, 1989: 90 miners killed in the Aleksinački Rudnik mine in SR Serbia, SFRepublic of Yugoslavia.
*August 26, 1990: Dobrnja-Jug mine disaster. 180 miners were killed at the Mramor coal mine near Tuzla,SR Bosnia and Herzegovina, SFR Yugoslavia.
* May 9, 1992: Westray Mine, Pictou County, Nova Scotia. 26 killed in a methane and coal dust explosion. 
*May 9, 1993: Nambija mine disaster, Nambija, Ecuador. Approximately 300 people were killed in a landslide
*May 13, 1993: Middelbult colliery near the town of Secunda in South Africa. 53 people killed in an underground methane explosion. 
*August 28, 1994: Rajpura Dariba Mine VRM disaster, Dariba, Udaipur, India: This incident occurred due to flooding of the slurry from a mined VRM Underground mining hard rock stop, where cemented fill could not settle and its plug failed. This slurry accumulated in the plugged shaft, which could not take the load and subsequently failed. All of the material fell in the shaft, resulting in the drowning deaths of 63 people working below.
* February 22, 1994: Merriespruit tailings dam disaster, where 17 people died when a tailings dam failed.
* May 10, 1995: Vaal Reefs mining disaster, South Africa; a locomotive fell down a lift shaft and landed on a cage, causing the deaths of 104 people.
* March 24, 1996: Marcopper mining disaster, occurred in the island province of Marinduque, Philippines. A year after the Republic Act No. 7942, or also known as &quot;The Philippine Mining Act of 1995&quot; is enacted. A mine tailings pit fracture caused toxic waste to flood the Makulapnit-Boac river, displacing 400 families in Barangay Hinapulan. Drinking water contamination killed fish and shrimp, while large animals perished. Crops, irrigation channels, and the Boac River were destroyed.
* August 31st, 1995: firedamp explosion at the San Nicolás Pit (Ablaña, Asturias, Spain), killing 14 miners.

===21st century===

*January 30, 2000: Baia Mare cyanide spill took place in Baia Mare, Romania. The accident, called the worst environmental disaster in Europe since Chernobyl, was a release of 100,000 tons of cyanide-contaminated water by an Aurul mining company when a reservoir broke, releasing its waters into the rivers Someş, Tisza and Danube. Although no human fatalities were reported, the leak killed up to 80% of aquatic life of some of the affected rivers.
*October 11, 2000: 2000 Martin County coal slurry spill occurred after midnight when the bottom of a coal slurry impoundment owned by Massey Energy in Martin County, Kentucky, broke into an abandoned underground mine below. The slurry came out of the mine openings, sending an estimated 306 million US gallons (1.16 million cubic metres; 1.16 billion litres) of slurry down two tributaries of the Tug Fork River. By morning, Wolf Creek was oozing with the black waste; on Coldwater Fork, a 10-foot-wide (3.0 m) stream became a 100-yard (91 m) expanse of thick slurry.
*September 23, 2001: Brookwood Mine Disaster At approximately 5:15 p.m., at the Jim Walter Resources No. 5 coal mine in Brookwood, Alabama a cave-in caused a release of methane gas that sparked two major explosions, killing 13 miners.
*January 23, 2002: La Espuela Coal Mine disaster The disaster was caused by flooding of the shaft. Without the ability to flee, the 13 miners drowned.
*February 19, 2006: Pasta de Conchos accident. 65 miners lost their lives in the mining accident near Nueva Rosita, Coahuila, Mexico. Only 2 bodies were recovered.
*August 6, 2007: Crandall Canyon Mine collapse. 6 miners and 3 rescue workers killed after subsequent collapses caused by inadequate mine design. 
*May–June 2009: 2009 Harmony Gold mine deaths - at least 82 miners died from inhalation of poisonous gasses created by a fire in a closed section of the mine where unofficial miners were operating illegally.
*April 5, 2010: Upper Big Branch Mine disaster, West Virginia. An explosion occurred in Massey Energy&#x27;s Upper Big Branch coal. 29 of 31 miners at the site were killed.
*May 8, 2010: Raspadskaya mine explosion in Kemerovo Oblast, Russia. An explosion believed to have been caused by a methane build up. 66 people were confirmed to have died with at least 99 others injured and as many as 24 unaccounted for.
*August 5, 2010: 2010 Copiapó mining accident, Atacama Desert, Chile. The 121-year-old San José copper–gold mine structurally collapsed at 14:05 CLT. The heart of the mountain, which had the mass of two Empire State Buildings, collapsed and caused catastrophic damage to the mine. It blocked all possible escape routes for the 33 miners trapped at . After 69 days, all 33 miners were rescued.
*November 19, 2010: Pike River Mine disaster in New Zealand. At 3:45 pm, the coal mine exploded. 29 men underground died immediately, or shortly afterwards, from the blast or from the toxic atmosphere. Two men in the stone drift, some distance from the mine workings, managed to escape. (Extract from Royal Commission of Enquiry Report on Pike River.)
*October 28th, 2013: a leak of firedamp gas killed six miners working at a depth of almost 700 metres in the Emilio del Valle mine in León, Castille and León, Spain.
*May 13, 2014: Soma mine disaster took place in Soma, Turkey. The accident was reportedly the worst mining accident ever in Turkey, and is the worst mining accident in the 21st century so far. 301 people died.
*January 6, 2019: 2019 Kohistan mine collapse, Afghanistan. The accident killed at least 30 gold miners.
*July 2, 2020: At least 174 people were killed in a landslide in the 2020 Hpakant jade mine disaster in the Hpakant area in Myanmar.
*December 1, 2020: At least 18 people were killed by a carbon monoxide leak in the Diaoshuidong mine disaster in Chongqing in China.
*November 25, 2021: Listvyazhnaya mine disaster in Kemerovo Oblast, Russia. Smoke from a fire in a ventilation shaft caused the suffocation of over 40 miners.
*May 30, 2022: At least 12 people were killed by an explosion in La Mestiza coal mine in Colombia.
* August 3, 2022: 10 people missing after flooding at the El Pinabete coal mine in Sabinas, Coahuila, Mexico.
*October 14, 2022: 41 killed in 2022 Turkish Mine Explosion in Bartın.
*May 18, 2023: At least 31 miners died at an abandoned mine being mined illegally in Welkom, South Africa.
*October 28, 2023: 46 killed in Kostenko mine disaster in the Karaganda Region of Kazakhstan.

==Accidents by country==
===Australia===


22 miners drowned in December 1882 in the Australasian number 2 deep lead gold mine at Creswick in Victoria. The mine was violently flooded by a burst of water when miners digging a new drive approached too close to the abandoned and flooded Australasian number 1 workings, due to an error in surveying by the manager of the mine. 5 miners survived and were rescued after 50 hours trapped underground. This disaster, with the highest death toll from a gold mine disaster in Australian history, left 63 children without fathers and 18 widows.

The Bulli Mine Disaster of 23 March 1887 involved a gas explosion in the mine that killed 81 men and boys, leaving 50 women widows and 150 children without fathers.

The Mount Kembla Mine Disaster of 31 July 1902 was an explosion resulting in the death of 96 miners, including two engaged in rescue work. It remains the worst mining disaster in Australian history.

A coal dust explosion at the Mount Mulligan mine on 19 September 1921 killed 75 or 76 workers.

Tasmania&#x27;s Beaconsfield Mine collapse occurred on 25 April 2006. Of the 17 people who were in the mine at the time, 14 escaped immediately following the collapse, one was killed and the remaining two were found alive after five days. The survivors were trapped in a 1.5m x 1.2m cherry picker cage, which had saved them from being crushed by rocks. As it was not safe for rescuers to blast their way through, a special borer was brought in to drill an escape shaft. They were finally released on 9 May after 14 days underground.

Three mining disasters occurred at Moura in a 20-year period. The first of these was in 1975, at the Kianga Mine, where 13 men died in an underground explosion. The mine was sealed without their bodies being retrieved. In 1986 a second disaster occurred, as an underground explosion, which took the lives of 12 miners. The bodies of all those persons were retrieved. In Moura on 7 August 1994 a third major mining accident occurred with an explosion at Moura No. 2 Mine. A second explosion at the mine approximately a day and a half later saw rescue attempts abandoned, and the mine was sealed, with the bodies of the 11 miners unretrieved.

In the 1996 Gretley coal mine disaster, near Newcastle, four men were killed when their mining machine broke into the flooded workings of an old coalmine, abandoned over 80 years earlier.

Four miners were killed in a windblast incident at the Northparkes mine outside the New South Wales town of Parkes in 1999.

A mine collapsed at Ballarat Gold Mine in Victoria on March 14, 2024, resulting in a man dead, and another in critical condition. The two had been &#x27;air legging&#x27; in a prohibited area under unsupported ground when the collapse occurred at 4:50pm. 29 other miners took refuge in a safety pod and were later brought to safety. The air legging technique is to be no longer used temporarily while a work safe investigation is underway. Australian Workers&#x27; Union organiser Ross Kenna said the geology of the mine is not suitable for the technique.

=== Belgium ===
On March 4, 1887, 120 miners died in a coal mine in La Boule, Borinage due to a methane explosion.

On the morning of August 8, 1956, a fire in the mine &quot;Bois du Cazier&quot; in Marcinelle caused 262 victims, with only 12 survivors. A mining cart on an elevator cage hit an oil pipe and electricity lines, with the resulting fire trapping the miners. Most of the victims were immigrants (136 Italians, 8 Poles, 6 Greeks, 5 Germans, 5 Frenchmen, 3 Hungarians, 1 Englishman, 1 Dutchman, 1 Russian and 1 Ukrainian.)

===Bosnia and Herzegovina===
On September 4, 2014, after a 3.5 Richter earthquake hit Zenica caused rock burst in coal mine &quot;Raspotočje&quot;, 34 miners remained trapped inside the mine. It was later reported that 5 miners were killed in the accident.

===Canada===

*The 1887 Nanaimo mine explosion in Nanaimo, British Columbia killed 150 miners at the No 1 Esplanade Mine. Explosives were laid improperly triggering a massive mine-wide explosion. Most miners were killed instantly, only 7 survived. Of the 150 workers killed, 53 of them were Chinese, the names of which are mostly unknown.
*The Hillcrest mine disaster, the worst coal mining disaster of Canadian history, occurred in Alberta in 1914. Deaths from the methane and coal dust-fueled explosion numbered 189; news coverage was eclipsed by the First World War. The mine remained in use until 1939.
*On May 20, 1980, a mining disaster in Val-d&#x27;Or, Quebec killed eight men under 68,000 tons of debris when part of a 150-meter shaft collapsed; 16 men escaped by scrambling through a partially completed ventilation shaft. Charges of manslaughter were made against the company which pled non guilty. It was not the fault of the owners of the operation, a jury has found in acquitting Belmoral Mines Ltd. on all charges. A song about this event called &quot;La tragédie de la Balmoral&quot; was recorded and published by singer Jean-Guy Gauthier in 1981.
*On 18 September 1992, at the height of a labour dispute at the Giant Mine near Yellowknife, an explosion resulting from a bomb planted by striking worker &quot;Roger Warren&quot;, killed nine men riding through a transport tunnel.
*Coal mining accidents in the province of Nova Scotia spanning 65 years referred to collectively as the Springhill mining disasters, which claimed in total at least 138 lives of men and boys due to coal dust explosions. The Westray Mine disaster in 1992 claimed the lives of 26 miners in a methane/coal dust explosion at a recently opened mining operation. Both of these mines were subsequently permanently closed in the wake of these events.
*On 17 May 2006, four people died due to asphyxiation in an accident at the decommissioned Sullivan Mine.

=== Central African Republic ===

In June 2013, heavy rains provoked the collapse of a gold mine in Ndassima, killing 37 miners and injuring many others.

=== Chile ===
In June 1945, during a fire, 355 workers died in El Teniente by inhaling carbon monoxide, in what was called the &quot;Tragedia del Humo&quot; ().

In January 2006, an explosion occurred in a mine in Copiapó, leaving 70 miners trapped underground. The miners were rescued after a brief period of time, but two people died.

In August 2010, 33 miners were trapped underground in Copiapó. After two weeks communication was made with them but it was said at least four more months would pass before they could be rescued, though essential services could still be provided. The rescues began on October 12, 2010, and all the 33 miners were rescued within 22 hours of first rescue. News of the success of the team led to celebrations around the country and much of the region.

===China===
According to one source, in 2003 China accounted for the largest number of coal-mining fatalities, accounting for about 80% of the world&#x27;s total, although it produced only 35% of the world&#x27;s coal. Between January 2001 and October 2004, there were 188 accidents that had a death toll of more than 10, about one such accident every 7.4 days. After the 2005 Sunjiawan mine disaster, which killed at least 210 miners, a meeting of the State Council was convened to work on measures to improve work safety in coal mines. The meeting&#x27;s statement indicated serious problems such as violation of safety standards and overproduction in some coal mines. Three billion yuan (360 million US dollars) were dedicated for technological renovation on work safety, gas management in particular, at state-owned major coal mines. The government also promised to send safety supervision teams to 45 coal mines with serious gas problems and invite colliery safety experts to evaluate safety situations in coal mines and formulate prevention measures.

In 2006, according to the State Work Safety Supervision Administration, 4,749 Chinese coal miners were killed in thousands of blasts, floods, and other accidents. For example, a gas explosion at the Nanshan Colliery killed 24 people on November 13, 2006; the mine was operating without any safety license and the Xinhua News Agency claimed the cause was incorrect usage of explosives. However, the 2006 rate was 20.1% less than 2005 despite an 8.1% increase in production.

The &quot;New York Times&quot; reported that China&#x27;s lack of a free press, independent trade unions, citizen watchdog groups and other checks of official power has made cover-ups of mining accidents more possible, even in the Internet age. As a result, Chinese bureaucrats habitually hide scandals (such as mine disasters, chemical spills, the 2003 SARS epidemic, and tainted milk powder) for fear of being held accountable by the ruling Chinese Communist Party or exposing their own illicit deals with companies involved. Under China&#x27;s authoritarian system, superiors reward subordinates for strict compliance with goals established by authorities, like reducing mine disasters. Indeed, should a mining accident occur, the incentive to hide it is often stronger than the reward for managing it well, as any disaster is almost surely considered a liability.

In November 2009, a mining accident in Heilongjiang killed at least 104 people. It is thought to have been caused by a methane explosion followed by a coal dust explosion. Three top officials involved with the mining company were promptly dismissed.

On August 30, 2012, an explosion killed 45 people at the Xiaojiawan coal mine in Sichuan province. A few days later on September 3, 2012, 14 miners were killed at Gaokeng Coal Mine in Jiangxi province.

On March 29, 2013, a landslide trapped 83 people in the Gyama Mine in Tibet.

On 4 January 2014 The Chinese Government stated that 1,049 people died in the year 2013, down 24 percent from 2012.

On 22 February 2023, China recorded four deaths and 49 missing cases due to collapse of a pit coal mine in vast Inner Mongolia region&#x27;s Alxa League. Nearly 900 rescuers, including a team from Ministry of Emergency Management, were sent to search for people. General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping ordered “all-out efforts in search and rescue” of all people.

===Ecuador===
About 300 people were killed on May 9, 1993, in the Nambija mine disaster in Ecuador.

On October 15, 2010, shortly after Chile completed its historic, successful rescue of 33 miners who had been stuck underground in the San Jose mine for a record period of nearly 10 weeks, four workers were trapped in an Ecuadoran gold mine following a tunnel collapse. All were confirmed dead by October 20.

===France===

The Courrières mine disaster was the worst ever pit mine disaster in Europe. It caused the death of 1,099 miners (including many children) in Northern France on 10 March 1906. It seems that this disaster was surpassed only by the Benxihu Colliery accident in China on April 26, 1942, which killed 1,549 miners. A dust explosion, the cause of which is not known with certainty, devastated a coal mine operated by the Compagnie des mines de houille de Courrières (founded in 1852) between the villages of Méricourt (404 killed), Sallaumines (304 killed), Billy-Montigny (114 killed), and Noyelles-sous-Lens (102 killed) about two kilometres (one mile) to the east of Lens, in the Pas-de-Calais département (about 220 km, or 140 miles, north of Paris).

A large explosion was heard shortly after 06:30 on the morning of Saturday 10 March 1906. An elevator cage at Shaft 3 was thrown to the surface, damaging pit-head workings; windows and roofs were blown out on the surface at Shaft 4; an elevator cage raised at Shaft 2 contained only dead and unconscious miners.

===India===
*Burra Dhemo Colliery on 26.9.1956
*Central Bhowrah Colliery on 20.2.1958
*Central Saunda Colliery on 16.9.1976
*Central Saunda Colliery on 15.06.2005
*Chasnalla Colliery on 27.12.1975
*Damua Colliery on 5.1.1960
*Gaslitand Colliery on 26 or 27.9.1995
*Godavarkhani No. 7 LEP on 16.06.2003
*Hurriladih Colliery on 14.9.1983
*Jotejanaki Colliery on 28.6.1913
*Loyabad Colliery on 16.1.1935
*Mahabir Colliery on 13.11.1989
*Majri Colliery on 5.8.1953
*Makerwal Colliery on 6.7.1942
*Newton Chikli Colliery on 10.12.1954
*Phularitand Colliery on 11.07.1912
*Rajpura Dariba Mine VRM disaster on 28.8.1994
*Silewara Colliery on 18.11.1975

===Japan===
Mine disaster of a number occurs from the 1900s to 1980s in Japan, with introduce only large-scale disaster.
* Hokkaido
** New Yubari Coal Mine accident, November 1914, 423 fatalities.
** Hokutan Yubari, 
*** April 1912 accident, 276 fatalities.
*** December 1912 accident, 216 fatalities.
*** December 1938 accident, 161 fatalities.
*** October 1981 accident 93 fatalities.
** South Yubari Coal mine accident, May 1985, 62 fatalities.
** Bibai coal mine
*** March 1941 accident, 177 fatalities.
*** May 1944 accident, 109 fatalities.
* Honshu
** Uchigo coal mine caught fire accident in March 1927, 134 fatalities in Iwaki, Fukushima Prefecture
** East Mizome coal mine seawater inflow accident in April 1915, 235 fatalities in Ube, Yamaguchi Prefecture
** Chosei coal mine submerged cave accident in February 1942, 183 fatalities in Ube.
* Kyushu
** Hōjō coal mine explosion in December 1914, 687 fatalities in Miyata, Fukuoka.
** Hokoku coal mine accidents in Itoda, Fukuoka Prefecture.
*** June 1899 accident, 213 fatalities.
*** July 1907 accident, 365 fatalities.
** Onoura coal mine accidents in Miyata, Fukuoka Prefecture.
*** November 1909 accident, 243 fatalities.
*** December 1918 accident, 376 fatalities.
*** January 1939 accident, 94 fatalities.
** 1965 Yamano coal mine accident on June in Maka, Fukuoka, 237 fatalities.
** 1906 Takashima coal mine explosion on March, 307 fatalities in Nagasaki
** 1963 Mikawa coal mine accident on November in Fukuoka, 458 fatalities.

===Netherlands===
The twelve mines in the Netherlands, four of which were state owned, were considered among the safest in the world, with only three larger accidents occurring during 70 years of mining:
*On 13 July 1928 a methane gas explosion killed 13 miners in the state-owned mine Hendrik in Brunssum.
*On 24 March 1947 13 miners from Staatsmijn Hendrik were killed in a fire caused by an overheated conveyor belt.
*On 3 March 1958 7 miners lost their lives when a cave-in occurred at Staatsmijn Maurits in Geleen.

===New Zealand===

The most notable mining accident in New Zealand is the 1896 Brunner Mine disaster, which killed all 65 miners inside. On 19 November 2010, there were four explosions over nine days at Pike River mine; 29 miners were killed and two escaped with minor injuries.

On 19 January 1967, there was an explosion in the Strongman Mine, near Greymouth, on the West Coast. 19 people were killed.

=== Niger ===
A gold mine collapse in Maradi Region in 2021, killed dozens.

===Poland===

On November 25, 2006, the worst mining disaster occurred in modern Polish history, 23 miners lost their lives at Halemba Coal Mine, a colliery in the town of Ruda Śląska in the southern industrial province of Silesia. A methane explosion at a depth of 1,030 meters caused the November 21 tragedy. The miners were attempting to retrieve €17 million ($US22 million) worth of equipment from a tunnel when a blast caused the shaft to collapse. The tunnel was supposed to have been closed in March due to dangerously high methane concentrations, but was kept active because of the value of the equipment left behind.

===Russia===
Several major mining accidents have happened in Russia, particularly the Ulyanovskaya Mine disaster of 2007, which killed at least 106 miners. On January 20, 2013, at least four miners died and four more went missing following an accident at a coal mine in the Kuznetsk Basin, in western Siberia. In November 2021, the Listvyazhnaya mine disaster took place in Listvyazhnaya; many people were trapped.

===Spain===
The history of mining in Spain has left a number of major mining accidents with hundreds of victims. The majority of the accidents and casualties have happened in the North of Spain and are particularly related to coal mining, mainly due to the collapse of structures and gas explosions. Though, the worst recorded accident took place in Villanueva del Río, Sevilla, in the Southwest of the country on 28 April 1904, killing 63 people and leaving several more injured.

===South Africa===
A number of major mining accidents happened in South Africa including the following accidents:
*57 deaths on 12 September 1944 at Hlobane Colliery near Vryheid, Kwa-Zulu Natal
*437 deaths on 21 January 1960 the Coalbrook mining disaster occurred at Coalbrook North colliery. Coalbrook North colliery was one of the underground collieries of Clydesdale (Transvaal) Collieries Limited and was situated near Sasolburg in the Orange Free State province
*177 killed on 16 September 1986 at the Kinross gold mine in Evander, Mpumalanga. 
*104 deaths on 10 May 1995 at Vaal Reefs number two shaft near Orkney, in the North West.
*64 deaths on 12 September 1983 at Hlobane Colliery near Vryheid, Kwa-Zulu Natal
*53 deaths on 13 May 1993 at Middelbult colliery. Middelbult colliery was and is still one of the underground collieries of Sasol Mining situated near the town of Secunda, Mpumalanga

===Taiwan===
The three worst mining accidents in Taiwan all happened in 1984:
*On June 20, 1984, in in Tucheng District, a runaway mining cart struck a high voltage transformer and triggered an explosion. 72 miners died from carbon monoxide poisoning.
*On July 10, 1984, 103 miners died in in Ruifang District as a result of carbon monoxide poisoning caused by a fire started in the air compressor chamber.
*On December 5, 1984, an explosion occurred at Haishan Coal Mine No. 1 in Sanxia District. 93 miners died from carbon monoxide poisoning with only one survival who was rescued 93 hours after the initial explosion.

===Tanzania===
At least 56 miners were killed in April 1998 after heavy rains flooded tanzanite mine shafts. Five people were killed in July 2013 after the tanzanite quarry they were working in the Mererani mining hills collapsed above their heads. A sixth was admitted to hospital in critical condition.

===Turkey===
In March 1983, in the Armutçuk coal mine 103 miners died due to a methane gas explosion.

In March 1992 at the TCC Kozla mine, 263 miners were killed due to a firedamp explosion

In 2008 there was another disaster which resulted in one person losing their life. In November 2013, 300 workers barricaded the Zonguldak mine in order to protest the working conditions.

During the year of 2009, in December killed 19 miners due to a methane gas explosion in Bursa Province.

In 2010, there was a mining disaster in Zonguldak Province which resulted in the deaths of 30 workers in a coal mine. The explosion was caused by a firedamp explosion. Previous mining disasters have also occurred here, one in 1992 resulted in the deaths of 270 workers. This was the worst mining disaster until the Soma mine disaster.

In May 2014, in Soma, Manisa there was a major mine collapse caused by an explosion. More than 302 workers lost their lives in the collapse and at least 80 workers were injured.

In October 2022, at least 41 were killed in the 2022 Turkish Mine Explosion in Bartın.

In recent years, the Turkish coal mining industry has had the highest number of fatal accidents per million tons of coal produced. When using the &quot;deaths per million tons of coal production&quot; measure, on any given day, a Turkish coal miner is 360 times more likely to be killed in a Turkish mine than an American coal miner is in an American mine, and 5 times more likely to die from the lax mine safety standards of the Turkish mines than even a Chinese coal miner, whose country places with a distant second in terms of safety related deaths per million tons of coal produced.

===United Kingdom===

====England====
In England, The Oaks explosion remains the worst mining accident, claiming 388 lives on 12–13 December 1866 near Barnsley in Yorkshire although in the first and main explosion only 340 died, fewer than at the Hulton colliery, but subsequent explosions claimed other lives during the night and the following day.
The Hulton Colliery explosion at Westhoughton, Lancashire, in 1910 claimed the lives of 344 miners.
An explosion in 1878, at the Wood Pit, Haydock, Lancashire, killed over 200 workers, although only 189 were included in the &#x27;official list&#x27;. Another disaster that killed many miners was the Hartley Colliery Disaster, which occurred in January 1862 when the beam of the pumping engine broke suddenly and fell into the single shaft serving the pit. The beam blocked the shaft and entombed hundreds of miners. The final death toll was 204, most of whom were suffocated by the lack of oxygen.

In the mines of Cornwall, some of the worst accidents were at East Wheal Rose in 1846, where 39 workers were killed by a sudden flood; at Levant mine in 1919, where 31 were killed and many injured in a failure of the man engine; 12 killed at Wheal Agar in 1883 when a cage fell down a shaft and seven killed at Dolcoath mine in 1893 when a large stull collapsed.

====Scotland====
The worst mining accident in Scotland is the 1877 Blantyre mining disaster in Blantyre, Lanarkshire, which claimed 207 lives. Other fatal incidents occurred in the town in 1878 and 1879.

Another serious incident occurred in the small Ayrshire mining village of Knockshinnoch in September 1950. For several tense days rescuers battled bravely against all odds to reach the 129 men trapped deep underground when a field above where they were working caved-in, flooding the mine workings with thick liquid peat, cutting off all means of escape. 116 were rescued but 13 died. A film, &quot;The Brave Don&#x27;t Cry&quot;, was made about the disaster in 1952.

The worst Scottish mining disaster in the 20th century took place at Auchengeich by Moodiesburn in September 1959, with 47 men killed. The total surpassed the 40 who had died in flooding at Redding, Falkirk in September 1923.

====Wales====
During the period 1850 to 1930 the South Wales coalfield had the worst disaster record. This was due to the increasing number of mines being sunk to greater depths into gas-containing strata, combined with poor safety and management practices. As a result, there were nearly forty underground explosions in the Glamorgan and Monmouthshire areas of the coalfield during this time. Each accident resulted in the deaths of twenty or more workers – either directly in the explosion or by suffocation by the poisonous gases formed. The total death toll from these disasters was 3,119 people. The four worst accidents in Wales were:

*439 deaths at the Senghenydd Colliery Disaster at Universal Colliery in Senghenydd, Glamorgan, in a gas explosion in 1913.
*290 deaths at the Albion Colliery in Cilfynydd, Glamorgan, in a gas explosion on 25 June 1894.
*272 deaths at the Prince of Wales Colliery, Abercarn, Monmouthshire, in an explosion of 11 September 1878.
*266 deaths in the Gresford Disaster near Wrexham in North Wales on 22 September 1934.

Some collieries, e.g. Morfa Colliery, near Port Talbot, Glamorgan, and Black Vein Colliery, Risca, Monmouthshire, suffered three disasters before they were closed for being unsafe.

===United States===

The Scofield Mine disaster occurred on May 1, 1900, near Scofield, Utah. At least 200 men died making it the worst mining disaster in the United States at that point.

The Fraterville mine disaster occurred on May 19, 1902, killing 216 miners making it one of the worst in American history. Fraterville is located in western Anderson County, Tennessee. Also in the same year on July 10, 1902, the Rolling Mill Mine Disaster happened in Johnstown, Pa. It killed 112, many of whom had just arrived in town. At the time it was one of the region&#x27;s most productive mines.

The Monongah Mining Disaster was the worst mining accident of American history; 362 workers were killed in an underground explosion on December 6, 1907, in Monongah, West Virginia.

The Marianna Mine Disaster occurred on November 28, 1908, in a coal mine near Marianna, Pennsylvania resulting in the death of 154 men from the explosion. The explosion occurred during shift change, as men entered the mine before the previous shift had left. Consequently, the mine contained many more miners than usual. Another accident occurred in the same mine on September 23, 1957, when an explosion killed 6 of 11 men in the mine.

The Cross Mountain Mine disaster occurred on December 9, 1911, near the community of Briceville, Tennessee, killing 84 miners.

The First Dawson Disaster was a mining accident on October 22, 1913, in Dawson, New Mexico in which 263 men died (146 were Italian and 36 were Greek).

The Second Dawson Disasters was a mining accident on February 8, 1923, in Dawson, New Mexico in which 123 men died.

The Speculator Mine Disaster occurred in the copper mines of Butte, Montana on June 8, 1917. An electric cable being lowered into the mine was accidentally ignited at 2,500 feet below the surface. The fire quickly climbed the cable, in turn igniting the shaft. The shaft thus became a chimney, eliminating the mine&#x27;s primary source of oxygen. Nearly all of the 168 fatalities were due to asphyxia. It remains the deadliest underground hard rock mining event in American history.

The Hastings mine explosion was a fire at the Victor-American Fuel Company coal mine in Hastings, Las Animas Country, Colorado, On April 27, 1917, in which 121 people died.

The Cherry Mine disaster was a fire in the Cherry, Illinois, coal mine in 1909, and surrounding events, in which 259 men and boys died.

The Millfield Mine Disaster 1930 in Ohio killed 82 men.

From 1880 to 1910, mine accidents claimed thousands of fatalities. Where annual mining deaths had numbered more than 1,000 a year during the early part of the 20th century, they decreased to an average of about 500 during the late 1950s, and to 93 during the 1990s. In addition to deaths, many thousands more are injured (an average of 21,351 injuries per year between 1991 and 1999), but overall there has been a downward trend of deaths and injuries.

In 1959, the Knox Mine Disaster occurred in Port Griffith, Pennsylvania. The swelling Susquehanna River collapsed into a mine under it and resulted in 12 deaths. In Plymouth, Pennsylvania, the Avondale Mine Disaster of 1869 resulted in the deaths of 108 miners and two rescue workers after a fire in the only shaft eliminated the oxygen in the mine. Federal laws for mining safety resulted from this disaster. Pennsylvania suffered another disaster in 2002 at Quecreek, 9 miners were trapped underground and subsequently rescued after 78 hours. During 2006, 72 miners died at work, 47 by coal mining. The majority of these fatalities occurred in Kentucky and West Virginia, including the Sago Mine Disaster. On April 5, 2010, in the Upper Big Branch Mine disaster an underground explosion caused the deaths of 29 miners.

The U.S. Bureau of Mines was created in 1910 to investigate accidents, advise industry, conduct production and safety research, and teach courses in accident prevention, first aid, and mine rescue. The Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Acts of 1969 and 1977 set further safety standards for the mining. Since the closure of the U.S. Bureau of Mines in 1996, this research function has been carried on by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). NIOSH maintains a list of mine disasters which occurred in the United States since 1839.

===Venezuela===

On 21 February 2024, fourteen people were killed and eleven injured following the collapse of an illegal gold mine in Angostura Municipality, Bolívar.

==References==
==Further reading==
*North of England Institute of Mining and Mechanical Engineers. Nicholas Wood Memorial Library &quot;Mining accidents and safety: a guide to resources&quot;. 2016. A guide to books, journals, inspectors&#x27; reports, government enquiries, legislation, archival material, etc. in the Institute Library relating to accidents and safety in the UK.
*For more details of mining disasters in the UK see The Coalmining History Research Centre at 1842 Royal Commission Reports – Raleys – Maps, Poems and Sm

==External links==
*MSHA Fact Sheets – Injury Trends in Mining
*CDC – Mining – Historical Mine Disasters
*Worst mining disasters</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1550225" start="2" end="17" title="Mining accident" label="mining accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="67" end="73" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="74" end="81" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883681" start="167" end="178" title="underground mining (hard rock)" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="179" end="190" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883681" start="225" end="241" title="Underground mining (hard rock)" label="hard rock mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="386" end="393" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778575" start="403" end="412" title="coal dust" label="coal dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="453" end="473" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="494" end="513" title="developed countries" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550225" start="566" end="581" title="Mining accident" label="mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="724" end="737" title="poisonous gas" label="poisonous gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="748" end="764" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q394497" start="804" end="812" title="firedamp" label="firedamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="816" end="823" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296331" start="825" end="840" title="dust explosions" label="dust explosions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419614" start="861" end="867" title="Stoping (mining method)" label="stopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394636" start="876" end="894" title="induced seismicity" label="induced seismicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q371150" start="1000" end="1011" title="safety lamp" label="safety lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618851" start="1016" end="1036" title="electrical equipment" label="electrical equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="1059" end="1068" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778575" start="1109" end="1118" title="coal dust" label="coal dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q711090" start="1198" end="1216" title="Benxihu Colliery" label="Benxihu (Honkeiko)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="1217" end="1226" title="coal mine" label="coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778575" start="1332" end="1351" title="coal dust explosion" label="coal dust explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="1495" end="1507" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="1511" end="1520" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="2097" end="2122" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493873" start="2927" end="2952" title="Fraterville Mine disaster" label="Fraterville Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493877" start="2956" end="2978" title="Fraterville, Tennessee" label="Fraterville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677868" start="3071" end="3092" title="Harwick, Pennsylvania" label="Harwick, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995431" start="3260" end="3276" title="Tercio, Colorado" label="Tercio, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550228" start="3393" end="3417" title="Courrières mine disaster" label="Courrières mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q323072" start="3421" end="3431" title="Courrières" label="Courrières"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964674" start="3527" end="3547" title="Naomi Mine explosion" label="Naomi Mine Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132172" start="3551" end="3577" title="Fayette City, Pennsylvania" label="Fayette City, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255369" start="3614" end="3637" title="Giroux Mining Accidents" label="Giroux Mining Accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q844042" start="3638" end="3649" title="Ely, Nevada" label="Ely, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157600" start="3689" end="3713" title="Monongah Mining disaster" label="Monongah Mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731020" start="3717" end="3740" title="Monongah, West Virginia" label="Monongah, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="3869" end="3886" title="Italian American" label="Italian immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="4050" end="4069" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224211" start="4111" end="4129" title="Darr Mine disaster" label="Darr Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370070" start="4133" end="4165" title="Rostraver Township, Pennsylvania" label="Rostraver Township, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958075" start="4223" end="4248" title="Maypole Colliery disaster" label="Maypole Colliery disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181884" start="4359" end="4381" title="Marianna, Pennsylvania" label="Marianna, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558986" start="4433" end="4453" title="Cherry Mine disaster" label="Cherry Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q980460" start="4457" end="4473" title="Cherry, Illinois" label="Cherry, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242180" start="4627" end="4652" title="Pretoria Pit disaster" label="The Pretoria Pit disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q105060" start="4834" end="4843" title="Sosnowiec" label="Sosnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="4845" end="4859" title="Congress Poland" label="Russian Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454100" start="4876" end="4896" title="Banner Mine disaster" label="Banner Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255369" start="4996" end="5019" title="Giroux Mining Accidents" label="Giroux Mining Accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q844042" start="5020" end="5031" title="Ely, Nevada" label="Ely, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188360" start="5068" end="5096" title="Cross Mountain Mine disaster" label="Cross Mountain Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965870" start="5117" end="5138" title="Briceville, Tennessee" label="Briceville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404150" start="5158" end="5186" title="Senghenydd colliery disaster" label="Senghenydd colliery disaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5283" end="5323" title="Dawson, New Mexico#Disasters" label="Dawson Stag Canon Number 2 Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201125" start="5330" end="5348" title="Dawson, New Mexico" label="Dawson, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575345" start="5584" end="5608" title="Speculator Mine disaster" label="Speculator Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="5612" end="5626" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868827" start="6082" end="6101" title="Minnie Pit disaster" label="Minnie Pit disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="6105" end="6118" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6529" end="6564" title="Dawson, New Mexico#Disasters" label="Dawson Stag Canon #1 Mine Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6900" end="6927" title="Barnes-Hecker Mine Disaster" label="Barnes-Hecker Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685233" start="7095" end="7121" title="Hawks Nest Tunnel Disaster" label="Hawks Nest Tunnel Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245446" start="7128" end="7141" title="Gauley Bridge" label="Gauley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q653318" start="7215" end="7224" title="silicosis" label="silicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="7283" end="7297" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113456459" start="7537" end="7562" title="1934 Kakanj mine disaster" label="1934 Kakanj mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976141" start="7603" end="7619" title="Kakanj coal mine" label="Kakanj coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q963038" start="7623" end="7629" title="Kakanj" label="Kakanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="7631" end="7652" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190574" start="8069" end="8088" title="Japanese government" label="Japanese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203321" start="8238" end="8246" title="Tsumagoi" label="Tsumagoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q129499" start="8248" end="8264" title="Gunma Prefecture" label="Gunma Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569174" start="8407" end="8427" title="Staveley, Derbyshire" label="Staveley, Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181720" start="8523" end="8544" title="Portage, Pennsylvania" label="Portage, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q711090" start="8580" end="8596" title="Benxihu Colliery" label="Benxihu Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q75091" start="8609" end="8614" title="Benxi" label="Benxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="8616" end="8624" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565545" start="8902" end="8934" title="1945 El Teniente mining accident" label="1945 El Teniente mining accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q529024" start="8938" end="8949" title="El Teniente" label="El Teniente"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192" start="9038" end="9047" title="Bergkamen" label="Bergkamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="9049" end="9053" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q575126" start="9114" end="9133" title="Centralia, Illinois" label="Centralia, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q493806" start="9221" end="9228" title="Langreo" label="Langreo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="9230" end="9238" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="9240" end="9245" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41692" start="9272" end="9277" title="Mule" label="mules"/>
<link wikidata="Q575514" start="9530" end="9544" title="West Frankfort" label="West Frankfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="9546" end="9554" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q28173439" start="9594" end="9625" title="Newton Chikli Colliery disaster" label="Newton Chikli Colliery disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q891068" start="9924" end="9938" title="Bois du Cazier" label="Bois du Cazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q785440" start="9957" end="9967" title="Marcinelle" label="Marcinelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423570" start="10261" end="10279" title="Knox Mine disaster" label="Knox Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q501292" start="10315" end="10343" title="Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Luzerne County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903859" start="10421" end="10446" title="Coalbrook mining disaster" label="Coalbrook mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="10448" end="10460" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q72877" start="10526" end="10532" title="Datong" label="Datong"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="10596" end="10610" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76812" start="10700" end="10709" title="Kings Bay AS" label="Kings Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55669" start="10713" end="10723" title="Ny-Ålesund" label="Ny-Ålesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="10754" end="10762" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10817" end="10848" title="Miike coal mine#Incidents" label="Mitsui Miike Coal Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845423" start="10849" end="10861" title="Miike coal mine" label="Mitsui Miike"/>
<link wikidata="Q385623" start="10863" end="10877" title="Ōmuta, Fukuoka" label="Ōmuta, Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931401" start="10968" end="10978" title="1965 Valparaíso earthquake and El Cobre dam failure" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q219458" start="11045" end="11062" title="Valparaíso Region" label="Valparaíso Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="11064" end="11069" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025285" start="11121" end="11138" title="Cambrian Colliery" label="Cambrian Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="11142" end="11153" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571897" start="11180" end="11206" title="1965 Dhanbad coal mine disaster" label="Dhanbad coal mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="11221" end="11230" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851383" start="11279" end="11304" title="1965 Kakanj mine disaster" label="1965 Kakanj mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976141" start="11345" end="11361" title="Kakanj coal mine" label="Kakanj coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q963038" start="11365" end="11371" title="Kakanj" label="Kakanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q208545" start="11372" end="11397" title="SR Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="SR Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="11399" end="11413" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="SFR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q384291" start="11434" end="11450" title="Aberfan Disaster" label="Aberfan Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="11535" end="11540" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435902" start="11651" end="11675" title="Farmington Mine disaster" label="Farmington Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145983" start="11679" end="11704" title="Farmington, West Virginia" label="Farmington, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="11761" end="11769" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196770" start="11781" end="11828" title="Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969" label="Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996167" start="11850" end="11879" title="Hurricane Creek mine disaster" label="Hurricane Creek mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749646" start="11883" end="11898" title="Hyden, Kentucky" label="Hyden, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196770" start="11997" end="12044" title="Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969" label="Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967967" start="12061" end="12086" title="Wankie coal mine disaster" label="Wankie coal mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202229" start="12087" end="12093" title="Wankie" label="Wankie"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="12095" end="12103" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="12104" end="12112" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666688" start="12147" end="12174" title="Lofthouse Colliery disaster" label="Lofthouse Colliery disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="12176" end="12190" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770999" start="12235" end="12260" title="Markham Colliery disaster" label="Markham Colliery disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569174" start="12266" end="12286" title="Staveley, Derbyshire" label="Staveley, Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217841" start="12480" end="12486" title="Liévin" label="Liévin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087394" start="12609" end="12633" title="Chasnala mining disaster" label="Chasnala mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q244159" start="12635" end="12642" title="Dhanbad" label="Dhanbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="12644" end="12653" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q637145" start="12909" end="12925" title="Yūbari, Hokkaido" label="Yūbari, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043160" start="12990" end="13011" title="No. 21 Mine explosion" label="No. 21 Mine explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289413" start="13017" end="13036" title="Whitwell, Tennessee" label="Whitwell, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845423" start="13107" end="13122" title="Miike coal mine" label="Miike coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q385623" start="13176" end="13190" title="Ōmuta, Fukuoka" label="Ōmuta, Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q385906" start="13260" end="13285" title="Val di Stava dam collapse" label="Val di Stava dam collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q327161" start="13327" end="13333" title="Tesero" label="Tesero"/>
<link wikidata="Q119999025" start="13595" end="13618" title="Kinross mining disaster" label="Kinross mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="13623" end="13635" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q565488" start="13692" end="13705" title="Borken, Hesse" label="Borken, Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590596" start="13809" end="13827" title="Aleksinački Rudnik" label="Aleksinački Rudnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q269864" start="13836" end="13845" title="SR Serbia" label="SR Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="13847" end="13871" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="SFRepublic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286754" start="13891" end="13916" title="Dobrnja-Jug mine disaster" label="Dobrnja-Jug mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="13955" end="13964" title="coal mine" label="coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="13970" end="13975" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q208545" start="13976" end="14001" title="SR Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="SR Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="14003" end="14017" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="SFR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314812" start="14034" end="14046" title="Westray Mine" label="Westray Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="14063" end="14074" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961386" start="14139" end="14160" title="Nambija mine disaster" label="Nambija mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="14171" end="14178" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110377" start="14284" end="14291" title="Secunda, Mpumalanga" label="Secunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456312" start="14382" end="14414" title="Rajpura Dariba Mine VRM disaster" label="Rajpura Dariba Mine VRM disaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14510" end="14538" title="Underground mining hard rock" label="Underground mining hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820108" start="14825" end="14859" title="Merriespruit tailings dam disaster" label="Merriespruit tailings dam disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q119821776" start="14926" end="14952" title="Vaal Reefs mining disaster" label="Vaal Reefs mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757803" start="15078" end="15103" title="Marcopper mining disaster" label="Marcopper mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13846" start="15140" end="15150" title="Marinduque" label="Marinduque"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="15152" end="15163" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q803699" start="15706" end="15729" title="2000 Baia Mare cyanide spill" label="Baia Mare cyanide spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q185280" start="15744" end="15753" title="Baia Mare" label="Baia Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="15755" end="15762" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q129677" start="15834" end="15843" title="Chernobyl" label="Chernobyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q217401" start="15993" end="15998" title="Someş" label="Someş"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="16000" end="16005" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="16010" end="16016" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775212" start="16155" end="16191" title="Martin County coal slurry spill" label="2000 Martin County coal slurry spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297582" start="16270" end="16283" title="Massey Energy" label="Massey Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503521" start="16287" end="16310" title="Martin County, Kentucky" label="Martin County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16725" end="16748" title="Brookwood Mine Disaster" label="Brookwood Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462354" start="16958" end="16987" title="La Espuela Coal Mine disaster" label="La Espuela Coal Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150989" start="17110" end="17135" title="Pasta de Conchos mine disaster" label="Pasta de Conchos accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014880" start="17192" end="17204" title="Nueva Rosita" label="Nueva Rosita"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="17206" end="17214" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="17216" end="17222" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181973" start="17271" end="17291" title="Crandall Canyon Mine" label="Crandall Canyon Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434220" start="17417" end="17446" title="2009 Harmony Gold mine deaths" label="2009 Harmony Gold mine deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898494" start="17625" end="17655" title="Upper Big Branch Mine disaster" label="Upper Big Branch Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297582" start="17697" end="17710" title="Massey Energy" label="Massey Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110438" start="17796" end="17822" title="Raspadskaya mine explosion" label="Raspadskaya mine explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076" start="17826" end="17841" title="Kemerovo Oblast" label="Kemerovo Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="17843" end="17849" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214790" start="18038" end="18066" title="2010 Copiapó mining accident" label="2010 Copiapó mining accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q963820" start="18108" end="18116" title="San José Mine" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q335396" start="18166" end="18169" title="Time in Chile" label="CLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="18224" end="18245" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727192" start="18344" end="18350" title="The 33 (film)" label="the 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q928629" start="18434" end="18458" title="Pike River Mine disaster" label="Pike River Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q71140" start="18900" end="18904" title="Province of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739" start="18906" end="18923" title="Castile and León" label="Castille and León"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869476" start="18947" end="18965" title="Soma mine disaster" label="Soma mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124930" start="18980" end="18984" title="Soma, Manisa" label="Soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768863" start="19160" end="19187" title="2019 Kohistan mine collapse" label="2019 Kohistan mine collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="19189" end="19200" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96788795" start="19316" end="19347" title="2020 Hpakant jade mine disaster" label="2020 Hpakant jade mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226232" start="19355" end="19362" title="Hpakant" label="Hpakant"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="19371" end="19378" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19463" end="19489" title="Diaoshuidong mine disaster" label="Diaoshuidong mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="19493" end="19502" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q109735242" start="19533" end="19560" title="Listvyazhnaya mine disaster" label="Listvyazhnaya mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076" start="19564" end="19579" title="Kemerovo Oblast" label="Kemerovo Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="19581" end="19587" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19737" end="19757" title="La Mestiza coal mine" label="La Mestiza coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="19761" end="19769" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19829" end="19850" title="El Pinabete coal mine" label="El Pinabete coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010445" start="19854" end="19871" title="Sabinas, Coahuila" label="Sabinas, Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="19873" end="19879" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q114670156" start="19913" end="19940" title="2022 Turkish Mine Explosion" label="2022 Turkish Mine Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q211805" start="19944" end="19950" title="Bartın" label="Bartın"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015631" start="20037" end="20043" title="Welkom" label="Welkom"/>
<link wikidata="Q123224458" start="20091" end="20113" title="Kostenko mine disaster" label="Kostenko mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q485429" start="20121" end="20137" title="Karaganda Region" label="Karaganda Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="20141" end="20151" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996904" start="20744" end="20763" title="Bulli, New South Wales" label="Bulli Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362483" start="20792" end="20805" title="gas explosion" label="gas explosion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20910" end="20936" title="Mount Kembla#Mine disaster" label="Mount Kembla Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922313" start="21135" end="21154" title="Mount Mulligan mine disaster" label="Mount Mulligan mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876029" start="21218" end="21244" title="Beaconsfield Mine collapse" label="Beaconsfield Mine collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490569" start="22622" end="22633" title="Northparkes" label="Northparkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17856" start="22712" end="22720" title="Ballarat" label="Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q782765" start="23132" end="23162" title="Australian Workers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Australian Workers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q182920" start="23327" end="23335" title="Borinage" label="Borinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="23345" end="23352" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q891068" start="23424" end="23438" title="Bois du Cazier" label="Bois du Cazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q785440" start="23448" end="23458" title="Marcinelle" label="Marcinelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q488996" start="23884" end="23894" title="rock burst" label="rock burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161115" start="24031" end="24039" title="2014 Zenica mine disaster" label="accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550226" start="24061" end="24088" title="1887 Nanaimo mine explosion" label="1887 Nanaimo mine explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16461" start="24092" end="24099" title="Nanaimo" label="Nanaimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="24101" end="24117" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820842" start="24386" end="24409" title="Hillcrest mine disaster" label="Hillcrest mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="24475" end="24482" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037755" start="25248" end="25262" title="Labor unrest" label="labour dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423887" start="25270" end="25280" title="Giant Mine" label="Giant Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061" start="25286" end="25297" title="Yellowknife" label="Yellowknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="25480" end="25491" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581128" start="25542" end="25568" title="Springhill mining disaster" label="Springhill mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314812" start="25662" end="25683" title="Westray Mine" label="Westray Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="25922" end="25934" title="asphyxiation" label="asphyxiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636415" start="25972" end="25985" title="Sullivan Mine" label="Sullivan Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q96395135" start="26088" end="26096" title="Ndassima" label="Ndassima"/>
<link wikidata="Q529024" start="26206" end="26217" title="El Teniente" label="El Teniente"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="26230" end="26245" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565545" start="26276" end="26293" title="1945 El Teniente mining accident" label="Tragedia del Humo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301261" start="26322" end="26364" title="2006 Copiapó mining accident" label="an explosion occurred in a mine in Copiapó"/>
<link wikidata="Q214790" start="26500" end="26531" title="2010 Copiapó mining accident" label="miners were trapped underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300272" start="26834" end="26927" title="Reaction to the 2010 Copiapó mining accident" label="News of the success of the team led to celebrations around the country and much of the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604896" start="27302" end="27330" title="2005 Sunjiawan mine disaster" label="2005 Sunjiawan mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964228" start="28187" end="28203" title="Nanshan Colliery disaster" label="Nanshan Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q204839" start="28301" end="28319" title="Xinhua News Agency" label="Xinhua News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="28472" end="28486" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="28905" end="28928" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236265" start="29349" end="29366" title="2009 Heilongjiang mine explosion" label="a mining accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="29370" end="29382" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q394497" start="29450" end="29467" title="methane explosion" label="methane explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778575" start="29482" end="29491" title="coal dust" label="coal dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="29492" end="29501" title="explosion" label="explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044264" start="29605" end="29614" title="Xiaojiawan coal mine disaster" label="explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249904" start="29806" end="29815" title="2013 Gyama Mine Landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="29885" end="29903" title="Government of China" label="Chinese Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q449963" start="30121" end="30132" title="Alxa League" label="Alxa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042431" start="30177" end="30209" title="Ministry of Emergency Management" label="Ministry of Emergency Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="30243" end="30291" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="30292" end="30302" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961386" start="30432" end="30453" title="Nambija mine disaster" label="Nambija mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q214790" start="30518" end="30653" title="2010 Copiapó mining accident" label="its historic, successful rescue of 33 miners who had been stuck underground in the San Jose mine for a record period of nearly 10 weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550228" start="30794" end="30818" title="Courrières mine disaster" label="Courrières mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q711090" start="31020" end="31036" title="Benxihu Colliery" label="Benxihu Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31979" end="32016" title="Central Saunda Colliery on 15.06.2005" label="Central Saunda Colliery on 15.06.2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087394" start="32018" end="32050" title="Chasnala mining disaster" label="Chasnalla Colliery on 27.12.1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456312" start="32421" end="32453" title="Rajpura Dariba Mine VRM disaster" label="Rajpura Dariba Mine VRM disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q274384" start="33131" end="33136" title="Iwaki, Fukushima" label="Iwaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q71707" start="33138" end="33158" title="Fukushima Prefecture" label="Fukushima Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q468765" start="33242" end="33245" title="Ube, Yamaguchi" label="Ube"/>
<link wikidata="Q127264" start="33247" end="33267" title="Yamaguchi Prefecture" label="Yamaguchi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q943887" start="33426" end="33441" title="Miyata, Fukuoka" label="Miyata, Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208544" start="33476" end="33481" title="Itoda" label="Itoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q943887" start="33616" end="33631" title="Miyata, Fukuoka" label="Miyata, Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q26600" start="33825" end="33832" title="Fukuoka" label="Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="33916" end="33924" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q26600" start="33974" end="33981" title="Fukuoka" label="Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="34074" end="34085" title="state ownership" label="state owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="34223" end="34234" title="methane" label="methane gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594110" start="34286" end="34293" title="Staatsmijn Hendrik" label="Hendrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q9803" start="34297" end="34305" title="Brunssum" label="Brunssum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594110" start="34340" end="34358" title="Staatsmijn Hendrik" label="Staatsmijn Hendrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q770135" start="34405" end="34418" title="conveyor belt" label="conveyor belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q870545" start="34470" end="34477" title="cave-in" label="cave-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010363" start="34490" end="34508" title="Staatsmijn Maurits" label="Staatsmijn Maurits"/>
<link wikidata="Q73570" start="34512" end="34518" title="Geleen" label="Geleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979089" start="34600" end="34621" title="Brunner Mine disaster" label="Brunner Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q928629" start="34724" end="34739" title="Pike River mine accident" label="Pike River mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624699" start="34851" end="34865" title="Strongman Mine" label="Strongman Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q934790" start="34872" end="34881" title="Greymouth" label="Greymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="34890" end="34900" title="West Coast, New Zealand" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q109518499" start="34942" end="34960" title="Niger gold mine collapse" label="gold mine collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q850036" start="34964" end="34977" title="Maradi Region" label="Maradi Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q11737156" start="35049" end="35064" title="2006 Halemba Coal Mine disaster" label="mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237716" start="35130" end="35147" title="Halemba Coal Mine" label="Halemba Coal Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108679" start="35175" end="35186" title="Ruda Śląska" label="Ruda Śląska"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="35226" end="35233" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976337" start="35716" end="35742" title="Ulyanovskaya Mine disaster" label="Ulyanovskaya Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q109735242" start="35962" end="35989" title="Listvyazhnaya mine disaster" label="Listvyazhnaya mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="36416" end="36423" title="Sevilla" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117680" start="36677" end="36693" title="Hlobane Coal Mine Disaster (1944)" label="Hlobane Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903859" start="36758" end="36783" title="Coalbrook mining disaster" label="Coalbrook mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q963786" start="36952" end="36961" title="Sasolburg" label="Sasolburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971200" start="36969" end="36986" title="Orange Free State (province)" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q119999025" start="37036" end="37043" title="Kinross mining disaster" label="Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644260" start="37057" end="37076" title="Evander, Mpumalanga" label="Evander, Mpumalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q119821776" start="37109" end="37119" title="Vaal Reefs mining disaster" label="Vaal Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117685" start="37204" end="37220" title="Hlobane Coal Mine Disaster (1983)" label="Hlobane Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023254" start="37226" end="37233" title="Vryheid" label="Vryheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="37235" end="37249" title="Kwa-Zulu Natal" label="Kwa-Zulu Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q905998" start="37374" end="37386" title="Sasol Mining" label="Sasol Mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110377" start="37413" end="37432" title="Secunda, Mpumalanga" label="Secunda, Mpumalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="37483" end="37489" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q372120" start="37537" end="37553" title="Tucheng District" label="Tucheng District"/>
<link wikidata="Q570254" start="37727" end="37743" title="Ruifang District" label="Ruifang District"/>
<link wikidata="Q570349" start="37915" end="37930" title="Sanxia District" label="Sanxia District"/>
<link wikidata="Q429942" start="38142" end="38151" title="tanzanite" label="tanzanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q429942" start="38212" end="38221" title="tanzanite" label="tanzanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251758" start="38397" end="38415" title="Armutçuk coal mine" label="Armutçuk coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43690" start="38830" end="38844" title="Bursa Province" label="Bursa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q219956" start="38887" end="38905" title="Zonguldak Province" label="Zonguldak Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q394497" start="38995" end="39003" title="firedamp" label="firedamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124930" start="39199" end="39211" title="Soma, Manisa" label="Soma, Manisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869476" start="39224" end="39243" title="Soma mine disaster" label="major mine collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q114670156" start="39410" end="39437" title="2022 Turkish Mine Explosion" label="2022 Turkish Mine Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q211805" start="39441" end="39447" title="Bartın" label="Bartın"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099081" start="39851" end="39862" title="mine safety" label="mine safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074218" start="40089" end="40107" title="The Oaks explosion" label="The Oaks explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q54212" start="40190" end="40198" title="Barnsley" label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="40202" end="40211" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242180" start="40389" end="40408" title="Pretoria Pit Disaster" label="The Hulton Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q686319" start="40422" end="40434" title="Westhoughton" label="Westhoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="40436" end="40446" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783795" start="40528" end="40535" title="Haydock" label="Haydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="40537" end="40547" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674884" start="40689" end="40714" title="Hartley Colliery Disaster" label="Hartley Colliery Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="40980" end="40986" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329671" start="41051" end="41066" title="East Wheal Rose" label="East Wheal Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821720" start="41127" end="41138" title="Levant mine" label="Levant mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997263" start="41206" end="41216" title="man engine" label="man engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41231" end="41241" title="Wheal Agar" label="Wheal Agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288904" start="41300" end="41313" title="Dolcoath mine" label="Dolcoath mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419614" start="41335" end="41340" title="stoping (mining method)" label="stull"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="41399" end="41407" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925231" start="41420" end="41444" title="Blantyre mining disaster" label="Blantyre mining disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q881708" start="41448" end="41456" title="Blantyre, South Lanarkshire" label="Blantyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q530296" start="41458" end="41469" title="Lanarkshire" label="Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="41605" end="41613" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422943" start="41632" end="41645" title="Knockshinnoch Disaster" label="Knockshinnoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719880" start="41957" end="41981" title="The Brave Don&amp;#x27;t Cry" label="The Brave Don&amp;#x27;t Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011148" start="42111" end="42122" title="Moodiesburn" label="Moodiesburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q122973421" start="42197" end="42213" title="Redding mining disaster" label="died in flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305614" start="42217" end="42233" title="Redding, Falkirk" label="Redding, Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568766" start="42303" end="42324" title="South Wales coalfield" label="South Wales coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="42579" end="42588" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245075" start="42593" end="42606" title="Monmouthshire (historic)" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404150" start="42915" end="42943" title="Senghenydd Colliery Disaster" label="Senghenydd Colliery Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893914" start="42947" end="42965" title="Universal Colliery" label="Universal Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404686" start="42969" end="42979" title="Senghenydd" label="Senghenydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712505" start="43039" end="43054" title="Albion Colliery" label="Albion Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119940" start="43058" end="43067" title="Cilfynydd" label="Cilfynydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177907" start="43135" end="43159" title="Abercarn colliery disaster" label="Prince of Wales Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868842" start="43161" end="43169" title="Abercarn" label="Abercarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607565" start="43243" end="43260" title="Gresford Disaster" label="Gresford Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="43266" end="43273" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="43277" end="43288" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43334" end="43348" title="Morfa Colliery" label="Morfa Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072019" start="43355" end="43366" title="Port Talbot" label="Port Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="43368" end="43377" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43383" end="43402" title="Black Vein Colliery" label="Black Vein Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814569" start="43404" end="43409" title="Risca" label="Risca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245075" start="43411" end="43424" title="Monmouthshire (historic)" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434245" start="43519" end="43541" title="Scofield Mine disaster" label="Scofield Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q482489" start="43572" end="43586" title="Scofield, Utah" label="Scofield, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493873" start="43687" end="43712" title="Fraterville mine disaster" label="Fraterville mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361195" start="43912" end="43938" title="Rolling Mill Mine Disaster" label="Rolling Mill Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157600" start="44092" end="44116" title="Monongah Mining Disaster" label="Monongah Mining Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731020" start="44244" end="44252" title="Monongah" label="Monongah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="44254" end="44267" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181884" start="44348" end="44370" title="Marianna, Pennsylvania" label="Marianna, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188360" start="44712" end="44740" title="Cross Mountain Mine disaster" label="Cross Mountain Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965870" start="44793" end="44814" title="Briceville, Tennessee" label="Briceville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201125" start="44908" end="44926" title="Dawson, New Mexico" label="Dawson, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575345" start="45109" end="45133" title="Speculator Mine disaster" label="Speculator Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="45166" end="45180" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925682" start="45594" end="45617" title="Hastings mine explosion" label="Hastings mine explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q980460" start="45807" end="45823" title="Cherry, Illinois" label="Cherry, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="45825" end="45834" title="coal mine" label="coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859478" start="45905" end="45928" title="Millfield Mine Disaster" label="Millfield Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423570" start="46425" end="46443" title="Knox Mine Disaster" label="Knox Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230656" start="46456" end="46483" title="Port Griffith, Pennsylvania" label="Port Griffith, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="46498" end="46515" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187496" start="46577" end="46599" title="Plymouth, Pennsylvania" label="Plymouth, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829317" start="46605" end="46627" title="Avondale Mine Disaster" label="Avondale Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269902" start="46872" end="46880" title="Quecreek Mine Rescue" label="Quecreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="47058" end="47066" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="47071" end="47084" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399333" start="47100" end="47118" title="Sago Mine Disaster" label="Sago Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898494" start="47145" end="47175" title="Upper Big Branch Mine disaster" label="Upper Big Branch Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889588" start="47238" end="47258" title="U.S. Bureau of Mines" label="U.S. Bureau of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q381446" start="47419" end="47430" title="mine rescue" label="mine rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196770" start="47436" end="47475" title="Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act" label="Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="47644" end="47697" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="47919" end="47928" title="Mining" label="gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651292" start="47932" end="47963" title="Angostura Municipality, Bolívar" label="Angostura Municipality, Bolívar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954551" wikidata="Q884005" url="?curid=954551" title="Look Back in Anger">
<text>Look Back in Anger (1956) is a realist play written by John Osborne. It focuses on the life and marital struggles of an intelligent and educated but disaffected young man of working-class origin, Jimmy Porter, and his equally competent yet impassive upper-middle-class wife Alison. The supporting characters include Cliff Lewis, an amiable Welsh lodger who attempts to keep the peace; and Helena Charles, Alison&#x27;s snobbish friend.

Osborne drew inspiration from his personal life and failing marriage with Pamela Lane while writing &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot;, which was his first successful outing as a playwright. The play spawned the term &quot;angry young men&quot; to describe Osborne and those of his generation who employed the harshness of realism in the theatre in contrast to the more escapist theatre that characterised the previous generation. This harsh realism has led to &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot; being considered one of the first examples of kitchen sink drama in theatre.

The play was received favourably in the theatre community, becoming an enormous commercial success, transferring to the West End and Broadway, and even touring to Moscow. It is credited with turning Osborne from a struggling playwright into a wealthy and famous personality, and also won him the Evening Standard Drama Award as the most promising playwright of 1956. The play was adapted into a motion picture of the same name by Tony Richardson, starring Richard Burton and Mary Ure, which was released in 1959. Film production credited circa 1958.

==Synopsis==
===Act 1===
Act 1 opens on a dismal April Sunday afternoon in Jimmy and Alison&#x27;s cramped attic in the Midlands. Jimmy and Cliff are reading the Sunday papers, plus the radical weekly, &quot;price ninepence, obtainable at any bookstall&quot; as Jimmy snaps, claiming it from Cliff. This is a reference to the &quot;New Statesman&quot;, and in the context of the period would have instantly signalled the pair&#x27;s political preference to the audience. Alison is attempting to do the week&#x27;s ironing and is only half listening as Jimmy and Cliff engage in the expository dialogue.

It becomes apparent that there is a huge social gulf between Jimmy and Alison. Her family is upper-middle-class military, while Jimmy belongs to the working class. He had to fight hard against her family&#x27;s disapproval to win her. &quot;Alison&#x27;s mummy and I took one look at each other, and from then on the age of chivalry was dead,&quot; he explains. We also learn that the sole family income is derived from a sweets confectionery stall in the local market—an enterprise that is surely well beneath Jimmy&#x27;s education, let alone Alison&#x27;s &quot;station in life&quot;.

As Act 1 progresses, Jimmy becomes more and more vituperative, transferring his contempt for Alison&#x27;s family onto her personally, calling her &quot;pusillanimous&quot; and generally belittling her to Cliff. (Some actors play this scene as though Jimmy thinks everything is just a joke, while others play it as though he really is excoriating her.) The tirade ends with physical horseplay, resulting in the ironing board overturning and Alison&#x27;s arm getting burned. Jimmy exits to play his trumpet off stage.

Alison, alone with Cliff, confides that she&#x27;s accidentally pregnant and can&#x27;t quite bring herself to tell Jimmy. Cliff urges her to tell him. When Jimmy returns, Alison announces that her actress friend Helena Charles is coming to stay; Jimmy despises Helena even more than Alison, he flies into a rage.

===Act 2===
Act 2 opens on another Sunday afternoon, with Helena and Alison making lunch. In a two-handed scene, Alison says that she decided to marry Jimmy because of
her own minor rebellion against her upbringing and her admiration for Jimmy&#x27;s campaigns against the dereliction of life in postwar England. She describes Jimmy to Helena as a &quot;knight in shining armour&quot;. Helena says, firmly, &quot;You&#x27;ve got to fight him&quot;.

Jimmy enters, and the tirade continues. If his Act 1 material could be played as a joke, there&#x27;s no doubt about the intentional viciousness of his attacks on Helena. When the women put on hats and declare that they are going to church, Jimmy&#x27;s sense of betrayal peaks. When he leaves to take an urgent phone call, Helena announces that she has forced the issue. She has sent a telegram to Alison&#x27;s parents asking them to come and &quot;rescue&quot; her. Alison is stunned but agrees that she will go.

The next evening, Alison&#x27;s father, Colonel Redfern, comes to collect her to take her back to her family home. The playwright allows the Colonel to come across as quite a sympathetic character, albeit totally out of touch with the modern world, as he himself admits. &quot;You&#x27;re hurt because everything&#x27;s changed&quot;, Alison tells him, &quot;and Jimmy&#x27;s hurt because everything&#x27;s stayed the same&quot;. Helena arrives to say goodbye, intending to leave very soon herself. Alison is surprised that Helena is staying on for another day, but she leaves, giving Cliff a note for Jimmy. Cliff in turn hands it to Helena and leaves, saying &quot;I hope he rams it up your nostrils&quot;.

Almost immediately, Jimmy bursts in. His contempt at finding a &quot;goodbye&quot; note makes him turn on Helena again, warning her to keep out of his way until she leaves. Helena tells him that Alison is expecting a baby, and Jimmy admits grudgingly that he&#x27;s taken aback. However, his tirade continues. They first come to physical blows, and then as the Act 2 curtain falls, Jimmy and Helena are kissing passionately and falling on the bed.

===Act 3===
Act 3 opens as a deliberate replay of Act 1, but this time with Helena at the ironing-board wearing Jimmy&#x27;s Act 1 red shirt. Months have passed. Jimmy is notably more pleasant to Helena than he was to Alison in Act 1. She actually laughs at his jokes, and the three of them (Jimmy, Cliff, and Helena) get into a music hall comedy routine that obviously is not improvised. Cliff announces that he&#x27;s decided to strike out on his own. As Jimmy leaves the room to get ready for a final night out for the three of them, he opens the door to find Alison, looking like death. He snaps over his shoulder &quot;Friend of yours to see you&quot; and abruptly leaves.

Alison explains to Helena that she lost the baby (one of Jimmy&#x27;s cruellest speeches in Act 1 expressed the wish that Alison would conceive a child and lose it). The two women are reconciled, but Helena realises that what she&#x27;s done is immoral and she in turn decides to leave. She summons Jimmy to hear her decision and he lets her go with a sarcastic farewell.

The play ends with a sentimental reconciliation between Jimmy and Alison. They revive an old game they used to play, pretending to be bears and squirrels, and seem to be in a state of truce.

==Background of the play==

Written in 17 days in a deck chair on Morecambe Pier, &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot; was a strongly autobiographical piece based on Osborne&#x27;s unhappy marriage to actress Pamela Lane and their life in cramped accommodation in Derby. While Osborne aspired towards a career in theatre, Lane was more practical and materialistic. It also draws from Osborne&#x27;s earlier life; for example, the wrenching speech of witnessing a loved one&#x27;s death was a replay of the death of his father, Thomas.

What it is best remembered for, though, are Jimmy&#x27;s tirades. Some of these are directed against generalised British middle-class smugness in the post-atomic world. Many are directed against the female characters, a very distinct echo of Osborne&#x27;s uneasiness with women, including his mother, Nellie Beatrice, whom he describes in his autobiography &quot;A Better Class of Person&quot; as &quot;hypocritical, self-absorbed, calculating and indifferent&quot;. Madeline, the lost love Jimmy pines for, is based on Stella Linden, the older rep-company actress who first encouraged Osborne to write. After the first production in London, Osborne began a relationship with Mary Ure, who played Alison; he divorced his first wife (of five years) Pamela Lane to marry Ure in 1957.

== Cast and characters ==
Characters:
* Jimmy Porter - is the &quot;angry young man of the play&quot; who is at odds with the British upper class. 
* Alison Porter - Jimmy&#x27;s complacent yet unsatisfied wife. 
* Cliff Lewis - easy going working class friend and roommate to Jimmy and Allison. 
* Helena Charles - An upper class friend who has an affair with Jimmy.
* Colonel Redfern - Alison&#x27;s father, a British colonel formerly stationed in India.

==Production==
The play was premiered at London&#x27;s Royal Court Theatre, on 8 May 1956 by the English Stage Company under the direction of Tony Richardson, setting by Alan Tagg, and music for songs by Tom Eastwood. The press release called the author an &quot;angry young man&quot;, a phrase that came to represent a new movement in 1950s British theatre. Audiences supposedly gasped at the sight of an ironing board on a London stage.

The cast was as follows: Kenneth Haigh (Jimmy), Alan Bates (Cliff), Mary Ure (Alison), Helena Hughes (Helena Charles) and John Welsh (Colonel Redfern). The following year, the production moved to Broadway under producer David Merrick and director Tony Richardson. Retaining the original cast but starring Vivienne Drummond as Helena, it received three Tony Award nominations, including for Best Play and Best Dramatic Actress for Ure.

==Critical reception==

At the time of production reviews of &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot; were deeply negative. Kenneth Tynan and Harold Hobson were among the few critics to praise it, and they now are regarded among the more influential critics of the time.

For example, on BBC Radio&#x27;s &quot;The Critics&quot;, Ivor Brown began his review by describing the play&#x27;s setting—a one-room flat in the Midlands—as &quot;unspeakably dirty and squalid&quot; such that it was difficult for him to &quot;believe that a colonel&#x27;s daughter, brought up with some standards&quot;, would have lived in it. He expressed anger at having watched something that &quot;wasted [his] time&quot;. The &quot;Daily Mail&quot;&#x27;s Cecil Wilson wrote that the beauty of Mary Ure was &quot;frittered away&quot; on a pathetic wife, who, &quot;judging by the time she spends ironing, seems to have taken on the nation&#x27;s laundry&quot;. Indeed, Alison, Ure&#x27;s character, irons during Act One, makes lunch in Act Two, and leaves the ironing to her rival in Act Three.

On the other hand, Kenneth Tynan wrote that he &quot;could not love anyone who did not wish to see &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot;&quot;, describing the play as a &quot;minor miracle&quot; containing &quot;all the qualities...one had despaired of ever seeing on the stage—the drift towards anarchy, the instinctive leftishness, the automatic rejection of &quot;official&quot; attitudes, the surrealist sense of humour (e.g., Jimmy describes an effeminate male friend as a &#x27;female Emily Brontë&#x27;), the casual promiscuity, the sense of lacking a crusade worth fighting for and, underlying all these, the determination that no one who dies shall go unmourned.&quot; Harold Hobson was also quick to recognise the importance of the play &quot;as a landmark of British theatre&quot;. He praised Osborne for the play, despite the fact that &quot;blinkers still obscure his vision&quot;.

Alan Sillitoe, author of &quot;Saturday Night and Sunday Morning&quot; and &quot;The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner&quot; (both of which are also part of the &quot;angry young men&quot; movement), wrote that Osborne &quot;didn&#x27;t contribute to British theatre, he set off a landmine and blew most of it up&quot;.

==Other notable productions==
Bates reprised his role as Cliff Lewis, alongside Drummond as Helena Charles, on ITV&#x27;s &quot;Play of the Week&quot; in 1956, shortly after the theatrical production premiered. Richard Pasco and Doreen Aris assumed the roles of Jimmy and Alison Porter, respectively. It was co-directed by Richardson and Silvio Narizzano.

The Renaissance Theatre Company&#x27;s August 1989 production at the Lyric Theatre, London was directed by Judi Dench, with Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson. A television version of the production was broadcast in Britain in December of that year. In 1995, Greg Hersov directed a production at the Royal Exchange, Manchester with Michael Sheen as Jimmy, Claire Skinner as Alison, Dominic Rowan as Cliff, and Hermione Norris as Helena. Hersov directed a second production in 1999, again starring Sheen, at the Royal National Theatre in London.

In 2012, it was adapted by Sam Gold off-Broadway starring Matthew Rhys, Adam Driver, and Sarah Goldberg at the Roundabout Theatre Company. A 2024 adaptation started by Billy Howle as Jimmy, Ellora Torchia as Alison, Morfydd Clark as Helena, and Iwan Davies as Cliff at the Almeida Theatre.

==Sequel==
In 1989 Osborne wrote a sequel to the play titled &quot;Déjàvu&quot;, which was first produced in 1992. &quot;Déjàvu&quot; depicted Jimmy Porter, now known as J.P., in middle age, living with his daughter Alison. He rants about the state of the country to his old friend Cliff, while his Alison irons, just as her mother had done in &quot;Look Back&quot;. The play was not a commercial success, closing after seven weeks. It was Osborne&#x27;s last play.

==Film adaptations==
* A British film adaptation starring Richard Burton, Claire Bloom, and Mary Ure and directed by Tony Richardson was made in 1958 and released in 1959. The screenplay was written by the play&#x27;s author, John Osborne, with Nigel Kneale. Interior set design was by Loudon Sainthill. The film was nominated in four categories in the 1959 BAFTA Awards, including a Best Actor nomination for Richard Burton, but it did not win any of them. In the United States, the film failed at the box office.
* A version released in 1980 was directed by Lindsay Anderson and David Hugh Jones.
* In December 1989 Judi Dench&#x27;s stage direction of the play from earlier in the year was formed by her into a TV production that starred Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson.

==Radio adaptations==
* A radio dramatisation starring David Tennant as Jimmy Porter and Ian McKellen as the Colonel, and directed by Richard Wilson, was broadcast by the BBC on 30 April 2016.

==In popular culture==
&quot;Look Back in Anger&quot;″s turtleneck sweater, and wife ironing while wearing a slip, became symbols that both represented the Angry Young Men movement and which others satirised.

=== Media ===
* An episode of the BBC radio comedy series &quot;Hancock&#x27;s Half Hour&quot; paid tribute to Osborne&#x27;s play in &quot;The East Cheam Drama Festival&quot; (1958). The episode features the regular cast spoofing a number of theatrical genres, with &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot; recast as &quot;Look Back in Hunger—a new play by the Hungry Young Man, Mr. John Eastbourne&quot;. Scriptwriters Alan Simpson and Ray Galton mimic several elements of Osborne&#x27;s play, from Jimmy&#x27;s railing against the iniquities of modern life to the values of middle-class bourgeois life. The episode &quot;Sunday Afternoon at Home&quot; (1958) begins with a striking similarity to the opening of Osborne&#x27;s play, with Hancock and Sid James sitting reading the papers and complaining there&#x27;s nothing to do.
* &quot;SCTV&quot; (season 4, episode 2) parodied the play and its genre with &quot;Look Back in a Bloody Rage&quot; as an entrant in a British film festival focused on angry young men.
* &quot;Ed Wood: Look Back in Angora&quot;, a 1994 documentary about Ed Wood, a B-movie director, released by Rhino Home Video. The cross-dressing Wood often wore an angora sweater and angora fabric is featured in many of his films.
* In &quot;Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip&quot;, an American television series by Aaron Sorkin, the character Andy Mackinaw translates &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot; into Dutch.
* &quot;Look Back in Annoyance&quot; is the title of a retrospective episode of &quot;Daria&quot;, an animated television series.
* Jimmy Shive-Overly, one of the leads in the FX series &quot;You&#x27;re the Worst&quot;, is named after Jimmy.

=== Music ===
* Jimmy Porter appears as the protagonist - older, increasingly feeble, but still angry - in The Albion Band&#x27;s &quot;Ash on an Old Man&#x27;s Sleeve,&quot; from their 1989 album &quot;Give Me a Saddle I&#x27;ll Trade You a Car&quot;.
* &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot; is a song by British singer David Bowie from his 1979 album &quot;Lodger&quot;, but there is no connection to the play, only a shared title.
* &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot; is a song by British rock group Television Personalities from their first album &quot;...And Don&#x27;t the Kids Just Love It&quot; (1981).
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Back in Anger&quot; is a song by British rock group Oasis from their album (What&#x27;s the Story) Morning Glory?.

== See also ==
* &quot;Look Back in Anger&quot; (1959 film)

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9485200" start="31" end="43" title="Realism (theatre)" label="realist play"/>
<link wikidata="Q313841" start="55" end="67" title="John Osborne" label="John Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="174" end="187" title="working class" label="working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751085" start="250" end="268" title="upper-middle-class" label="upper-middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q543736" start="656" end="671" title="angry young men" label="angry young men"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="756" end="763" title="Realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q898449" start="803" end="811" title="escapism" label="escapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q477371" start="971" end="989" title="Kitchen sink realism" label="kitchen sink drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="1123" end="1131" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1136" end="1144" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416631" start="1299" end="1327" title="Evening Standard Awards" label="Evening Standard Drama Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610858" start="1398" end="1429" title="Look Back in Anger (1959 film)" label="motion picture of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q52411" start="1433" end="1448" title="Tony Richardson" label="Tony Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="1459" end="1473" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q264759" start="1478" end="1486" title="Mary Ure" label="Mary Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="1674" end="1682" title="Midlands (England)" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1768" end="1777" title="Coins of the pound sterling#Pre-decimal coinage" label="ninepence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="1886" end="1899" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737172" start="3935" end="3959" title="Knight-errant" label="knight in shining armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="6036" end="6046" title="music hall" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q985279" start="7017" end="7026" title="Morecambe" label="Morecambe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="7209" end="7214" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655429" start="7845" end="7869" title="A Better Class of Person" label="A Better Class of Person"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607082" start="8002" end="8015" title="Stella Linden" label="Stella Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q264759" start="8158" end="8166" title="Mary Ure" label="Mary Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="8685" end="8692" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8715" end="8720" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="8778" end="8797" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="Royal Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="8820" end="8841" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="English Stage Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q52411" start="8865" end="8880" title="Tony Richardson" label="Tony Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815693" start="8927" end="8939" title="Tom Eastwood" label="Tom Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q543736" start="8986" end="9001" title="Angry Young Men" label="angry young man"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463577" start="9188" end="9201" title="Kenneth Haigh" label="Kenneth Haigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q309160" start="9211" end="9221" title="Alan Bates" label="Alan Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q264759" start="9231" end="9239" title="Mary Ure" label="Mary Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527373" start="9285" end="9295" title="John Welsh (actor)" label="John Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237521" start="9383" end="9396" title="David Merrick" label="David Merrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q52411" start="9410" end="9425" title="Tony Richardson" label="Tony Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="9515" end="9525" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799442" start="9553" end="9562" title="Tony Award for Best Play" label="Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q374900" start="9713" end="9726" title="Kenneth Tynan" label="Kenneth Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661060" start="9731" end="9744" title="Harold Hobson" label="Harold Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099327" start="9919" end="9929" title="Ivor Brown" label="Ivor Brown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10325" end="10337" title="Cecil Wilson (critic)" label="Cecil Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q374900" start="10684" end="10697" title="Kenneth Tynan" label="Kenneth Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="11055" end="11065" title="surrealist" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80137" start="11149" end="11161" title="Emily Brontë" label="Emily Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661060" start="11336" end="11349" title="Harold Hobson" label="Harold Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265341" start="11512" end="11520" title="blinders" label="blinkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q216398" start="11554" end="11567" title="Alan Sillitoe" label="Alan Sillitoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q444395" start="11585" end="11618" title="Saturday Night and Sunday Morning" label="Saturday Night and Sunday Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222069" start="11635" end="11677" title="The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner" label="The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="11991" end="11994" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3789902" start="12008" end="12024" title="Play of the Week (TV series)" label="Play of the Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328292" start="12091" end="12104" title="Richard Pasco" label="Richard Pasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q211974" start="12218" end="12234" title="Silvio Narizzano" label="Silvio Narizzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424740" start="12241" end="12268" title="Renaissance Theatre Company" label="Renaissance Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269699" start="12306" end="12327" title="Lyric Theatre, London" label="Lyric Theatre, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="12344" end="12354" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="12361" end="12376" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q168724" start="12381" end="12394" title="Emma Thompson" label="Emma Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674993" start="12398" end="12416" title="Look Back in Anger (1989 film)" label="television version"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605697" start="12495" end="12506" title="Greg Hersov" label="Greg Hersov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="12536" end="12562" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q298276" start="12568" end="12581" title="Michael Sheen" label="Michael Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125312" start="12592" end="12606" title="Claire Skinner" label="Claire Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290639" start="12618" end="12631" title="Dominic Rowan" label="Dominic Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415881" start="12646" end="12661" title="Hermione Norris" label="Hermione Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="12747" end="12769" title="Royal National Theatre" label="Royal National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087905" start="12809" end="12817" title="Sam Gold" label="Sam Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q342784" start="12840" end="12852" title="Matthew Rhys" label="Matthew Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="12854" end="12865" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745307" start="12871" end="12885" title="Sarah Goldberg" label="Sarah Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371225" start="12893" end="12919" title="Roundabout Theatre Company" label="Roundabout Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q28915096" start="12950" end="12961" title="Billy Howle" label="Billy Howle"/>
<link wikidata="Q120174053" start="12972" end="12986" title="Ellora Torchia" label="Ellora Torchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572561" start="12998" end="13011" title="Morfydd Clark" label="Morfydd Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839111" start="13055" end="13070" title="Almeida Theatre" label="Almeida Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182822" start="13140" end="13146" title="Déjàvu" label="Déjàvu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610858" start="13565" end="13588" title="Look Back in Anger (1959 film)" label="British film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="13598" end="13612" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q235622" start="13614" end="13626" title="Claire Bloom" label="Claire Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q264759" start="13632" end="13640" title="Mary Ure" label="Mary Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q52411" start="13657" end="13672" title="Tony Richardson" label="Tony Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313841" start="13766" end="13778" title="John Osborne" label="John Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278904" start="13785" end="13797" title="Nigel Kneale" label="Nigel Kneale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006639" start="13826" end="13842" title="Loudon Sainthill" label="Loudon Sainthill"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="13898" end="13910" title="BAFTA Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q877435" start="14043" end="14053" title="box office" label="box office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427591" start="14059" end="14083" title="Look Back in Anger (1980 film)" label="version released in 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q298352" start="14100" end="14116" title="Lindsay Anderson" label="Lindsay Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174792" start="14121" end="14137" title="David Jones (director)" label="David Hugh Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="14158" end="14168" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674993" start="14254" end="14267" title="Look Back in Anger (1989 film)" label="TV production"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="14281" end="14296" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q168724" start="14301" end="14314" title="Emma Thompson" label="Emma Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214601" start="14372" end="14385" title="David Tennant" label="David Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="14406" end="14418" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761690" start="14785" end="14809" title="Hancock&amp;#x27;s Half Hour" label="Hancock&amp;#x27;s Half Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="14975" end="14980" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q21876070" start="15132" end="15144" title="Alan Simpson (scriptwriter)" label="Alan Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21876065" start="15149" end="15159" title="Ray Galton" label="Ray Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086861" start="15463" end="15472" title="Sid James" label="Sid James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767756" start="15552" end="15556" title="Second City Television" label="SCTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q221843" start="15738" end="15745" title="Ed Wood" label="Ed Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="15810" end="15817" title="B-movie" label="B-movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="15840" end="15856" title="Rhino Home Video" label="Rhino Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q431604" start="15862" end="15876" title="cross-dressing" label="cross-dressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q542460" start="15896" end="15902" title="angora wool" label="angora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15974" end="16003" title="Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip" label="Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q299194" start="16044" end="16056" title="Aaron Sorkin" label="Aaron Sorkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165866" start="16226" end="16231" title="Daria" label="Daria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157123" start="16332" end="16353" title="You&amp;#x27;re the Worst" label="You&amp;#x27;re the Worst"/>
<link wikidata="Q786980" start="16491" end="16506" title="The Albion Band" label="The Albion Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="16698" end="16709" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342720" start="16736" end="16742" title="Lodger (album)" label="Lodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421042" start="16876" end="16900" title="Television Personalities" label="Television Personalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545047" start="16930" end="16969" title="...And Don&amp;#x27;t the Kids Just Love It" label="...And Don&amp;#x27;t the Kids Just Love It"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070349" start="16992" end="17021" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="17060" end="17065" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8360" start="17083" end="17121" title="(What&amp;#x27;s the Story) Morning Glory?" label="(What&amp;#x27;s the Story) Morning Glory?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610858" start="17141" end="17183" title="Look Back in Anger (1959 film)" label="&amp;quot;Look Back in Anger&amp;quot; (1959 film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954553" wikidata="Q3546573" url="?curid=954553" title="Télébec">
<text>Télébec LP is a telephone company located in Quebec, Canada. It serves various sectors like the James Bay territory area, the Abitibi-Témiscamingue region, parts of central and southern Quebec and parts of the Outaouais region.

Currently, Télébec is the landline carrier for over 180,000 customers spread on about 750,000 square kilometres, making it the telephone company with the largest territory in Quebec.

Télébec is an ADSL Internet Service Provider (ISP) through Télébec Internet, which is also closely linked with Bell Internet.

==History==
The name Télébec originated with the first telephone company to operate a municipal system in the town of Bécancour, &quot;Téléphone Bécancour&quot;, which was founded in 1965 by a group of businessmen. Three years later, Télébec merged with seven other phone companies: Téléphone Princeville ltée, Télécommunication Richelieu ltée, Téléphone de Contrecoeur ltée, Compagnie de Téléphone La Tuque ltée, Télécommunications de l&#x27;Est ltée, Compagnie de Téléphone Arthabaska ltée, and Compagnie de Téléphone Pontiac ltée.

Other telephone companies were sold to Télébec over previous years, with some merged into Télébec.

In 1996 Télébec created Télébec Mobilité, a CDMA and HSPA mobile phone service provider affiliated with Bell Mobility.

===Bell subsidiary===
Since January 30, 2007, Télébec is a wholly owned subsidiary of Bell Aliant, although for Inter-Exchange Carrier and Competitive Local Exchange Carrier service agreements it is still considered independent by Bell.

Since 2016 it has been a subsidiary of BCE Inc., after Bell Aliant operations were consolidated into those of Bell Canada.

==References==
==External links==
*Télébec website
*Bell Aliant</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3546573" start="0" end="10" title="Télébec" label="Télébec LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="16" end="33" title="telephone company" label="telephone company"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="45" end="51" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="53" end="59" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q223810" start="96" end="105" title="James Bay" label="James Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q321529" start="126" end="147" title="Abitibi-Témiscamingue" label="Abitibi-Témiscamingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q222948" start="210" end="219" title="Outaouais" label="Outaouais"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="427" end="431" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="432" end="457" title="Internet Service Provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894586" start="524" end="537" title="Bell Internet" label="Bell Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q141542" start="658" end="667" title="Bécancour, Quebec" label="Bécancour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546573" start="1199" end="1215" title="Télébec Mobilité" label="Télébec Mobilité"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="1219" end="1223" title="CDMA" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q731991" start="1228" end="1232" title="High Speed Packet Access" label="HSPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="1279" end="1292" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q815690" start="1381" end="1392" title="Bell Aliant" label="Bell Aliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696188" start="1407" end="1429" title="Inter-Exchange Carrier" label="Inter-Exchange Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156358" start="1434" end="1468" title="Competitive Local Exchange Carrier" label="Competitive Local Exchange Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525746" start="1572" end="1580" title="BCE Inc." label="BCE Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q815690" start="1588" end="1599" title="Bell Aliant" label="Bell Aliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="1643" end="1654" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954571" wikidata="Q1637219" url="?curid=954571" title="Speedcubing">
<text>Speedcubing is a competitive mind sport centered around the rapid solving of various combination puzzles. The most prominent puzzle in this category is the 3×3×3 puzzle, commonly known as the Rubik&#x27;s Cube. Participants in this sport are called &quot;speedcubers&quot; (or simply &quot;cubers&quot;), who focus specifically on solving these puzzles at high speeds to get low clock times. The essential aspect of solving these puzzles typically involves executing a series of predefined algorithms in a particular sequence with eidetic prediction and finger tricks.

Competitive speedcubing is predominantly overseen by the World Cube Association (WCA), which officially recognizes 17 distinct speedcubing events. These events encompass a range of puzzles, including N×N×N puzzles of sizes varying from 2×2×2 to 7×7×7, and other puzzle forms such as the Pyraminx, Megaminx, Skewb, Square-1, and Rubik&#x27;s Clock. Additionally, specialized formats such as 3×3, 4×4, and 5×5 blindfolded, 3×3 one-handed (OH), 3×3 Fewest Moves, and 3×3 multi-blind are also regulated and hosted in competitions.

As of February 2025, the world record for the fastest single solve of a Rubik&#x27;s cube in a competitive setting stands at 3.08 seconds. This record was achieved by Yiheng Wang at the XMUM Cube Open 2025 event on February 16, 2025. He also set the record for the average time of five solves in the 3×3×3 category with 4.05 seconds at Zhengzhou Open 2024 on December 8, 2024. Speedcubing is organized by numerous countries that hold international competitions throughout the year. The widespread popularity of the Rubik&#x27;s Cube has led to an abundance of online resources, including guides and techniques, aimed at assisting individuals in solving the puzzle.

==History==

The Rubik&#x27;s Cube was invented on May 19, 1974, by Hungarian professor of architecture Ernő Rubik (born July 13, 1944). In 1979, Rubik partnered with Ideal Toy Company to garner widespread international interest in the cube. On June 5, 1982, the first world championship of speedcubing was held in Budapest, Hungary. Nineteen people competed in the event, and the American Minh Thai won with a single solve time of 22.95 seconds, which was, at the time, the fastest Rubik&#x27;s Cube solve ever recorded. Other attendees include Jessica Fridrich and Lars Petrus, both of whom later contributed to the development of new solving methods and the speedcubing community. The Rubik&#x27;s Cube waned in popularity after 1983, as there were no official competitions held, but with the advent of the Internet, online websites began to surface to discuss the cube. With these websites facilitating the renewed popularity of the cube, a new generation of speedcubers arose.

Those prominent in the online speedsolving community, such as Ron van Bruchem, Tyson Mao, Chris Hardwick, and Ton Dennenbroek, eventually wanted to create an organization where cubers from around the world could meet and compete against each other. In 2003, they organized a championship in Toronto, Ontario, followed by another competition in the Netherlands later that same year. This revival of competition sparked a new wave of organized speedcubing events, which included regular national and international competitions. There were twelve competitions in 2004, 58 more from 2005 to 2006, over 100 in 2008, and over 1150 in 2018. Since Budapest&#x27;s 1982 competition, there have been nine further World Championships traditionally held every other year. This new wave of speedcubing competitions has been and still is organized by the World Cube Association (WCA).

Since the rise of speedcubing&#x27;s popularity, numerous entrepreneurial ventures have been founded specializing in making or selling speedcubes, creating competition between these brands and Rubik&#x27;s. Dozens of cube manufacturers, such as GANCube, MoYu, YJ, and QiYi, have begun improving the cube&#x27;s technology by creating speedcubes to allow for smoother turning and faster solving. This has helped to facilitate the eventual rise of the Rubik&#x27;s Cube as not just a toy, but also a lucrative business.

== World Cube Association ==

The World Cube Association (WCA) is an organization which organizes speedcubing competitions and ratifies results. The WCA consists of the WCA Board, WCA Committee, and the WCA Council. The WCA Board is the head or leader of the entire WCA, and is responsible for fulfilling tasks not completed or done by the WCA Committee and WCA Council. The WCA Appeals Committee(WAC) is responsible for ensure right and fair decisions in accordance with the WCA Regulations. The WCA Committee is also responsible for reviewing and resolving appeals regarding the decisions of other WCA Staff members. The WCA Council is a special type of team that serves as an advisory role to the WCA, and consists of community members, and not WCA Staff Members. These WCA Staff Members are part of a cubing community, which consist of organizers, who organize and manage cubing competitions, and delegates, who help in managing competitions and help competitors who are unfamiliar with the competition environment, and to decide whether a competitor’s solve should be penalized or not. WCA Regulations are required to be followed by competitors and can be found on the official WCA website.

== Methods ==

=== 3×3×3 ===
The standard 3x3x3 can be solved using several methods. The most commonly used methods for speedcubing are CFOP, Roux, and ZZ, which are generally considered to achieve the fastest times. The CFOP method is used by the majority of cubers and employs a layer-by-layer system with numerous algorithms for solving the final layer. The method starts by creating a cross on any side of the cube, followed by F2L where 4 corner edge pairs are inserted into the cross, followed by OLL (Orientation of the Last Layer) where the top side is solved in 1 of 57 algorithms, and finally PLL (Permutation of the Last Layer) where you do 1 of 21 algorithms to solve the rest of the cube. Roux, the second most popular method, which starts by forming a 3x2x1 block on both sides of the cube and solves the middle layer last, using fewer algorithms. ZZ uses a unique step called Edge Orientation to improve the ergonomics of turning by removing the amount of rotations during a solve. Other notable methods include Petrus, which has been popular at times in the past; however, it is now considered sub-optimal to CFOP and Roux and was abandoned due to its unfavorable finger tricks.

Solving larger cubes, such as 4x4x4 and 5x5x5, is most often done by reducing them to 3x3x3 and solving them like so, while 2x2x2 can be solved with the same or similar methods as 3x3x3. However, specialized 2x2x2 methods are quicker, and are regarded as superior to 3x3x3 methods. These methods include Ortega, CLL, and the EG method (which can allow users to plan the entire solution during inspection).

==== CFOP ====
The CFOP (abbreviation for Cross-F2L-OLL–PLL) method, also known as the Fridrich method after one of its inventors, Jessica Fridrich, who finished second in the 2003 Rubik&#x27;s Cube World Championships, is the most commonly used method in speedcubing today. Its origins are credited to David Singmaster, who was one of the first to publish a layer-by-layer method of solving in 1980, and Guus Razoux Schultz, who built upon this and developed a more efficient system for the first two layers (F2L). Jessica Fridrich then finished developing the method and published it online in 1997, an event that was very influential in the revival of competitive speedcubing. The first step of the method is to solve a cross of edge pieces on the first layer. The remainder of the first layer and all of the second layer are then solved together in what is referred to as &quot;corner-edge pairs,&quot; or slots. Finally, the last layer is solved in two steps – first, all of the pieces in the layer are oriented to form a solid color (but without the individual pieces always being in their correct places on the cube). This step is referred to as orientation and is usually performed with a single set of algorithms known as OLL (Orientation of the Last Layer). Then, all of those pieces are permuted to their correct spots. This is also usually performed as a single set of PLL (Permutation of the Last Layer) algorithms. OLL and PLL use 57 and 21 algorithms, respectively.

The CFOP method can be used as a less advanced method by dividing the steps into more steps, reducing the number of algorithms that need to be learned but sacrificing time. It is usually known as the beginner method or layer by layer (LBL). Most people start learning CFOP with 4LLL (Four-Look Last Layer), which is the less advanced, slower, and algorithm-reducing (from 78 algorithms to 16) way to learn CFOP. The 4 steps are divided into edge orientation, corner orientation, corner permutation, and edge permutation (which can be called EO, CO, CP, and EP). Later on, full OLL, which has 57 algorithms, and full PLL, which has 21 algorithms, can be learned. An average CFOP user that solves with full OLL and PLL, along with an efficient cross (which takes 8 moves at maximum) and efficient F2L (which takes almost 30 moves), consists of 55–60 moves, which means that it has a higher move count than Roux and ZZ. However, finger tricks and algorithms are more researched with CFOP than any other method, which explains why the majority of the fastest speedcubers use CFOP as their main speedcubing method.

The CFOP method is the most widely used speed-solving method. It is a more efficient version of the Layer-By-Layer method (also known as the beginner&#x27;s method). It is very popular due to the vast amount of resources that teach and improve upon the CFOP method. Many top speedcubers, including two-time World Champion Feliks Zemdegs and world record holder Max Park, learn additional sets of algorithms for the last slot and layer, such as Corners of Last Layer (COLL), which orients and permutes the corners when the edges are oriented, or Winter Variation (also known as Valk Last Slot, or VLS), which finishes OLL while inserting the last pair, and ZBLL, which combines the solving processes of OLL corner orientation and PLL in only one algorithm, provided the last-layer edges are oriented.

Pseudoslotting is a technique that allows advanced CFOP solvers to be more creative with efficient solutions. It is an alternative method to F2L, where instead of creating and inserting pairs with matching colors, the bottom layer is intentionally misaligned to allow different pieces to be paired together. This provides more freedom while pairing pieces during F2L. Pseudoslotting is similar to another technique called keyhole in which the bottom layer is misaligned to allow a piece to be inserted independently of its solved counterpart. It is widely believed that Tymon Kolasiński (who holds the European record for a 3x3x3 single with 3.66 seconds) is the best speedcuber who uses pseudoslotting.

==== Roux ====
The Roux method was invented by French speedcuber Gilles Roux. The first step of the Roux method is to form a 3×2×1 block, usually placed in the lower portion of the left layer. The second step is creating another 3×2×1 on the opposite side, so each block shares a bottom color. The creation of these blocks is commonly known as &quot;block-building&quot;. The remaining four corners are then solved using a set of algorithms known as CMLL (Corners of the Last Layer, without regard to the M-slice), which leaves six edges and four centers that are solved in the last step, L6E or LSE (Last Six Edges).

This method is not as dependent on algorithm memorization as the CFOP method since all but the third step is done with intuition as opposed to predefined sets of algorithms. Because of the frequent use of M moves, the Roux method can be performed without any rotations (unlike the CFOP method), which means it is easier to look ahead (solving pieces while at the same time looking for the solution to the next step) while solving. It is also considered one of the most efficient speedsolving methods, with its average move count being between 45 and 50 moves for experienced solvers. However, the Roux method of speedcubing has been criticized over the years because, unlike CFOP, ZZ, or Petrus, Roux requires M (middle layer) slices to solve LSE. Using M slice moves makes it harder to achieve higher TPS (turns per second) because the finger tricks are almost always flicks, but high TPS is achievable through training.

One of the users of this method, Kian Mansour, broke the one-handed (OH) world record average with a time of 9.54 seconds. Sean Patrick Villanueva is the first Roux user to achieve a sub-6 average of five in competition and is currently ranked twenty-sixth in the world by 3x3 average. He also podiumed in 3x3 at the WCA World Championship 2019 (2nd Place). On May 25, 2024, he broke the OH WR average with the largest margin in nearly 10 years, bringing it down from 8.62 to 8.09 seconds. He also broke the WR single with a 6.05 a few weeks later, though he lost this to Dhruva Sai Meruva, a CFOP one-hand solver on October 6, 2024.

==== ZZ ====
The ZZ method (short for &quot;Zbigniew Zborowski&quot;) is a modern speedcubing method originally proposed by Zbigniew Zborowski in 2006, and built upon since. The method was designed specifically to achieve high turning speeds by focusing on movement ergonomics and is a combination of a block-building method and a layer-by-layer method. The initial pre-planned step is called EOCross and is the most distinctive hallmark of the ZZ method. It involves orienting all edges while placing the cross pieces. It is also common to build an EOLine, mainly used for one-handed solving, where all edges are oriented and only the front and back cross edges are placed. The next step solves the remaining first two layers using only left, right, top, and bottom face turns, one of the advantages of ZZ. On completion of the first two layers, the last layer&#x27;s edges are all correctly oriented because of edge pre-orientation during EO. The last layer may be completed using a number of techniques, including those used in the CFOP method. An expert variant of this method, ZBLL (Zborowski-Bruchem Last Layer), allows the last layer to be completed in a single step with an average of just over 12 moves but requires a total of 493 algorithms to be learned. Due to the ergonomics of ZZ, rotating when solving will never be needed, unlike in the CFOP method. The ZZ method has fewer moves than CFOP, with ZZ averaging 53.5 compared to CFOP&#x27;s 55–60 moves. Because ZZ uses EO, it is very move-efficient, and these techniques are sometimes used in FMC (Fewest Moves Challenge).

==== Corners-first methods ====
Corners-first methods involve solving the corners and then finishing the edges with slice turns. Corner-first solutions were common in the 1980s. It was used by the 1982 world champion Minh Thai. Currently, corner-first solutions are rarely used among speedsolvers. Dutch cuber Marc Waterman created a corners-first method in the cube craze and averaged 18 seconds in the mid-late 1980s.

===Fewest Moves Challenge===
At the highest level, there is typically not a standard method used for Fewest Moves solving. Rather, competitors attempt to solve the cube intuitively using solving techniques such as blockbuilding, Normal-Inverse-Scramble-Switch (NISS), commutator insertions, and Domino Reduction after its rise to popularity in 2019. Most solves use multiple of these techniques in order to generate a solution.

===Blindfolded===
In 2003, when the first blindfolded competitions were organized, world record solvers would use the 3OP (3-Cycle Orientation Permutation) Method, which orients and then permutes pieces using 3 cycles. As of today, methods such as 3-Style and M2 are among the fastest and most popular blind-solving methods. The Old Pochmann Method, which is a method that solves one piece at a time, is a method typically used by beginner blindsolvers. Blindfolded solvers use letter patterns to help memorize sequences of moves in order to solve the cube.

The lettering scheme that blindfolded solvers use is called the Speffz lettering scheme, and each sticker or individual color is given a letter. The letters are assigned starting with the top edge of the top face, going clockwise, and beginning with A. The top edge of the top face is A, the right edge is B, the bottom edge is C, and the left edge is D. The same process is done on the other sides in the order top, left, front, right, back, and bottom to get every edge lettered from A to X. The same process is applied to all of the corners, starting with the top left corner and going clockwise in the same face order. A cycle of piece swaps is then used with the letter E being used as a buffer location for corners and D commonly being used for edges in the Old Pochmann method. The current 3x3 average and single blindfolded world record holder is Tommy Cherry, from the United States.

==Competitions==
Speedcubing competitions have been held every year since 2003. The WCA was formed in 2004 to govern all official competitions. For a competition to be official, it must be approved by the WCA and follow the WCA regulations. Included in the regulations is the necessity of having one or more WCA delegate in attendance. A delegate&#x27;s main role is to ensure all regulations are followed during the competition. Once the competition is finished, results are uploaded to the WCA website. Judges oversee the round. Delegates help the judge. Runners give the scrambled or solved cube to the competitor. A scrambler scrambles the cube.

===Format===
The majority of puzzle competitions are held using a trimmed mean of five. This involves the competitor executing five solves in the round in question, after which the fastest and slowest solves are disregarded and the mean of the remaining three is used. The 6×6×6 and 7×7×7 events are ranked by a straight mean of three—only three solves, none of which are disregarded. In 3×3×3 blindfolded and 3×3×3 fewest moves challenges, either a straight mean of 3 or the best of 3 is used, while 4×4×4 blindfolded, 5×5×5 blindfolded, and multiple blindfolded challenges are ranked using the best of 1, 2 or 3, depending on the competition.

When a round begins, competitors turn in the puzzle they will use. Puzzles are scrambled using a computer-generated scramble. In each round, five, three, or one (depending on the format mentioned above) scrambles are used. Every competitor in the round will receive each scramble once. Before starting a solution, a competitor has up to 15 seconds to inspect the puzzle (inspection is removed for blindfolded events). This is monitored by a judge with a stopwatch. Once the solution is complete, the judge records the time on the competitor&#x27;s scorecard, which is signed by both. If the puzzle is unsolved and the timer is stopped, the time is recorded as &quot;DNF&quot; (Did Not Finish). There are also numerous reasons why the solver can receive a two-second addition to the solve time, such as a face being more than 45 degrees off or the competitor going over the allowed inspection time. A competitor can also receive an extra solution to replace the one just completed, for example in the case of a timer malfunction or a duplicate scramble.

The official timer used in competitions is the StackMat Gen 4 or Gen 5 timer, which was originally designed for sport stacking. This device has touch-sensitive pads that are triggered by the user lifting one or both of their hands to start the time and placing both their hands back on the pads after releasing the puzzle to stop the timer.

Only two WCA recognised events are not &quot;speedsolving&quot; events (i.e. are scored by means other than time taken for solves), these being: Fewest Moves Competition, or FMC, which is scored using the number of moves for a competitor&#x27;s solution, with a lower number of moves being better, and multiple blindfold solving, or &quot;multi-blind&quot;, where a competitor&#x27;s score is calculated by subtracting the number of unsolved cubes from the number of solved cubes. 

Official competitions are currently being held in several categories.

Competitions will often include events for speedsolving other puzzles as well, such as:
* Pyraminx, a pyramid-shaped puzzle.
* Megaminx, a twelve-sided dodecahedral puzzle solved similarly to a 3×3×3.
* Skewb, a cube-shaped puzzle added in 2014 as an official WCA event due to its growing popularity and the ease of its regulations.
* Square-1, a cubed puzzle that changes shape as it is solved
* Rubik&#x27;s Clock, a double-sided circle-shaped puzzle with 9 clock faces on it that is considered solved when all clock hands are in the 12 o&#x27;clock position.

The following are no longer official events:
* 3×3×3 with Feet, 3×3×3 with Feet was removed from the list of official WCA events in 2020.
* Rubik&#x27;s Magic, a folding puzzle with 8 connected tiles, Rubik&#x27;s Magic was removed from the list of official WCA events in 2012.
* Rubik&#x27;s Master Magic, a folding puzzle with 12 connected tiles, Rubik&#x27;s Master Magic was removed from the list of official WCA events in 2012.
* Rainbow Cube, a cuboctahedron-shaped puzzle, the Rainbow Cube was removed from the list of official WCA events in 2007.
* Siamese Cube, two connected 3×3s, the Siamese Cube was removed from the list of official WCA events in 2007.
* 3×3 with No Inspection, 3×3 with No Inspection was removed from the list of official WCA events in 2006.

===World Rubik&#x27;s Cube Championships===
The WCA organizes the Rubik&#x27;s Cube World Championship as the main international competition once every two years. The latest championship was held in Incheon, South Korea from August 12 to 15 August 2023.

==World Records==
The following are the official speedcubing world records approved by the WCA as of 15 February 2025.

Note: For averages of 5 solves, the best time and the worst time are dropped, and the mean of the remaining 3 solves is taken. For events where only 3 solves are done, the mean of all 3 is taken.

==See also==
* Rubik&#x27;s Revenge
* Professor&#x27;s Cube
* Magic Cube

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Speedsolving.com
*Speedsolving.com Wiki
*Fridrich Method
*Roux Method
*ZZ Method</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1637219" start="0" end="11" title="Speedcubing" label="Speedcubing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188693" start="29" end="39" title="mind sport" label="mind sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150814" start="85" end="103" title="combination puzzle" label="combination puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700732" start="156" end="168" title="N-dimensional_sequential_move_puzzle" label="3×3×3 puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47043" start="192" end="209" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098949" start="356" end="367" title="Optimal solutions for the Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="high speeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="416" end="423" title="permutation" label="solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="490" end="499" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q386001" start="531" end="538" title="eidetic memory" label="eidetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715960" start="627" end="649" title="World Cube Association" label="World Cube Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q861555" start="770" end="775" title="Cube_(algebra)" label="N×N×N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322820" start="857" end="865" title="Pyraminx" label="Pyraminx"/>
<link wikidata="Q532286" start="867" end="875" title="Megaminx" label="Megaminx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462468" start="877" end="882" title="Skewb" label="Skewb"/>
<link wikidata="Q584750" start="884" end="892" title="Square-1 (puzzle)" label="Square-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759004" start="898" end="916" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Clock" label="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254017" start="1123" end="1135" title="list of world records in speedcubing" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q124350057" start="1265" end="1276" title="Yiheng Wang" label="Yiheng Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47043" start="1781" end="1798" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="1832" end="1841" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="1842" end="1851" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="1855" end="1867" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186089" start="1868" end="1878" title="Ernő Rubik" label="Ernő Rubik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293839" start="1931" end="1948" title="Ideal Toy Company" label="Ideal Toy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="2079" end="2087" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2089" end="2096" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172987" start="2154" end="2163" title="Minh Thai" label="Minh Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q457550" start="2310" end="2326" title="Jessica Fridrich" label="Jessica Fridrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340472" start="2331" end="2342" title="Lars Petrus" label="Lars Petrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="2574" end="2582" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="2591" end="2598" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364579" start="2809" end="2824" title="Ron van Bruchem" label="Ron van Bruchem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861783" start="2826" end="2835" title="Tyson Mao" label="Tyson Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675502" start="2837" end="2851" title="Chris Hardwick (speedcuber)" label="Chris Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3022" end="3034" title="2003 World Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube Championship" label="championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="3038" end="3054" title="Toronto" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3095" end="3106" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="3387" end="3395" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715960" start="3588" end="3610" title="World Cube Association" label="World Cube Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="3841" end="3854" title="Manufacturing" label="manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715960" start="4172" end="4194" title="World Cube Association" label="World Cube Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q47043" start="5377" end="5382" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="3x3x3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627732" start="5471" end="5475" title="CFOP method" label="CFOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627732" start="5556" end="5567" title="CFOP method" label="CFOP method"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="5652" end="5661" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071123" start="6561" end="6566" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="4x4x4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470118" start="6571" end="6576" title="Professor&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="5x5x5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627732" start="6957" end="6961" title="CFOP method" label="CFOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627732" start="7025" end="7040" title="Fridrich method" label="Fridrich method"/>
<link wikidata="Q457550" start="7069" end="7085" title="Jessica Fridrich" label="Jessica Fridrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176665" start="7241" end="7257" title="David Singmaster" label="David Singmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229871" start="8620" end="8659" title="Layer by Layer" label="beginner method or layer by layer (LBL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q715552" start="9853" end="9867" title="Feliks Zemdegs" label="Feliks Zemdegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323657" start="9892" end="9900" title="Max Park" label="Max Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="11084" end="11090" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562087" start="11102" end="11113" title="Gilles Roux" label="Gilles Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627732" start="11721" end="11732" title="Fridrich method" label="CFOP method"/>
<link wikidata="Q106619176" start="12702" end="12725" title="Sean Patrick Villanueva" label="Sean Patrick Villanueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627732" start="14249" end="14260" title="Fridrich method" label="CFOP method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627732" start="14567" end="14578" title="CFOP method" label="CFOP method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172987" start="15019" end="15028" title="Minh Thai" label="Minh Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="15100" end="15105" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17413" end="17425" title="World Cube Association#WCA Delegates" label="WCA delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q32278" start="17822" end="17834" title="Truncated mean" label="trimmed mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="17988" end="17992" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416308" start="19568" end="19582" title="sport stacking" label="sport stacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322820" start="20442" end="20450" title="Pyraminx" label="Pyraminx"/>
<link wikidata="Q532286" start="20479" end="20487" title="Megaminx" label="Megaminx"/>
<link wikidata="Q47043" start="20546" end="20551" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="3×3×3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462468" start="20555" end="20560" title="Skewb" label="Skewb"/>
<link wikidata="Q584750" start="20687" end="20695" title="Square-1 (puzzle)" label="Square-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759004" start="20749" end="20767" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Clock" label="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q847941" start="21366" end="21379" title="cuboctahedron" label="cuboctahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715960" start="21737" end="21740" title="World Cube Association" label="WCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q20934" start="21888" end="21895" title="Incheon" label="Incheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="21897" end="21908" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071123" start="22276" end="22296" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470118" start="22299" end="22320" title="Professor&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="Professor&amp;#x27;s Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q47043" start="22323" end="22333" title="Magic Cube" label="Magic Cube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954585" wikidata="Q5440025" url="?curid=954585" title="Federal Baseball Club v. National League">
<text>Federal Baseball Club v. National League, 259 U.S. 200 (1922), is a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Sherman Antitrust Act did not apply to Major League Baseball.

==Background==
After the Federal League folded in 1915, most of the Federal League owners had been bought out by owners in the other major leagues, or had been compensated in other ways. For example, the owner of the St. Louis Terriers of the Federal League had been permitted to buy the St. Louis Browns of the American League. The owner of the Baltimore Terrapins had not been compensated, and sued the National League, the American League and other defendants, including several Federal League officials for conspiring to monopolize baseball by destroying the Federal League. In 1919, the defendants were found jointly liable, and damages of $80,000 assessed, which was tripled to $240,000 under the provisions of the Clayton Antitrust Act.

==Judgment==
===Court of Appeals===
The Court of Appeals reversed the trial verdict, and held that baseball was not subject to the Sherman Act. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court.

===Supreme Court===

In a unanimous decision written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, the Court affirmed the Court of Appeals, holding that &quot;the business is giving exhibitions of base ball, which are purely state affairs&quot;; that is, that baseball was not interstate commerce for the purposes of the Sherman Act. Justice Holmes&#x27; decision was as follows:

==Significance==
This case is the main reason why MLB has not faced any competitor leagues since 1922, and MLB, to date, remains the only American sports league with such an antitrust exemption.

The case was reaffirmed in &quot;Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc.&quot;

In &quot;Flood v. Kuhn&quot;, the Court partially reversed, and found Major League Baseball to be engaged in interstate commerce. However, the justices refused to overturn baseball&#x27;s original antitrust exemption from &quot;Federal Baseball&quot;, deeming it necessary to preserve precedent: in addition to &quot;Toolson&quot;, the case had already been heavily cited in &quot;Shubert&quot;, &quot;International Boxing&quot;, and &quot;Radovich&quot;.

In 2016&#x27;s &quot;Direct Marketing Association v. Brohl&quot;, the Tenth Circuit&#x27;s Neil Gorsuch cited &quot;Federal Baseball&quot; and &quot;Toolson&quot; in his concurrence as one of the &quot;precedential islands&quot;, along with &quot;Bellas Hess&quot;, that] manage[s] to survive indefinitely even when surrounded by a sea of contrary law…. [that] would never expand but would, if anything,
wash away with the tides of time&quot;.

==See also==

* 1922 in baseball
* Baseball law
* List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 259
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="86" end="104" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="120" end="141" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="159" end="180" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131829" start="208" end="222" title="Federal League" label="Federal League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589713" start="400" end="418" title="St. Louis Terriers" label="St. Louis Terriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11314813" start="471" end="487" title="St. Louis Browns" label="St. Louis Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="495" end="510" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852933" start="529" end="548" title="Baltimore Terrapins" label="Baltimore Terrapins"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="588" end="603" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="609" end="624" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q972653" start="904" end="925" title="Clayton Antitrust Act" label="Clayton Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q360574" start="1181" end="1202" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="1382" end="1401" title="Commerce clause" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824102" start="1715" end="1748" title="Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc." label="Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5460083" start="1765" end="1778" title="Flood v. Kuhn" label="Flood v. Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893325" start="2158" end="2178" title="United States v. International Boxing Club of New York, Inc." label="International Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281673" start="2196" end="2204" title="Radovich v. National Football League" label="Radovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q24907775" start="2234" end="2271" title="Direct Marketing Association v. Brohl" label="Direct Marketing Association v. Brohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488345" start="2304" end="2316" title="Neil Gorsuch" label="Neil Gorsuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970957" start="2460" end="2471" title="Bellas Hess" label="Bellas Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822126" start="2674" end="2690" title="1922 in baseball" label="1922 in baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314676" start="2693" end="2705" title="Baseball law" label="Baseball law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602278" start="2708" end="2761" title="List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 259" label="List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 259"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954592" wikidata="Q7889423" url="?curid=954592" title="United States Antarctic Expedition Medal">
<text>The United States Antarctic Expedition Medal is a combined military-civilian award that was authorized by the United States Congress on September 24, 1945 under Public Law 185 of the 79th Congress (59 Stat. 536). The award recognizes members of the United States Antarctic Expedition of 1939–1941. There were gold, silver, and bronze versions. It is unclear if the gold version is considered a Congressional Gold Medal, as was the case with the 1st Byrd expedition.

==Background==
The statute awarding the medal reads as follows:

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the Secretary of the Navy is authorized and directed to cause to be made at the United States mint such number of gold, silver, and bronze medals of appropriate design as he may deem appropriate and necessary, to be presented to members of the United States Antarctic Expedition of 1939–1941, in recognition of their valuable services to the Nation in the field of polar exploration and science.

In 1935 Congress passed a law () allowing the Secretary of the Navy to authorize—at his discretion—the wearing of commemorative or other special awards on Navy or Marine Corps uniforms, in military sized form.

The first United States Antarctic Expedition Medal (gold version) was presented to Admiral Richard E. Byrd.

As the 1st and 2nd Byrd Expedition medals, and the United States Antarctic Expedition medal were only authorized to be awarded to a select number of people, in 1960 the Antarctica Service Medal was created, which can be awarded generally.

==Precedence and wear==
As recently as 1998 the Antarctic Expedition Medal still appeared in U.S. Navy uniform regulations precedence charts, after the WW II Victory Medal, and before the Navy Occupation Service Medal. In the 1953 Navy Awards Manual the Antarctic Expedition Medal was classified as a commemorative medal and ranked above all campaign service medals but below decorations, unit awards and all other commemorative medals.

==Notable recipients==
*Rear Admiral Richard E. Byrd, USN (Retired)
*Vice Admiral Richard H. Cruzen, USN
*Rear Admiral George J. Dufek, USN
*Dr. Paul A. Siple, Ph.D.
*J. Glenn Dyer - Cadastral Engineer

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7889423" start="4" end="44" title="United States Antarctic Expedition Medal" label="United States Antarctic Expedition Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="110" end="132" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643765" start="183" end="196" title="79th United States Congress" label="79th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836794" start="249" end="296" title="United States Antarctic Service Expedition" label="United States Antarctic Expedition of 1939–1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="394" end="418" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004216" start="423" end="435" title="Byrd Antarctic Expedition Medal" label="was the case"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="1340" end="1347" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q210268" start="1348" end="1363" title="Richard E. Byrd" label="Richard E. Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090338" start="1535" end="1559" title="Antarctica Service Medal" label="Antarctica Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210268" start="2081" end="2096" title="Richard E. Byrd" label="Richard E. Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715711" start="2126" end="2143" title="Richard H. Cruzen" label="Richard H. Cruzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101542" start="2163" end="2178" title="George J. Dufek" label="George J. Dufek"/>
<link wikidata="Q325520" start="2189" end="2202" title="Paul Siple" label="Paul A. Siple"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954600" wikidata="Q6687890" url="?curid=954600" title="Louis Niesten">
<text>Louis Niesten (1844–1920) was a Belgian astronomer working at the Brussels Royal Observatory. In 1877 he observed Mars and created a detailed map of its surface features.

He organized an expedition to Santiago de Chile to observe the Venus transit the Sun in 1882. A second Belgian expedition (led by Jean-Charles Houzeau) travelled to San Antonio, Texas to determine the planet&#x27;s parallax during the same transit. Both parties used a specially designed heliometer for this purpose.

A crater on Mars was named in his honor.

==External links==
*Description of the 1882 transit of Venus expeditions
*Mars globe presented by Louis Niesten to the Royal Astronomical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6687890" start="0" end="13" title="Louis Niesten" label="Louis Niesten"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="32" end="39" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="40" end="50" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66" end="92" title="Brussels Royal Observatory" label="Brussels Royal Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="114" end="118" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="202" end="219" title="Santiago de Chile" label="Santiago de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="235" end="240" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888" start="241" end="248" title="astronomical transit" label="transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="253" end="256" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q768943" start="302" end="322" title="Jean-Charles Houzeau" label="Jean-Charles Houzeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="337" end="355" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="387" end="395" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548206" start="460" end="470" title="heliometer" label="heliometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="492" end="498" title="Impact crater" label="crater"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954609" wikidata="Q1143480" url="?curid=954609" title="Stadius (crater)">
<text>Stadius is a ghostly remnant of an ancient lunar impact crater that has been nearly obliterated by basaltic lava flows. It was named after Flemish astronomer Johannes Stadius. It lies to the southwest of the much younger crater Eratosthenes, at the north edge of Mare Insularum where the mare joins Sinus Aestuum. To the west is the prominent ray crater Copernicus, and multiple secondary craters from the Copernican ejecta cover this area. To the northwest is a chain of craters that continue in a roughly linear formation until reaching Mare Imbrium.
Only the northwestern rim of Stadius remains nearly intact, and it joins with a north-running ridge line that reaches the western of Eratosthenes. The remainder of the formation forms a ghostly trace of the original rim, created from a few rises in the surface, and there is no indication of a central peak. The flat crater floor is pock-marked by craterlets, many of which were generated by secondary impacts from the creation of Copernicus.

==Satellite craters==

By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Stadius.

==Popular culture==
Within the Sega CD RPG &quot;&quot; (and all subsequent ) there is a region called the Stadius Zone, which is named after the Stadius crater.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

*Stadius at The Moon Wiki
* - featuring three released photos from Luna 19 from 1971 - it includes Stadius in the third one
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1143480" start="0" end="7" title="Stadius (crater)" label="Stadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q274076" start="13" end="28" title="Palimpsest" label="ghostly remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="43" end="48" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="49" end="62" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="99" end="105" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="108" end="112" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q360685" start="158" end="174" title="Johannes Stadius" label="Johannes Stadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345034" start="228" end="240" title="Eratosthenes (crater)" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q333864" start="263" end="277" title="Mare Insularum" label="Mare Insularum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="288" end="292" title="Lunar mare" label="mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q486746" start="299" end="312" title="Sinus Aestuum" label="Sinus Aestuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131154" start="354" end="364" title="Copernicus (lunar crater)" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="539" end="551" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131154" start="984" end="994" title="Copernicus (lunar crater)" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="1195" end="1202" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="1203" end="1206" title="Role-playing video game" label="RPG"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954615" wikidata="Q359444" url="?curid=954615" title="William Owsley">
<text>William Owsley (March 24, 1782 – December 9, 1862) was an associate justice of the Kentucky Court of Appeals and the 16th Governor of Kentucky. He also served in both houses of the Kentucky General Assembly and was Kentucky Secretary of State under Governor James Turner Morehead.

Owsley studied law under John Boyle. After briefly serving in the state legislature, he was appointed by Governor Charles Scott to serve alongside Boyle on the Kentucky Court of Appeals. During his service on the court, Owsley was involved in the Old Court – New Court controversy. In 1824, the state legislature, unhappy with the court&#x27;s rulings against debt relief legislation, attempted to abolish the court and replace it with a new court. For a time, both courts operated simultaneously, and both claimed to be the court of last resort in the state. Supporters of the old court won control of the legislature and abolished the new court in 1826. Owsley resigned from the Court of Appeals two years later.

In 1831, Owsley returned to the state legislature, where he served until Governor Morehead appointed him secretary of state in 1834. He resumed his legal practice in 1836 and in 1843, retired from that profession. The next year, he was nominated for governor on the Whig ticket and defeated William O. Butler in the general election. Through fiscally conservative policies, he was able to reduce the state&#x27;s debt. In spite of his opposition to the Mexican–American War, large numbers of Kentucky&#x27;s citizens volunteered for military service. Owsley&#x27;s popularity declined sharply when he attempted to remove Benjamin Hardin as Secretary of State. Hardin successfully challenged his removal in court, then resigned in protest of Owsley&#x27;s actions and charged him with practicing nepotism in his appointments. After his term as governor, Owsley never again sought public office. He died December 9, 1862, and was buried in Belleview Cemetery in Danville, Kentucky.

==Early life==
William Owsley was born March 24, 1782, in Virginia. He was the third of thirteen children born to William and Catherine (Bolin) Owsley. Owsley was a first cousin to U.S. Representative Bryan Owsley, whose father Anthony was the elder William Owsley&#x27;s brother. In 1783, his family relocated to Lincoln County, Kentucky, settling between the settlements of Crab Orchard and Stanford. He was of English ancestry. Owsley was dedicated to his studies in the public schools of the area, and obtained a better education than most of his peers. On March 30, 1802, he was appointed adjutant of the 26th Regiment of the Kentucky Militia.

For a time, Owsley taught at a country school, and in 1803, he married Elizabeth Gill, one of his students. Gill was almost seventeen; Owsley was twenty-one. The couple had six children. During his time as a teacher, Owsley also studied surveying and eventually became a deputy surveyor. Later, he served as a deputy sheriff under his father, who was High Sheriff of Lincoln County. While in this capacity, he attracted the attention of John Boyle, who offered Owsley the use of his library. Owsley availed himself of this opportunity, and read law with Boyle. In 1809, Owsley opened a legal practice in Garrard County.

==Kentucky Court of Appeals==
Owsley&#x27;s political career began in 1809 when he was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives, serving one term. Governor Charles Scott appointed him to the Kentucky Court of Appeals in 1810, where he served alongside his teacher, John Boyle. Soon after Owsley&#x27;s appointment, the legislature reduced the number of justices on the court, and Owsley resigned his seat. He was elected to the state House again in 1811. When a vacancy on the Court of Appeals occurred in 1813, Governor Isaac Shelby re-appointed Owsley to the court.

One of the court&#x27;s most crucial decisions during Owsley&#x27;s tenure was in the case of &quot;Commonwealth of Kentucky v. James Morrison&quot;, which held that the Bank of the United States did not have the right to establish branches in Kentucky. The Supreme Court of the United States later overturned this ruling.

A second important decision in which Owsley was a participant was the case of &quot;Blair, etc. v. Williams&quot;, which invalidated the Kentucky Replevin Act of 1820. This law granted debtors a two-year grace period in repaying their debts unless their creditors would accept notes from the Bank of Kentucky. Owsley and his colleagues opined that this law was in violation of the Contract Clause of the U.S. Constitution. The decision was extremely unpopular with the Commonwealth&#x27;s citizens, but it was re-affirmed by the court&#x27;s opinion in the related case of &quot;Lapsley v. Brashcars and Barr&quot;.

Following these decisions, the General Assembly attempted to remove all three justices from their positions, but lacked the two-thirds majority required for impeachment. The Assembly then attempted to abolish the Court of Appeals and create a new one, beginning the Old Court-New Court controversy. The members of the existing court – Owsley, John Boyle, and Benjamin Mills – continued functioning in that role, while a new court of four pro-relief justices was organized by the legislature. For a time, both courts claimed to be the court of last resort in Kentucky, but by 1826, supporters of the Old Court won control of the legislature and abolished the New Court.

Having seen the court through the Old Court-New Court controversy, Chief Justice Boyle resigned in 1826. In December 1828, Mills and Owsley also resigned. Their resignations were an attempt to silence criticism from the defeated New Court faction that they held their seats in defiance of the will of the people. Old Court supporters hoped both men would be re-nominated and re-confirmed by the legislature, making the New Court&#x27;s charge less credible. Accordingly, newly elected governor Thomas Metcalfe submitted both men to the legislature for confirmation, but the nominations were defeated in the state senate. Thus ended Owsley&#x27;s tenure on the court. It was, at the time, the longest tenure of any Court of Appeals justice except John Boyle. Owsley returned to his legal practice, and his case load soon compelled him to move to Frankfort.

==Governor of Kentucky==
Owsley returned to the state House in 1831, and served in the state senate from 1832 to 1834. He also served as a presidential elector for Henry Clay in 1833. When James Turner Morehead ascended to the governorship upon the death of John Breathitt, he appointed Owsley Secretary of State for his shortened term from 1834 to 1836. In 1843, Owsley retired from the practice of law and purchased a farm in Boyle County.

In 1844, Owsley was elected governor on the Whig ticket, defeating Democrat William O. Butler by a vote of 59,792 to 55,089. A fiscal conservative, Owsley reduced the state&#x27;s deficit slightly, and was reluctant to rebuild the state penitentiary, which was damaged by fire. Despite his reluctance to spend, he urged the General Assembly to increase funding for public education. &quot;Nothing but money will do it,&quot; proclaimed Owsley, &quot;and it is left to the appropriate department – the legislature – to determine on the expediency or inexpediency of raising it.&quot; In response, the Assembly passed only a small tax to benefit public education. Education made progress during Owsley&#x27;s tenure, largely due to his appointment of Robert J. Breckinridge as public school superintendent in 1847. Breckinridge is credited as the architect of Kentucky&#x27;s antebellum educational system.

In 1845, Secretary of War William L. Marcy requested that Kentucky provide militiamen to bolster Zachary Taylor&#x27;s forces in the new state of Texas. Owsley all but refused the request, but when word of Marcy&#x27;s request reached the citizens of the state, they volunteered in great numbers and rushed to reinforce Taylor. Owsley was similarly lethargic in responding to Marcy&#x27;s call for troops for service in the Mexican–American War. He joined fellow Kentucky Whigs John J. Crittenden and Henry Clay in deriding the conflict as &quot;Mr. Polk&#x27;s War&quot;. However, postal workers in the state opened Marcy&#x27;s letter before delivering it to Owsley and had spread the word that the federal government had once again requested troops. By the time Owsley made the formal call for volunteers on May 22, 1846, an entire regiment of Kentucky troops had already been organized. Despite his personal opposition to the war, Owsley boasted in his report to Marcy that the Commonwealth had raised 13,700 volunteers, more than five times the number requested of him.

Later, Owsley&#x27;s tenure would be marred by a conflict with Benjamin Hardin, his Secretary of State. Hardin believed that by supporting Owsley in the gubernatorial election, he would obtain some influence in Owsley&#x27;s choices for other appointments. Tensions between Hardin and Owsley worsened as Hardin became increasingly frustrated with his lack of influence. On September 1, 1846, Owsley removed Hardin from his cabinet, charging that Hardin had abandoned his duties because he did not reside in Frankfort. Hardin challenged this premise for his removal, and when Owsley nominated George B. Kinkead to replace Hardin, the state senate voted 30—8 that no vacancy existed. The Kentucky Court of Appeals upheld this decision. Vindicated, Hardin then resigned, charging Owsley with practicing nepotism. In the Kentucky Constitution of 1850, the governor was stripped of his power to remove the Secretary of State from office.

Following his term as governor, Owsley retired to his farm in Danville, Kentucky, where he lived until the death of his wife in 1858. After this, he lived with his children until he died December 9, 1862. He is buried at Bellevue Cemetery in Danville. Owsley County, Kentucky, is named in his honor. Pleasant Retreat, his home in Garrard County during his early political career, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Biography of Owsley from the Kentucky Secretary of State website 
* William Owsley at The Political Graveyard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q359444" start="0" end="14" title="William Owsley" label="William Owsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392210" start="83" end="108" title="Kentucky Court of Appeals" label="Kentucky Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q878605" start="117" end="142" title="List of Governors of Kentucky" label="16th Governor of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="162" end="173" title="bicameral legislature" label="both houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392265" start="181" end="206" title="Kentucky General Assembly" label="Kentucky General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091482" start="215" end="242" title="Secretary of State of Kentucky" label="Kentucky Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q537302" start="258" end="279" title="James Turner Morehead (Kentucky politician)" label="James Turner Morehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q631257" start="307" end="317" title="John Boyle (congressman)" label="John Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q735235" start="396" end="409" title="Charles Scott (governor)" label="Charles Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083783" start="529" end="562" title="Old Court – New Court controversy" label="Old Court – New Court controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="1264" end="1268" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q693499" start="1289" end="1306" title="William O. Butler" label="William O. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="1451" end="1471" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q817528" start="1619" end="1634" title="Benjamin Hardin" label="Benjamin Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="1793" end="1801" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q988923" start="1958" end="1976" title="Danville, Kentucky" label="Danville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="2037" end="2045" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q995078" start="2180" end="2192" title="Bryan Owsley" label="Bryan Owsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q498066" start="2293" end="2317" title="Lincoln County, Kentucky" label="Lincoln County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831276" start="2355" end="2367" title="Crab Orchard, Kentucky" label="Crab Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q951131" start="2372" end="2380" title="Stanford, Kentucky" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="2392" end="2399" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="2573" end="2581" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="2866" end="2875" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="2946" end="2953" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888937" start="2980" end="2992" title="High Sheriff" label="High Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300597" start="3169" end="3177" title="reading law" label="read law"/>
<link wikidata="Q491988" start="3233" end="3247" title="Garrard County, Kentucky" label="Garrard County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494716" start="3352" end="3385" title="Kentucky House of Representatives" label="Kentucky House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q878398" start="3779" end="3791" title="Isaac Shelby" label="Isaac Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="3997" end="4022" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4085" end="4119" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314049" start="4297" end="4305" title="Replevin" label="Replevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165650" start="4532" end="4547" title="Contract Clause" label="Contract Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="4555" end="4572" title="United States Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="4892" end="4911" title="two-thirds majority" label="two-thirds majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949797" start="4925" end="4936" title="Impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889030" start="5127" end="5141" title="Benjamin Mills" label="Benjamin Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q735297" start="5932" end="5947" title="Thomas Metcalfe (Kentucky politician)" label="Thomas Metcalfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494879" start="6045" end="6057" title="Kentucky Senate" label="state senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28603" start="6283" end="6292" title="Frankfort, Kentucky" label="Frankfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="6459" end="6469" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q187935" start="6553" end="6567" title="John Breathitt" label="John Breathitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q486920" start="6723" end="6735" title="Boyle County, Kentucky" label="Boyle County"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6805" end="6813" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q693499" start="6814" end="6831" title="William O. Butler" label="William O. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346075" start="7487" end="7509" title="Robert Jefferson Breckinridge" label="Robert J. Breckinridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="7612" end="7622" title="Antebellum era" label="antebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="7653" end="7669" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q389258" start="7670" end="7686" title="William L. Marcy" label="William L. Marcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896" start="7741" end="7755" title="Zachary Taylor" label="Zachary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="7790" end="7795" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q880239" start="8122" end="8140" title="John J. Crittenden" label="John J. Crittenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11891" start="8194" end="8198" title="James K. Polk" label="Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="8626" end="8638" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q817528" start="8783" end="8798" title="Benjamin Hardin" label="Benjamin Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q78172280" start="9312" end="9329" title="George B. Kinkead" label="George B. Kinkead"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="9520" end="9528" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9537" end="9566" title="Kentucky Constitution#The 1850 Constitution" label="Kentucky Constitution of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q111041274" start="9875" end="9892" title="Bellevue Cemetery (Danville, Kentucky)" label="Bellevue Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q505347" start="9906" end="9929" title="Owsley County, Kentucky" label="Owsley County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589624" start="9954" end="9970" title="Governor William Owsley House" label="Pleasant Retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="10051" end="10087" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954617" wikidata="Q2535134" url="?curid=954617" title="Vue International">
<text>Vue International ( , like &quot;view&quot;), is a multinational cinema holding company based in London, England. It operates in the United Kingdom, Ireland and Denmark as Vue, with international operations in Germany (as CinemaxX); Italy (as The Space Cinema); Poland and Lithuania (Multikino); Netherlands (Vue Netherlands).

==History==
===Foundation===
The company was founded in 1999 as Spean Bridge Cinemas by Stewart Blair, a former executive of United Artists Theatres and Tim Richards, a former executive of Warner Bros. International Theatres. It was named after a holiday to the Scottish Highland village of the same name by Blair.

===2000s===

The first cinema to open was under The Circuit Cinema brand in Livingston, Scotland, on 5 October 2000. The company was later renamed as SBC International Cinemas and opened cinemas in Faro, Portugal (closed in 2014) and Taipei, Taiwan (still operating as SBC).

In May 2003, SBC bought Warner Village Cinemas from its owners, Village Roadshow and Warner Bros., for £250 million. At the time, SBC owned four cinemas, and Warner Village Cinemas owned 36. In April 2005, the chain acquired the Ster Century chain from Aurora Entertainment; this included the highest grossing cinema in the United Kingdom or Ireland at Liffey Valley Shopping Centre in Dublin, Ireland.

On 20 June 2006, Vue&#x27;s executive team completed a management buyout of the company with the backing of Bank of Scotland Corporate; the management team retaining a 51% stake. Also, as part of the buyout, Vue took full ownership of the four Village sites it had been operating under contract from Village Roadshow. The private equity firm Doughty Hanson &amp; Co acquired Vue in November 2010.

===2010s===
Vue bought the company, Apollo, in May 2012, retaining 14 new sites across the United Kingdom, making it the third largest cinema company in the United Kingdom, behind Odeon and Cineworld.

In May 2013, Vue Entertainment acquired Multikino, the Polish cinema operator owning thirty cinemas with almost 250 screens in Poland and Baltic countries.

In June 2013, Doughty Hanson &amp; Co announced it had sold Vue to the Canadian pension funds Alberta Investment Management Corporation and OMERS for £935 million.

In November 2014, Vue International acquired The Space Cinema in Italy.

In March 2015, Vue announced it would build the United Kingdom&#x27;s first eSports arena in cooperation with Gfinity, costing £350,000. The Fulham Broadway cinema was converted into a six hundred seat &#x27;Gfinity Arena,&#x27; to host e gaming events 

In August 2015, Vue International acquired JT Bioscopen, the second-largest cinema chain in the Netherlands, bringing Vue&#x27;s number of sites to over 200.

In June 2018, Vue acquired the Irish operator Showtime Cinemas, adding a further two cinemas to their estate in the United Kingdom and Ireland, now totalling 89 cinemas.

===2020–present===
In March 2020, Vue temporarily closed its cinemas due to the COVID-19 pandemic, stating that it would &quot;remain closed until further notice&quot;. Though numerous lockdowns affected a brief reopening in mid-2020, eventually, all cinemas reopened in May 2021, with COVID restrictions in force until spring 2022.

On 18 May 2020, Vue announced that it would close its single Multikino site in Riga, Latvia, after operating for almost 10 years.

On 6 November 2024, Vue announced that their Rhyl venue would be closed permanently from the end of January 2025, after operating the site for over 10 years. Over two months later, the venue closed its doors for good on the night of Sunday, 19 January 2025, as revealed in a statement by the company the next day.

==Locations==
Vue International operates 225 sites and almost 2,000 screens across 8 countries.

==References==
==External links==
* Vue International Bidco PLC on Bloomberg L.P.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2535134" start="0" end="17" title="Vue International" label="Vue International"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="97" end="103" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535134" start="222" end="230" title="Vue International" label="CinemaxX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535134" start="243" end="259" title="Vue International" label="The Space Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144802" start="284" end="293" title="Multikino" label="Multikino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535134" start="309" end="324" title="Vue International" label="Vue Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q835638" start="453" end="476" title="Regal Cinemas" label="United Artists Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969781" start="517" end="552" title="Warner Village Cinemas" label="Warner Bros. International Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026775" start="623" end="632" title="Spean Bridge" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q848287" start="720" end="730" title="Livingston, West Lothian" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q159457" start="842" end="856" title="Faro, Portugal" label="Faro, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="878" end="884" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q825291" start="984" end="1000" title="Village Roadshow" label="Village Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="1005" end="1017" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q7611171" start="1149" end="1161" title="Ster Century" label="Ster Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545569" start="1273" end="1302" title="Liffey Valley Shopping Centre" label="Liffey Valley Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251923" start="1666" end="1689" title="Doughty Hanson &amp;amp; Co" label="Doughty Hanson &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127470" start="1902" end="1907" title="Odeon Cinemas" label="Odeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120901" start="1912" end="1921" title="Cineworld" label="Cineworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144802" start="1964" end="1973" title="Multikino" label="Multikino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711753" start="2175" end="2216" title="Alberta Investment Management Corporation" label="Alberta Investment Management Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347600" start="2221" end="2226" title="OMERS" label="OMERS"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="2395" end="2402" title="eSports" label="eSports"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2984" end="3001" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="3317" end="3321" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="3848" end="3862" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg L.P."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954621" wikidata="Q64017682" url="?curid=954621" title="Roulette Records">
<text>Roulette Records was an American record company and label founded in 1957 by George Goldner, Joe Kolsky, Morris Levy and Phil Kahl, with creative control given to producers and songwriters Hugo Peretti and Luigi Creatore. Levy was appointed director.

The label had known ties to New York City mobsters. Levy ran the label with an iron fist. In 1958 Roost Records was purchased. Goldner subsequently bowed out of his partnership interest in Roulette and, to cover his gambling debts, sold his record labels Tico, Rama, Gee and—years later—End and Gone to Levy, who grouped them into Roulette. Peretti and Creatore later left Roulette and worked as freelance producers for RCA Victor throughout the 1960s. They co-founded Avco Records in 1969. In 1971 Roulette took over the catalog of Jubilee Records.

==History==
During the late 1950s, Roulette scored hits by Buddy Knox, Jimmy Bowen, The Playmates, Jimmie Rodgers, Ronnie Hawkins, The Delicates, and Frankie Lymon as well as releasing albums by Pearl Bailey, Dinah Washington and Count Basie.

During the early 1960s, Roulette issued recordings connected to the twist dance craze, such as &quot;Peppermint Twist&quot; by Joey Dee and the Starliters. They also released a rare album of &quot;twist songs&quot; by Bill Haley &amp; His Comets, &quot;Twistin&#x27; Knights at the Roundtable&quot;. Other major 1960s hits for the label include &quot;Two Faces Have I&quot; by Lou Christie. A group of United States Marines called The Essex recorded the hit &quot;Easier Said Than Done&quot; while based at Camp Lejeune, NC, in 1963. In 1964, Stephen Stills and Richie Furay first recorded together on Roulette while in the nine-member Au Go Go Singers, the house band for the Cafe Au Go Go in New York City.

In the UK Roulette&#x27;s records were issued on EMI&#x27;s Columbia label. In April 1965, the UK music magazine &quot;NME&quot; reported that Roulette had agreed to offer a sponsored show to the UK pirate radio radio station Radio Caroline. The hour-long show, recorded in the US by disc jockey Jack Spector, was to be broadcast five evenings a week. The contract covered a two-year period and was worth over £10,000 to the station.
According to Tommy James of Tommy James and the Shondells, whose &quot;Hanky Panky&quot;, &quot;I Think We&#x27;re Alone Now&quot;, &quot;Mirage&quot;, &quot;Mony Mony&quot;, &quot;Crimson and Clover&quot; and many others were released during his time at the label, Roulette was a front business for the Genovese crime family. James estimates that the label kept $30 million-$40 million of the group&#x27;s royalties but afforded it total artistic freedom, whereas another label would have tampered with its formula and might have dropped the group early on. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Roulette was one of the industry&#x27;s major distributors, handling records for many leading labels.

Levy was the key financial backer for the rap music label Sugar Hill Records, which was founded in 1979 by the husband-and-wife team Joe and Sylvia Robinson. Sugar Hill released the first Top 40 rap single, &quot;Rapper&#x27;s Delight&quot;, in 1979. In the early 1980s, the Robinsons bought Levy out.

In 1981, Henry Stone turned to Levy to help prevent the demise of TK Records, so they set up Sunnyview Records under the Roulette umbrella. In 1986, Levy was arrested, tried and convicted for extorting money from an FBI informant, John LaMonte, but he died in Ghent, New York, before serving any time in prison. In 1989, Roulette Records was sold to a consortium of EMI and Rhino Records, the latter of which was later acquired by Warner Music Group. Rhino would control Roulette’s pop catalogue in the USA, Canada and Mexico, while EMI acquired Roulette’s jazz catalogue worldwide, plus the international distribution of Roulette’s pop catalogue. As of 2013, Warner Music Group now has worldwide rights to the Roulette catalogue as a result of acquiring EMI’s Parlophone label.

Following their 1989 acquisition, Rhino and EMI began issuing large royalty checks to former Roulette artists. Tommy James recalled that his checks were in amounts in six or seven digits. Roulette was notorious for not paying royalties to its artists, who had to rely on concerts and personal appearances for their income.

Until 2013, EMI used the Roulette name for the reissue of old Roulette-label material. In the US, Blue Note Records handled the Roulette jazz catalogue for release on the Roulette Jazz label until 2013. It was one of the units of Parlophone that Universal Music was required to sell to Warner Music Group to comply with international regulators.

==Roulette Records artists==

*Alive N Kickin&#x27;
*Louis Armstrong
*Arzachel (US and Canada)
*Au Go Go Singers
*Pearl Bailey
*The Barry Sisters
*Count Basie
*Jimmy Bowen
*Joanne Campbell
*Cathy Carr
*Betty Carter
*Marilyn Chambers
*The Choir
*Lou Christie
*Dave &quot;Baby&quot; Cortez
*Sammy Davis, Jr.

*Joey Dee and the Starliters
*The Delicates
*The Detergents
*The Devotions
*Tom Rizzi
*Ecstasy, Passion &amp; Pain
*Duane Eddy
*Harry &quot;Sweets&quot; Edison
*The Essex
*Maynard Ferguson
*Bill Haley &amp; His Comets
*Herman&#x27;s Hermits
*Ronnie Hawkins
*The Hullaballoos
*Tommy James
*Tommy James &amp; the Shondells
*Truth

* Jackie Kannon
*Buddy Knox
*Frankie Lymon
*Machito
*Deidre McCalla
*Lou Monte
*Jim Neske, aka Chance Eden
*The Playmates
*The Regents
*The Rock-A-Teens
*Jimmie Rodgers
*Jeri Southern
*The Teenagers
*The Three Degrees
*Sarah Vaughan
*Dinah Washington
*Joe Williams
*Eddie Palmieri 
*Chuck Wood
==Discography==

===25000 Popular Series===
Roulette Records 25000 Popular Series of LP records began in 1957 and ran until 1968. 
===42000 Pop series===
===3000 Pop Series===
===Birdland Jazz Series===
The Roulette 52000 Birdland Series of 12 inch LPs commenced in 1958 and consists of 124 album releases over 10 years.
===5000 Jazz Series===
===2-LP Birdland Series===
===500 Comedy Series===
===800 Soundtrack Series===
All of the soundtracks in this series were for films released in the United States during 1966.
===80000 Original Cast Series===
===10 Original Cast Series===
===100 Echoes Series===
Reissue series from used by the label during 1973. Not all these albums have &quot;Echoes of An Era&quot; somewhere in the title - some do, some don&#x27;t. They are two-album sets.
===59000 Original Rock N&#x27; Roll Hits Series===
This was the label&#x27;s final effort at repackaging its old recordings.
===9000 African Series===
These albums, which were acquired by Roulette for U.S. distribution, were recorded in the continent of Africa.
===65000 International Series===
===75000 Classical Series===
===100 Demo Series===
==See also==
* Lists of record labels

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64017682" start="0" end="16" title="Roulette Records" label="Roulette Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="52" end="57" title="record label" label="label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507428" start="77" end="91" title="George Goldner" label="George Goldner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948511" start="105" end="116" title="Morris Levy" label="Morris Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="163" end="172" title="record producer" label="producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="177" end="187" title="songwriter" label="songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934334" start="189" end="201" title="Hugo Peretti" label="Hugo Peretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700006" start="206" end="220" title="Luigi Creatore" label="Luigi Creatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q834895" start="350" end="363" title="Roost Records" label="Roost Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="672" end="682" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873375" start="721" end="733" title="Avco Records" label="Avco Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q279035" start="785" end="800" title="Jubilee Records" label="Jubilee Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001254" start="862" end="872" title="Buddy Knox" label="Buddy Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259060" start="874" end="885" title="Jimmy Bowen" label="Jimmy Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757465" start="887" end="900" title="The Playmates" label="The Playmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689292" start="902" end="916" title="Jimmie Rodgers (pop singer)" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q766930" start="918" end="932" title="Ronnie Hawkins" label="Ronnie Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729659" start="934" end="947" title="The Delicates" label="The Delicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q683420" start="953" end="966" title="Frankie Lymon" label="Frankie Lymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462118" start="998" end="1010" title="Pearl Bailey" label="Pearl Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q229322" start="1012" end="1028" title="Dinah Washington" label="Dinah Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="1033" end="1044" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q387916" start="1115" end="1126" title="Twist (dance)" label="twist dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166430" start="1148" end="1164" title="Peppermint Twist" label="Peppermint Twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691817" start="1174" end="1201" title="Joey Dee and the Starliters" label="Joey Dee and the Starliters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914477" start="1265" end="1292" title="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets" label="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164601" start="1398" end="1414" title="Two Faces Have I" label="Two Faces Have I"/>
<link wikidata="Q675153" start="1424" end="1436" title="Lou Christie" label="Lou Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1449" end="1470" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411116" start="1478" end="1487" title="The Essex" label="The Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327501" start="1511" end="1532" title="Easier Said Than Done" label="Easier Said Than Done"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479693" start="1554" end="1566" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune" label="Camp Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="1590" end="1604" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999" start="1609" end="1621" title="Richie Furay" label="Richie Furay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635037" start="1683" end="1699" title="Au Go Go Singers" label="Au Go Go Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1741" end="1754" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112471" start="1817" end="1825" title="Columbia Graphophone Company" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="1876" end="1879" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="1956" end="1968" title="pirate radio" label="pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936592" start="1983" end="1997" title="Radio Caroline" label="Radio Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115270" start="2053" end="2065" title="Jack Spector" label="Jack Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150457" start="2204" end="2215" title="Tommy James" label="Tommy James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932040" start="2219" end="2248" title="Tommy James and the Shondells" label="Tommy James and the Shondells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575623" start="2262" end="2273" title="Hanky Panky (The Raindrops song)" label="Hanky Panky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150469" start="2287" end="2315" title="I Think We&amp;#x27;re Alone Now" label="I Think We&amp;#x27;re Alone Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872592" start="2329" end="2335" title="Mirage (Tommy James and the Shondells song)" label="Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150506" start="2349" end="2358" title="Mony Mony" label="Mony Mony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185718" start="2372" end="2390" title="Crimson and Clover" label="Crimson and Clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="2472" end="2486" title="front organization" label="front business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348502" start="2495" end="2516" title="Genovese crime family" label="Genovese crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503043" start="2943" end="2961" title="Sugar Hill Records (hip hop label)" label="Sugar Hill Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346186" start="3026" end="3041" title="Sylvia Robinson" label="Sylvia Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="3080" end="3083" title="rap music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q944039" start="3098" end="3119" title="Rapper&amp;#x27;s Delight" label="Rapper&amp;#x27;s Delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728748" start="3197" end="3208" title="Henry Stone" label="Henry Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432165" start="3254" end="3264" title="TK Records" label="TK Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="3404" end="3407" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372542" start="3448" end="3463" title="Ghent, New York" label="Ghent, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="3554" end="3557" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="3562" end="3575" title="Rhino Records" label="Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="3619" end="3637" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="3949" end="3959" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q885833" start="4390" end="4407" title="Blue Note Records" label="Blue Note Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727445" start="4670" end="4690" title="Alive N Kickin&amp;#x27;" label="Alive N Kickin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="4692" end="4707" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095290" start="4709" end="4717" title="Uriel (band)" label="Arzachel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635037" start="4735" end="4751" title="Au Go Go Singers" label="Au Go Go Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q462118" start="4753" end="4765" title="Pearl Bailey" label="Pearl Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073330" start="4767" end="4784" title="The Barry Sisters" label="The Barry Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="4786" end="4797" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259060" start="4799" end="4810" title="Jimmy Bowen" label="Jimmy Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206087" start="4812" end="4827" title="Joanne Campbell" label="Joanne Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4987969" start="4829" end="4839" title="Cathy Carr (singer)" label="Cathy Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q465943" start="4841" end="4853" title="Betty Carter" label="Betty Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q220693" start="4855" end="4871" title="Marilyn Chambers" label="Marilyn Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722634" start="4873" end="4882" title="The Choir (garage rock)" label="The Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q675153" start="4884" end="4896" title="Lou Christie" label="Lou Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173408" start="4898" end="4926" title="Dave &amp;quot;Baby&amp;quot; Cortez" label="Dave &amp;quot;Baby&amp;quot; Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="4928" end="4944" title="Sammy Davis, Jr." label="Sammy Davis, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1691817" start="4947" end="4974" title="Joey Dee and the Starliters" label="Joey Dee and the Starliters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729659" start="4976" end="4989" title="The Delicates" label="The Delicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729869" start="4991" end="5005" title="The Detergents" label="The Detergents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730033" start="5007" end="5020" title="The Devotions" label="The Devotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333940" start="5033" end="5060" title="Ecstasy, Passion &amp;amp; Pain" label="Ecstasy, Passion &amp;amp; Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q455818" start="5062" end="5072" title="Duane Eddy" label="Duane Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q289821" start="5074" end="5105" title="Harry &amp;quot;Sweets&amp;quot; Edison" label="Harry &amp;quot;Sweets&amp;quot; Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411116" start="5107" end="5116" title="The Essex" label="The Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q353822" start="5118" end="5134" title="Maynard Ferguson" label="Maynard Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914477" start="5136" end="5163" title="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets" label="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q693597" start="5165" end="5186" title="Herman&amp;#x27;s Hermits" label="Herman&amp;#x27;s Hermits"/>
<link wikidata="Q766930" start="5188" end="5202" title="Ronnie Hawkins" label="Ronnie Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259327" start="5204" end="5220" title="The Hullaballoos" label="The Hullaballoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150457" start="5222" end="5233" title="Tommy James" label="Tommy James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932040" start="5235" end="5266" title="Tommy James &amp;amp; the Shondells" label="Tommy James &amp;amp; the Shondells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848266" start="5268" end="5273" title="Truth (American band)" label="Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001254" start="5292" end="5302" title="Buddy Knox" label="Buddy Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q683420" start="5304" end="5317" title="Frankie Lymon" label="Frankie Lymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462983" start="5319" end="5326" title="Machito" label="Machito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252410" start="5328" end="5342" title="Deidre McCalla" label="Deidre McCalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q538676" start="5344" end="5353" title="Lou Monte" label="Lou Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757465" start="5383" end="5396" title="The Playmates" label="The Playmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413801" start="5398" end="5409" title="The Regents (doo-wop band)" label="The Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346824" start="5411" end="5427" title="The Rock-A-Teens" label="The Rock-A-Teens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689292" start="5429" end="5443" title="Jimmie Rodgers (pop singer)" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q532027" start="5445" end="5458" title="Jeri Southern" label="Jeri Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445090" start="5460" end="5473" title="The Teenagers" label="The Teenagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865511" start="5475" end="5492" title="The Three Degrees" label="The Three Degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q229513" start="5494" end="5507" title="Sarah Vaughan" label="Sarah Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q229322" start="5509" end="5525" title="Dinah Washington" label="Dinah Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691660" start="5527" end="5539" title="Joe Williams (jazz singer)" label="Joe Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282931" start="5541" end="5555" title="Eddie Palmieri" label="Eddie Palmieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q753342" start="6082" end="6086" title="1966 in film" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="6611" end="6617" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="6718" end="6740" title="Lists of record labels" label="Lists of record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954629" wikidata="Q398716" url="?curid=954629" title="Nocturnal (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Nocturnality]] describes sleeping during the daytime and being active at night.

Nocturnal(s) may also refer to:
==Music==
===Classical compositions===
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (Varèse), a 1961 work for voice and orchestra by Edgard Varèse
*&quot;Nocturnal after John Dowland&quot;, a 1963 work for solo guitar by Benjamin Britten

===Performers===
*Knoc-turn&#x27;al (born 1975), American rapper
*Nokturnl, an Australian rap metal band

===Albums===
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (Amaral album) or the title song, 2015
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (The Black Dahlia Murder album) or the title song, 2007
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (Heltah Skeltah album), 1996
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (Yuna album), 2013
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot;, EP by Prozak, 2012
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (Roy Woods EP), 2016
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot;, by Florian-Ayala Fauna, 2012

===Songs===
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (song), by Disclosure, 2016
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot;, by House of Large Sizes from &quot;My Ass-Kicking Life&quot;, 1994
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot;, by Benxify, from &quot;a night of indigo&quot;, 2024

==Other uses==
*Nocturnal (instrument), a device for determining time from the position of stars
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (novel), a 2007 podcast and 2012 novel by Scott Sigler
*&quot;Nocturnal&quot; (film), a 2025 South Korean film

*&quot;Nocturnals&quot;, a comics series by Dan Brereton
*Nocturnal sect, a category in astrology of sect
*Nocturnals, a 2024 independent video game developed by Cowboy Toad Games.

==See also==
*Night owl (person), a person who tends to stay up until late at night</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q398716" start="0" end="16" title="Nocturnal (disambiguation)" label="[[Nocturnality]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q398716" start="83" end="92" title="Nocturnal (disambiguation)" label="Nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q398716" start="93" end="94" title="Nocturnal (disambiguation)" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342614" start="155" end="185" title="Nocturnal (Varèse)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (Varèse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016501" start="247" end="275" title="Nocturnal after John Dowland" label="Nocturnal after John Dowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422739" start="350" end="367" title="Knoc-turn&amp;#x27;al" label="Knoc-turn&amp;#x27;al"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048120" start="398" end="406" title="Nokturnl" label="Nokturnl"/>
<link wikidata="Q21294915" start="452" end="488" title="Nocturnal (Amaral album)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (Amaral album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q666143" start="514" end="567" title="Nocturnal (The Black Dahlia Murder album)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (The Black Dahlia Murder album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14867722" start="593" end="637" title="Nocturnal (Heltah Skeltah album)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (Heltah Skeltah album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20458005" start="645" end="679" title="Nocturnal (Yuna album)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (Yuna album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353377" start="716" end="722" title="Prozak (rapper)" label="Prozak"/>
<link wikidata="Q20739374" start="730" end="766" title="Nocturnal (Roy Woods EP)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (Roy Woods EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29453331" start="800" end="819" title="Florian-Ayala Fauna" label="Florian-Ayala Fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203196" start="840" end="868" title="Nocturnal (song)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915097" start="949" end="968" title="My Ass-Kicking Life" label="My Ass-Kicking Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607611" start="1075" end="1097" title="Nocturnal (instrument)" label="Nocturnal (instrument)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7046496" start="1157" end="1186" title="Nocturnal (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545925" start="1235" end="1263" title="Nocturnal (film)" label="&amp;quot;Nocturnal&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7046521" start="1298" end="1308" title="Nocturnals" label="Nocturnals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758744" start="1379" end="1396" title="astrology of sect" label="astrology of sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272661" start="1487" end="1505" title="Night owl (person)" label="Night owl (person)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954646" wikidata="Q8060916" url="?curid=954646" title="Yuletide Records">
<text>Yuletide Records was a daughter record label of Modern Records, specialized only in Christmas music. Apparently only nine records were made, somewhere during the late sixties. Their slogan was &quot;Great Sounds of Christmas&quot; which carried a light green label with dark green print.

== Discography ==
* Famous Christmas Carols – Johnny Cole &amp; Robert Evans Chorus
* O Come All Ye Faithful – Robert Evans Choir with Organ &amp; Chimes
* Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer and Other Christmas Favorites – Johnny Cole &amp; Robert Evans Chorus &amp; Orchestra
* Christmas Favorites – Fred Kirby&#x27;s Pipe Organ &amp; Chimes
* White Christmas – Gordon Jenkins &amp; Christmas Strings
* 12 Days of Christmas – Johnny Cole &amp; Robert Evans Chorus
* Silent Night: Organ and Chimes Favorites – William Daly
* Joy to the World – Juan Ditmar&#x27;s Organ and Chimes
* The Little Drummer Boy – Voices of Christmas

== See also ==
* List of record labels

==External links==
* Yuletide discography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8060916" start="0" end="16" title="Yuletide Records" label="Yuletide Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="32" end="44" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551705" start="48" end="62" title="Modern Records" label="Modern Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="930" end="951" title="List of record labels" label="List of record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954651" wikidata="Q5378285" url="?curid=954651" title="The English High School">
<text>The English High School in Boston, Massachusetts, founded in 1821, is one of the first public high schools in the United States. Originally called The English Classical School, it was renamed upon its first relocation in 1824. Commonly referred to as Boston English, the school is located in the Jamaica Plain neighborhood of Boston and is a part of Boston Public Schools (BPS).

==History==
Boston English was created at the urging of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanics Association and was modeled after the Royal High School in Edinburgh, Scotland. The School Committee to establish English High School was chaired by Samuel Adams Wells, grandson of former Governor Samuel Adams. Its first headmaster was George B. Emerson, an early leader in educational reform. English, like Boston Latin School, only admitted boys when established—although a separate high school for girls was established in Boston by Emerson three years later in 1824. Boston English ended its policy of single sex education and admitted girls to become coeducational in 1972, 151 years after its founding.

Boston English has had seven different geographic locations / buildings. Its first site was on Derne Street at the rear of the Massachusetts State House and is marked by a metal historical commemorative 
plaque. Its second home was a building, which is still standing at the corner of Pinkney and Anderson Streets, which eventually became the Phillips School, a school for then free born and emancipated African-Americans before the American Civil War. From 1844 to 1922, Boston English&#x27;s building was adjacent and matching on the other side to the structure for the Boston Latin School, first near downtown Boston and then, starting in 1881, in a building (now demolished) on Warren Street in the South End. From 1954 to 1989, Boston English was then at 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, across the street from the Boston Latin at 78 Avenue Louis Pasteur. This site is now part of Harvard University Medical School.

The motto of the school has been: &quot;The aim of every English High School boy is to become a man of honor and achievement.&quot; The current motto of the school is &quot;Honor, Achievement, Service to Mankind&quot;.

==Curriculum==
English High was created originally to educate working-class schoolboys in preparation for business, mechanics, and engineering trades as opposed to &quot;Latin-grammar&quot; schools like Boston Latin that prepared schoolboys for the college, ministry and scholarly pursuits, and private academies that were open only to affluent residents. Its original curriculum consisted of such courses as English, surveying, navigation, geography, logic, and civics as well as a strong emphasis on mathematics.

Nowadays, English High has opened up its curriculum to include more liberal arts subjects such as foreign languages and writing as well as performing arts and more college preparatory courses. It has received an experimental &quot;Commonwealth Co-Pilot School&quot; status, geared toward improving the curriculum of urban schools. For a while, the school had an award-winning mock trial team as well.

English High School has an English-Language Learners program, which was run for many years by Francisco Ruiz.

==AVID==
This is one of the few schools that offers Advancement Via Individual Determination (AVID), an American college-readiness system. AVID is designed to increase the number of students who enroll in four-year colleges, focusing on students in the academic middle by raising the expectations of students. Originating at the high school level, the program now serves grades 4–12 (roughly, ages 10–18).

==Extracurricular activities==

===Athletics===
Each Thanksgiving since 1887, English has played Boston Latin School in football in the oldest continuing high school rivalry in the United States. It is also the fourth longest U.S. high school rivalry of all time. In the 1993 football season, the football team made history by being the first team in school history to ever qualify for the Massachusetts State Championship. The Bulldogs (or Blue &amp; Blue) defeated the Nantucket Whalers by the score of 16–7 to claim its school&#x27;s first state championship. The &#x27;97 football team was the first team to go undefeated with a 12–0 record and English&#x27;s second football state championship. Since 2005 the baseball team has started by a winning record of 18–0 and defeating their rivals the Brighton Bengals, and since then the baseball team has never let up and has won 2 city championships. English High also has competitive basketball, softball, volleyball, and track teams. Up until the 1980s, the school had a boys&#x27; hockey team, a golf team, and swimming teams for both boys and girls. The 1961–1963 football team went 39 and 0 under coach Bill Stewart.

===Junior Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps===
This school offers a JROTC program. The program&#x27;s mission is to motivate students to become better citizens. The program is led by Col. D. Bennett and Command Sergeant Major Hornbuckle. The students participate in drill competitions, community service projects, academic competitions, and town parades to name a few. Selected cadets also attend a summer leadership camp at Fort Devens, MA in place of school for one week in June where they do activities such as obstacle courses, aquatics, rifle marksmanship, and rappelling off of 30 and 60-foot towers. English High JROTC has many partnerships with civic organizations, most notably the Roslindale Parade Committee, the Columbus Day Parade Committee, the City of Boston Veterans Day Committee and the Dorchester Day Parade Committee and the annual Special Olympics at White Stadium in Jamaica Plain.

==Notable alumni==
* Bruce Bolling – first black president of the Boston City Council
* Benjamin A. Botkin – folklorist
* Robert A. Brooks – 1949, telecommunications pioneer
* Percy Jewett Burrell – dramatist and playwright
* Tonya Cardoza - basketball coach
* Herb Chambers – automotive dealer
* Ken Clarke – former NFL defensive tackle
* George W. Coleman – publisher
* Jerry Colonna – trombonist, actor, comedian, singer and songwriter
* Allan Crite – painter
* William Healey Dall – malacologist and explorer of Alaska
* Louis Farrakhan, minister
* Maxwell Finland, physician and infectious diseases expert
* Kahlil Gibran – artist
* Frank Bunker Gilbreth – time and motion engineer
* Bobby Guindon – former MLB player (Boston Red Sox)
* Paul X. Kelley – Commandant of United States Marine Corps, 1983–1987
* Jordan Knight – singer
* Charles W. Lyons – Jesuit and president of several universities
* Samuel Pierpont Langley – director of the Smithsonian Institution
* Bill Meanix – hurdler
* J. P. Morgan – financier
* Leonard Nimoy – actor
* Bill Owens – American politician, businessman, and the first Black state senator in the Massachusetts State Senate.
* Matthew Ridgway – general
* Mickey Roach – NHL player (Hamilton Tigers)
* Louis Sullivan – architect
* Michael J. Sullivan – professional baseball player and politician
* Vito Tamulis – MLB player (New York Yankees, St. Louis Browns, Brooklyn Dodgers, Philadelphia Phillies)
* Timothy Francis Walsh – architect and partner of Maginnis &amp; Walsh
* William H.C. Whiting – Confederate general
* Kendra Lara – Former Boston City Counselor.

==Image gallery==
==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Annals of The Massachusetts Charitable Mechanics Association, 1795–1892&quot;. The Massachusetts Charitable Mechanics Association, Boston, MA.
* &quot;Semi-centennial Anniversary of the English High School, May 2, 1871&quot;. Robert Cassie Waterston, Editor. Boston: Printed for the English High School Association, 1871
* &quot;Annual Report of the School Committee of Boston, Boston, MA, 1820–1821&quot;.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5378285" start="0" end="23" title="The English High School" label="The English High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="27" end="33" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="35" end="48" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378285" start="251" end="265" title="The English High School" label="Boston English"/>
<link wikidata="Q985993" start="296" end="309" title="Jamaica Plain" label="Jamaica Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215021" start="350" end="371" title="Boston Public Schools" label="Boston Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171033" start="513" end="530" title="Royal High School, Edinburgh" label="Royal High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="534" end="553" title="Edinburgh, Scotland" label="Edinburgh, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212963" start="672" end="684" title="Samuel Adams" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536743" start="711" end="728" title="George Barrell Emerson" label="George B. Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49129" start="783" end="802" title="Boston Latin School" label="Boston Latin School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075597" start="981" end="1001" title="single sex education" label="single sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="1048" end="1052" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150259" start="1212" end="1237" title="Massachusetts State House" label="Massachusetts State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715815" start="1428" end="1443" title="Phillips School" label="Phillips School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1518" end="1536" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="1963" end="1996" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard University Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686371" start="3300" end="3340" title="Advancement Via Individual Determination" label="Advancement Via Individual Determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="3708" end="3720" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q49129" start="3752" end="3771" title="Boston Latin School" label="Boston Latin School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="3775" end="3783" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378713" start="3791" end="3828" title="English–Latin football rivalry" label="oldest continuing high school rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622285" start="3866" end="3917" title="List of high school football rivalries more than 100 years old" label="fourth longest U.S. high school rivalry of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362101" start="4901" end="4906" title="Junior Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="JROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="5685" end="5701" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977166" start="5759" end="5772" title="Bruce Bolling" label="Bruce Bolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947808" start="5804" end="5823" title="Boston City Council" label="Boston City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888158" start="5826" end="5844" title="Benjamin A. Botkin" label="Benjamin A. Botkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="5847" end="5857" title="folklorist" label="folklorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17402406" start="5860" end="5876" title="Robert A. Brooks" label="Robert A. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167423" start="5914" end="5934" title="Percy Jewett Burrell" label="Percy Jewett Burrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197926" start="5964" end="5977" title="Tonya Cardoza" label="Tonya Cardoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732867" start="5999" end="6012" title="Herb Chambers" label="Herb Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387456" start="6035" end="6045" title="Ken Clarke (American football)" label="Ken Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="6055" end="6058" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q112256393" start="6078" end="6095" title="George W. Coleman" label="George W. Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q923250" start="6110" end="6123" title="Jerry Colonna (entertainer)" label="Jerry Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730546" start="6179" end="6190" title="Allan Crite" label="Allan Crite"/>
<link wikidata="Q777148" start="6203" end="6222" title="William Healey Dall" label="William Healey Dall"/>
<link wikidata="Q190993" start="6225" end="6237" title="Malacology" label="malacologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="6254" end="6260" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q49075" start="6263" end="6278" title="Louis Farrakhan" label="Louis Farrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796099" start="6291" end="6306" title="Maxwell Finland" label="Maxwell Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347024" start="6351" end="6364" title="Kahlil Gibran (sculptor)" label="Kahlil Gibran"/>
<link wikidata="Q463793" start="6376" end="6397" title="Frank Bunker Gilbreth, Sr." label="Frank Bunker Gilbreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935077" start="6427" end="6440" title="Bobby Guindon" label="Bobby Guindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="6450" end="6453" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="6462" end="6476" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063239" start="6480" end="6494" title="Paul X. Kelley" label="Paul X. Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115074" start="6497" end="6507" title="Commandant of the United States Marine Corps" label="Commandant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="6511" end="6537" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q337511" start="6551" end="6564" title="Jordan Knight" label="Jordan Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q59660506" start="6576" end="6592" title="Charles W. Lyons" label="Charles W. Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="6595" end="6601" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q357961" start="6642" end="6665" title="Samuel Pierpont Langley" label="Samuel Pierpont Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="6668" end="6676" title="Board of Directors" label="director"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="6684" end="6707" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631913" start="6710" end="6721" title="Bill Meanix" label="Bill Meanix"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="6734" end="6746" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16345" start="6761" end="6774" title="Leonard Nimoy" label="Leonard Nimoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973580" start="6785" end="6795" title="Bill Owens (Massachusetts politician)" label="Bill Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q494930" start="6903" end="6918" title="Matthew Ridgway" label="Matthew Ridgway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311890" start="6931" end="6943" title="Mickey Roach" label="Mickey Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="6946" end="6949" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573571" start="6958" end="6973" title="Hamilton Tigers" label="Hamilton Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q243240" start="6977" end="6991" title="Louis Sullivan" label="Louis Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848989" start="7006" end="7025" title="Mike Sullivan (pitcher)" label="Michael J. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937181" start="7074" end="7086" title="Vito Tamulis" label="Vito Tamulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="7101" end="7117" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11314813" start="7119" end="7135" title="St. Louis Browns" label="St. Louis Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="7137" end="7153" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="7155" end="7176" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55790702" start="7180" end="7201" title="Timothy Francis Walsh" label="Timothy Francis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731116" start="7229" end="7249" title="Maginnis &amp;amp; Walsh" label="Maginnis &amp;amp; Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976842" start="7252" end="7272" title="William H.C. Whiting" label="William H.C. Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="7275" end="7286" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q112864877" start="7297" end="7308" title="Kendra Lara" label="Kendra Lara"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954657" wikidata="Q795559" url="?curid=954657" title="BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards">
<text>The BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards celebrate outstanding achievement during the previous year within the field of folk music, with the aim of raising the profile of folk and acoustic music. The awards have been given annually since 2000 by British radio station BBC Radio 2.

Award recipients have included Joan Baez, Cat Stevens, John Martyn, Steve Earle, The Dubliners, Martin Carthy, Billy Bragg, Shirley Collins, Kate Rusby, Cara Dillon, Eliza Carthy, Bellowhead, June Tabor, Oysterband, Aly Bain, Richard Thompson, Nancy Kerr, Seth Lakeman, Show of Hands, Lau, Tom Paxton, Don McLean, Ramblin&#x27; Jack Elliott, Nic Jones, Bella Hardy, Rhiannon Giddens, Norma Waterson, The Chieftains, Joan Armatrading and James Taylor.

==History==
The awards are managed by independent production company Smooth Operations, now part of 7digital. Kellie While of Smooth Operations has stated that the idea of the BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards was conceived by the company in 1999, inspired by the Country Music Awards, and brought to the BBC, and The Guardian has attributed their creation to John Leonard, who formed Smooth Operations in 1995.

The awards event has been staged in different regions of the United Kingdom, including The Brewery in London, The Lowry theatre in Salford, the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall during the 2013 Celtic Connections festival, the Bridgewater Hall during the 2019 Manchester Folk Festival, the Wales Millennium Centre, Cardiff in 2015,
and the Belfast Waterfront in 2018. 
In 2014, 2016 and 2017, the event was held at the Royal Albert Hall in London.
Reviewing the 2014 Royal Albert Hall event, Colin Irwin remarked on how much more glamorous it had become since the first event fifteen years earlier. 

Between 2000 and 2012 the Folk Awards were hosted by Mike Harding, and broadcast on BBC Radio 2. Mark Radcliffe and Scottish Gaelic singer Julie Fowlis took over presenting the ceremony in 2013. In 2004 the awards were shown on television for the first time, on BBC Four. The event has been streamed live in audio and video on the BBC Radio 2 website, the BBC iPlayer and/or the BBC Red Button TV service.

The BBC Radio 2 Young Folk Award has been included in the award event since 2011, having previously been awarded in a separate ceremony, but its selection process remains independent.

In 2016, Rhiannon Giddens became the first non-British winner of the &#x27;Folk Singer of the Year&#x27; award.

In 2020, there was no award ceremony due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

==Selection==
The controlling body is the Folk Awards Committee, comprising two BBC staff, two from the production company 7digital Creative, and one external expert. Two Nominated Representatives, one from 7digital and one from the BBC oversee the process. The Folk Awards Committee selects a panel of 150 representatives from the British folk world, including broadcasters, journalists, record producers, festival organisers, venue bookers, record company directors, agents and promoters. The panellists vary slightly from year to year, with new panellists being invited (or self-applying) each year.

The nominations in most categories are made by the panel. The four most-nominated artists go through to the second round. The winner is then selected from the nominees by a second vote among the same panellists. Since 2013, following criticism of the lack of transparency of the selection process, there have been some exceptions to this general process. The second round of the &quot;Best Album&quot; category is determined by a public vote, hosted on the BBC website. The two track categories, &quot;Best Original Track&quot; and &quot;Best Traditional Track&quot; were removed from the main panel. They are now voted by a much smaller specialist panel of judges, appointed by the Folk Awards committee, whose identities are published. 

Broader categories, including the &quot;Lifetime Achievement Award&quot; and the &quot;Good Tradition Award&quot; are chosen by two rounds of votes by the Folk Awards committee only. These may not be awarded every year. 

The BBC Radio 2 Young Folk Award, although presented at the Folk Awards ceremony since 2011, has its own independent selection process.

The selection process has been the subject of criticism, with accusations of bias, cronyism, and lack of transparency. In 2012 The Independent reported that there had been at least two Freedom of Information requests to identify the panellists, which have been rejected by the BBC. The BBC and 7digital have responded that the panellists are kept secret to avoid lobbying and bribery.

== Compilation album ==
A Folk Awards double-album, featuring music by most of the nominees, was released annually by the event&#x27;s producers in collaboration with BBC Radio 2 and the record label and distribution company, Proper Music.

== Hall of Fame ==
In 2014, a posthumous award was introduced to celebrate the contribution of significant figures in folk music&#x27;s past. 
* 2019 inductee: Leonard Cohen (with tribute performance by Thea Gilmore)
* 2018 inductee: Nick Drake (with tribute performance by Olivia Chaney)
* 2017 inductee: Woody Guthrie (with tribute performance by Billy Bragg)
* 2016 inductee: Sandy Denny (with tribute performance by Rufus Wainwright and original members of Fairport Convention)
* 2015 inductee: Ewan MacColl (with tribute performance by Guy Garvey and the MacColl family)
* 2014 inductee: Cecil Sharp

==Award winners==
===2019===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Ríoghnach Connolly
* Best Duo / Group: Catrin Finch &amp; Seckou Keita
* Horizon Award: Brìghde Chaimbeul
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;The Foggy Dew&quot; - Ye Vagabonds
* Best Original Track: &quot;I Burn but I Am Not Consumed&quot; - Karine Polwart
* Best Album: &quot;Hide and Hair&quot; - The Trials of Cato
* Musician of the Year: Seckou Keita
* Young Folk Award: Maddie Morris
* Lifetime Achievement Awards: Dervish and Wizz Jones
* Hall of Fame: Leonard Cohen
Presenter Mark Radcliffe was also presented with a special Folk Award to celebrate his 40 years in radio.

Venue: Bridgewater Hall, Manchester

===2018===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Karine Polwart
* Best Duo: Chris Stout &amp; Catriona McKay
* Best Group: Lankum
* Best Album: &quot;Strangers&quot; - The Young&#x27;uns
* Horizon Award: Ímar
* Musician of the Year: Mohsen Amini
* Young Folk Award: Mera Royle
* Best Original Song: &quot;The Granite Gaze&quot; - Lankum
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Banks of Newfoundland&quot; - Siobhan Miller
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Dónal Lunny
* Hall of Fame: Nick Drake
* Good Tradition: Armagh Pipers Club

Venue: Belfast Waterfront

===2017===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Kris Drever
* Best Duo: Ross Ainslie &amp; Ali Hutton
* Best Group: The Furrow Collective
* Best Album: &quot;Songs of Separation&quot; - Songs of Separation
* Horizon Award: Daoirí Farrell
* Musician of the Year: Rachel Newton
* Young Folk Award: Josie Duncan &amp; Pablo Lafuente
* Best Original Song: &quot;If Wishes Were Horses&quot; - Kris Drever
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Van Diemen&#x27;s Land&quot; - Daoirí Farrell
* Lifetime Achievement Awards: Al Stewart and Ry Cooder
* Hall of Fame: Woody Guthrie

Venue: Royal Albert Hall, London

===2016===

* Folk Singer of the Year: Rhiannon Giddens
* Best Duo: Kathryn Roberts and Sean Lakeman
* Best Group: The Young&#x27;uns
* Best Album: &quot;Mount the Air&quot; - The Unthanks
* Horizon Award: Sam Kelly
* Musician of the Year: Andy Cutting
* Young Folk Award: Brìghde Chaimbeul

* Best Original Song: &quot;Mackerel&quot; - The Rheingans Sisters

* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Lovely Molly&quot; - Sam Lee
* Lifetime Achievement Awards: Joan Armatrading and Norma Waterson
* Good Tradition Award: John McCusker
* Hall of Fame: Sandy Denny

Venue: Royal Albert Hall, London

===2015===

* Folk Singer of the Year: Nancy Kerr
* Best Duo: Josienne Clarke &amp; Ben Walker
* Best Group: The Young&#x27;uns
* Best Album: &quot;Tincian&quot; - 9Bach
* Horizon Award: The Rails
* Musician of the Year: Sam Sweeney
* Young Folk Award: Talisk
* Best Original Song: &quot;Swim to the Star&quot; - Peggy Seeger/Calum MacColl
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Samhradh Samhradh&quot; - The Gloaming
* Lifetime Achievement Awards: Yusuf Islam/Cat Stevens and Loudon Wainwright III
* Good Tradition Award: Meredydd Evans
* Hall of Fame: Ewan MacColl

Venue: Millennium Centre, Cardiff

===2014===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Bella Hardy
* Best Duo: Phillip Henry &amp; Hannah Martin
* Best Group: The Full English
* Best Album: &quot;The Full English&quot; - The Full English
* Horizon Award: Greg Russell and Ciaran Algar
* Musician of the Year: Aidan O&#x27;Rourke
* Young Folk Award: The Mischa Macpherson Trio
* Best Original Song: &quot;Two Ravens&quot; - Lisa Knapp
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Willie of Winsbury&quot; - Anaïs Mitchell and Jefferson Hamer
* Lifetime Achievement Awards: Clannad and Martin Carthy
* Good Tradition Award: Cambridge Folk Festival
* Hall of Fame: Cecil Sharp

Venue: Royal Albert Hall, London

===2013===
* Folk singer of the year: Nic Jones
* Best Duo: Kathryn Roberts and Sean Lakeman
* Best Group: Lau
* Best Album: &quot;Broadside&quot; - Bellowhead
* Horizon Award: Blair Dunlop
* Musician of the year: Kathryn Tickell
* Young Folk Award: Greg Russell and Ciaran Algar
* Best Original Song: &quot;Hatchlings&quot; - Emily Portman
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Lord Douglas&quot; - Jim Moray
* Lifetime achievement awards: Aly Bain and Roy Harper
* Lifetime achievement award for contribution to songwriting: Dougie MacLean
* Roots Award: Billy Bragg

Venue: Glasgow Royal Concert Hall

===2012===
*Folk Singer of the year: June Tabor
* Best Duo: Tim Edey &amp; Brendan Power
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Bonny Bunch of Roses&quot; - June Tabor &amp; Oysterband
* Best Group: June Tabor &amp; Oysterband
* Young Folk Award: Ioscaid
* Musician of the year: Tim Edey
* Best Original Song: &quot;The Herring Girl&quot; - Bella Hardy and The Reckoning – Steve Tilston
* Horizon Award: Lucy Ward
* Best Album: &quot;Ragged Kingdom&quot; – June Tabor &amp; Oysterband
* Lifetime achievement awards: The Dubliners and Don McLean
* Best Live Act: The Home Service
* Good Tradition Award: Ian Campbell and Bill Leader
* Roots Award: Malcolm Taylor

Venue: The Lowry, Salford

===2011===
* Folk Singer of the year: Chris Wood
* Best Duo: Nancy Kerr &amp; James Fagan
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Poor Wayfaring Stranger&quot; - Eliza Carthy &amp; Norma Waterson
* Best Group: Bellowhead
* Young Folk Award: Moore Moss Rutter
* Musician of the year: Andy Cutting
* Best Original Song: &quot;Hollow Point&quot; - Chris Wood
* Horizon Award: Ewan McLennan
* Best Album: &quot;Gift&quot; – Eliza Carthy &amp; Norma Waterson
* Lifetime achievement award: Donovan
* Best Live Act: Bellowhead
* Good Tradition Award: Fisherman&#x27;s Friends
* Roots Award: Levellers

Venue: The Brewery, London

===2010===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Jon Boden
* Best Duo: Show of Hands
* Best Group: Lau
* Best Album: &quot;Hill of Thieves&quot; by Cara Dillon 
* Best Original Song: &quot;Arrogance Ignorance and Greed&quot; by Steve Knightley (performed by Show of Hands) 
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Sir Patrick Spens&quot; by Martin Simpson
* Horizon Award: Sam Carter
* Musician of the Year: John Kirkpatrick
* Best Live Act: Bellowhead
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Nanci Griffith 
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Dick Gaughan
* Folk Club Award: The Magpies Nest
* Good Tradition Award: Transatlantic Sessions

===2009===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Chris Wood
* Best Duo: Chris While and Julie Matthews
* Best Group: Lau
* Best Album: &quot;Trespasser&quot; by Chris Wood
* Best Original Song: &quot;All You Pretty Girls&quot; by Andy Partridge (performed by Jim Moray)
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;The Lark in the Morning&quot; by Jackie Oates
* Horizon Award: Jackie Oates
* Musician of the Year: Tom McConville
* Best Live Act: The Demon Barbers
* Lifetime Achievement Award: James Taylor
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Judy Collins
* Folk Club Award: Black Swan Folk Club, York

===2008===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Julie Fowlis
* Best Duo: John Tams and Barry Coope
* Best Group: Lau
* Best Album: &quot;Prodigal Son&quot; by Martin Simpson
* Best Original Song: &quot;Never Any Good&quot; by Martin Simpson
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Cold Haily Rainy Night&quot; by The Imagined Village
* Horizon Award: Rachel Unthank and the Winterset
* Musician of the Year: Andy Cutting
* Best Live Act: Bellowhead
* Lifetime Achievement Award: John Martyn
* Good Tradition Award: Shirley Collins
* Folk Club Award: Dartford Folk Club

===2007===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Seth Lakeman
* Best Duo: Martin Carthy and Dave Swarbrick
* Best Group: Bellowhead
* Best Album: &quot;Freedom Fields&quot; by Seth Lakeman
* Best Original Song: &quot;Daisy&quot; by Karine Polwart
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Barleycorn&quot; (performed by Tim van Eyken)
* Musician of the Year: Chris Thile
* Horizon Award: Kris Drever
* Best Live Act: Bellowhead
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Pentangle
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Danny Thompson
* Good Tradition Award: Nic Jones
* Folk Club Award: The Ram Club
* Favourite Folk Track Award (public vote): Who Knows Where The Time Goes (performed by Sandy Denny / Fairport Convention)

===2006===
* Folk Singer of the Year: John Tams
* Best Duo: John Spiers and Jon Boden
* Best Group: Flook
* Best Album: &quot;The Reckoning&quot; by John Tams
* Best Original Song: &quot;One In A Million&quot; by Chris Wood and Hugh Lupton
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Bitter Withy&quot; (performed by John Tams)
* Horizon Award: Julie Fowlis
* Musician of the Year: Michael McGoldrick
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Paul Brady
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Richard Thompson
* Best Live Act: Kate Rusby
* Good Tradition Award: Ashley Hutchings
* Folk Club Award: Red Lion, Birmingham
* Most Influential Folk Album of All Time (public vote): &quot;Liege and Lief&quot; by Fairport Convention

===2005===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Martin Carthy
* Best Duo: Aly Bain and Phil Cunningham
* Best Group: Oysterband The Big Session
* Best Album: &quot;Faultlines&quot; by Karine Polwart
* Best Original Song: &quot;The Sun&#x27;s Comin&#x27; Over The Hill&quot; by Karine Polwart
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Famous Flower Of Serving Men&quot; (performed by Martin Carthy)
* Horizon Award: Karine Polwart
* Musician of the Year: Kathryn Tickell
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Ramblin&#x27; Jack Elliott
* Lifetime Achievement Award (Songwriting): Tom Paxton
* Best Live Act: Bellowhead
* Best Dance Band: Whapweasel
* Good Tradition Award: Steeleye Span
* Folk Club Award: Hitchin Folk Club

===2004===
* Folk Singer of the Year: June Tabor
* Best Duo: John Spiers and Jon Boden
* Best Group: Danú
* Best Album: &quot;Sweet England&quot; by Jim Moray
* Best Original Song: &quot;Co. Down&quot; by Tommy Sands (performed by Danú)
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Hughie Graeme&quot; (performed by June Tabor)
* Horizon Award: Jim Moray
* Musician of the Year: Martin Simpson
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Dave Swarbrick
* Lifetime Achievement Award (Songwriting): Steve Earle
* Best Live Act: Show of Hands
* Good Tradition Award: Celtic Connections
* Folk Club Award: Rockingham Arms, Wentworth

===2003===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Eliza Carthy
* Best Duo: Nancy Kerr and James Fagan
* Best Group: Altan
* Best Album: &quot;Anglicana&quot; by Eliza Carthy
* Best Original Song: &quot;No Telling&quot; performed by Linda Thompson
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Worcester City&quot; performed by Eliza Carthy
* Horizon Award: John Spiers and Jon Boden
* Instrumentalist of the Year: John McCusker
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Christy Moore
* Lifetime Achievement Award (Songwriting): John Prine
* Best Live Act: Roy Bailey and Tony Benn
* Good Tradition Award: Oysterband
* Folk Club Award: Edinburgh

===2002===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Martin Carthy
* Best Album: &quot;The Bramble Briar&quot; by Martin Simpson
* Best Original Song: &quot;Lullabye&quot; by Kate Rusby
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Black Is the Color&quot; performed by Cara Dillon
* Best Group: Cherish the Ladies
* Horizon Award: Cara Dillon
* Instrumentalist of the Year: Martin Simpson
* Lifetime Achievement Award: The Chieftains
* Lifetime Achievement Award (Songwriting): Ralph McTell
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Fairport Convention
* Folk Club Award: Nettlebed
* Best Live Act: Rory McLeod

===2001===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Norma Waterson
* Best Album: &quot;Unity&quot; by John Tams
* Best Original Song: &quot;Harry Stone (Hearts of Coal)&quot; by John Tams
* Best Group: Danú
* Horizon Award: Bill Jones
* Instrumentalist of the Year: Michael McGoldrick
* Lifetime Achievement Award: Bert Jansch
* Radio 2 Special Roots Award: Taj Mahal 
* Good Tradition Award: Bob Copper
* Folk Club Award: The Davy Lamp
* Best Live Act: Vin Garbutt

===2000===
* Folk Singer of the Year: Kate Rusby
* Best Album: &quot;Sleepless&quot; by Kate Rusby
* Best Original Song: &quot;A Place Called England&quot; by Maggie Holland
* Best Traditional Track: &quot;Raggle Taggle Gypsy&quot; performed by Waterson–Carthy
* Best Group: Waterson–Carthy
* Horizon Award: Nancy Kerr and James Fagan
* Instrumentalist of the Year: Martin Hayes
* Radio 2 Special Award: Joan Baez
* Radio 2 Special Roots Award: Youssou N&#x27;Dour
* Andy Kershaw Roots Award: Joe Boyd and Lucy Durán
* Good Tradition Award: Topic Records
* Folk Club Award: Westhoughton
* Best Live Act: La Bottine Souriante

==See also==
* Scots Trad Music Awards

==References==
==External links==

*The BBC&#x27;s 2019 Folk Awards Site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2018 Folk Awards Site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2017 Folk Awards Site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2016 Folk Awards Site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2015 Folk Awards site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2014 Folk Awards site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2013 Folk Awards site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2012 Folk Awards site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2011 Folk Awards site
*The BBC&#x27;s 2010 Folk Awards site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q795559" start="4" end="27" title="BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards" label="BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="107" end="117" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q286080" start="167" end="181" title="acoustic music" label="acoustic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="255" end="266" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="300" end="309" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q154216" start="311" end="322" title="Cat Stevens" label="Cat Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q472578" start="324" end="335" title="John Martyn" label="John Martyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q781634" start="337" end="348" title="Steve Earle" label="Steve Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q478629" start="350" end="363" title="The Dubliners" label="The Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903579" start="365" end="378" title="Martin Carthy" label="Martin Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q508412" start="380" end="391" title="Billy Bragg" label="Billy Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q528937" start="393" end="408" title="Shirley Collins" label="Shirley Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q447652" start="410" end="420" title="Kate Rusby" label="Kate Rusby"/>
<link wikidata="Q467591" start="422" end="433" title="Cara Dillon" label="Cara Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581565" start="435" end="447" title="Eliza Carthy" label="Eliza Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="449" end="459" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q454425" start="461" end="471" title="June Tabor" label="June Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379720" start="473" end="483" title="Oysterband" label="Oysterband"/>
<link wikidata="Q450214" start="485" end="493" title="Aly Bain" label="Aly Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q539955" start="495" end="511" title="Richard Thompson (musician)" label="Richard Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962776" start="513" end="523" title="Nancy Kerr" label="Nancy Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131249" start="525" end="537" title="Seth Lakeman" label="Seth Lakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959759" start="539" end="552" title="Show of Hands" label="Show of Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497592" start="554" end="557" title="Lau (band)" label="Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351527" start="559" end="569" title="Tom Paxton" label="Tom Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q57339" start="571" end="581" title="Don McLean" label="Don McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q703905" start="583" end="609" title="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Jack Elliott" label="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Jack Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984666" start="611" end="620" title="Nic Jones" label="Nic Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883361" start="622" end="633" title="Bella Hardy" label="Bella Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320514" start="635" end="651" title="Rhiannon Giddens" label="Rhiannon Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551621" start="653" end="667" title="Norma Waterson" label="Norma Waterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q662577" start="669" end="683" title="The Chieftains" label="The Chieftains"/>
<link wikidata="Q263194" start="685" end="701" title="Joan Armatrading" label="Joan Armatrading"/>
<link wikidata="Q310300" start="706" end="718" title="James Taylor" label="James Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="790" end="807" title="UBC Media Group#Smooth Operations" label="Smooth Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q270077" start="821" end="829" title="7digital" label="7digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16216166" start="831" end="843" title="Kellie While" label="Kellie While"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137234" start="975" end="995" title="Country Music Association Awards" label="Country Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="1025" end="1037" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521692" start="1234" end="1243" title="The Lowry" label="The Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="1255" end="1262" title="Salford" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566904" start="1268" end="1294" title="Glasgow Royal Concert Hall" label="Glasgow Royal Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753881" start="1311" end="1329" title="Celtic Connections" label="Celtic Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925178" start="1344" end="1360" title="Bridgewater Hall" label="Bridgewater Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631977" start="1407" end="1430" title="Wales Millennium Centre" label="Wales Millennium Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="1432" end="1439" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974082" start="1457" end="1475" title="Belfast Waterfront" label="Belfast Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="1536" end="1553" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145222" start="1609" end="1620" title="Colin Irwin (journalist)" label="Colin Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847134" start="1771" end="1783" title="Mike Harding" label="Mike Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="1802" end="1813" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118229" start="1815" end="1829" title="Mark Radcliffe (radio broadcaster)" label="Mark Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q467103" start="1857" end="1869" title="Julie Fowlis" label="Julie Fowlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="1980" end="1988" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="2049" end="2060" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557489" start="2074" end="2085" title="BBC iPlayer" label="BBC iPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q795594" start="2097" end="2111" title="BBC Red Button" label="BBC Red Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864883" start="2129" end="2157" title="BBC Radio 2 Young Folk Award" label="BBC Radio 2 Young Folk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320514" start="2319" end="2335" title="Rhiannon Giddens" label="Rhiannon Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2471" end="2488" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q270077" start="2614" end="2631" title="7digital" label="7digital Creative"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864883" start="4061" end="4089" title="BBC Radio 2 Young Folk Award" label="BBC Radio 2 Young Folk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="4321" end="4336" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500727" start="4379" end="4401" title="Freedom of information in the United Kingdom" label="Freedom of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="4747" end="4758" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250168" start="4806" end="4818" title="Proper Music Distribution" label="Proper Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="4981" end="4994" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777206" start="5024" end="5036" title="Thea Gilmore" label="Thea Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q211588" start="5055" end="5065" title="Nick Drake" label="Nick Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202903" start="5095" end="5108" title="Olivia Chaney" label="Olivia Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="5127" end="5140" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q508412" start="5170" end="5181" title="Billy Bragg" label="Billy Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q236638" start="5200" end="5211" title="Sandy Denny" label="Sandy Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q192402" start="5241" end="5257" title="Rufus Wainwright" label="Rufus Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145652" start="5282" end="5301" title="Fairport Convention" label="Fairport Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192339" start="5320" end="5332" title="Ewan MacColl" label="Ewan MacColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q506393" start="5362" end="5372" title="Guy Garvey" label="Guy Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889019" start="5414" end="5425" title="Cecil Sharp" label="Cecil Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5483" end="5501" title="Ríoghnach Connolly" label="Ríoghnach Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398131" start="5522" end="5534" title="Catrin Finch" label="Catrin Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442931" start="5541" end="5553" title="Seckou Keita" label="Seckou Keita"/>
<link wikidata="Q89760955" start="5571" end="5588" title="Brìghde Chaimbeul" label="Brìghde Chaimbeul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732296" start="5621" end="5634" title="Foggy Dew (English song)" label="The Foggy Dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520549" start="5643" end="5655" title="Ye Vagabonds" label="Ye Vagabonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729615" start="5722" end="5736" title="Karine Polwart" label="Karine Polwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q107389009" start="5779" end="5797" title="The Trials of Cato" label="The Trials of Cato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442931" start="5822" end="5834" title="Seckou Keita" label="Seckou Keita"/>
<link wikidata="Q841481" start="5900" end="5907" title="Dervish (band)" label="Dervish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028801" start="5912" end="5922" title="Wizz Jones" label="Wizz Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="5939" end="5952" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118229" start="5963" end="5977" title="Mark Radcliffe (radio broadcaster)" label="Mark Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925178" start="6067" end="6083" title="Bridgewater Hall" label="Bridgewater Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729615" start="6135" end="6149" title="Karine Polwart" label="Karine Polwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108173" start="6162" end="6173" title="Chris Stout" label="Chris Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q41405399" start="6180" end="6194" title="Catriona McKay" label="Catriona McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q64816551" start="6209" end="6215" title="Lankum" label="Lankum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962679" start="6254" end="6272" title="The Young&amp;#x27;uns" label="The Young&amp;#x27;uns"/>
<link wikidata="Q97587415" start="6290" end="6294" title="Ímar (band)" label="Ímar"/>
<link wikidata="Q96440031" start="6319" end="6331" title="Mohsen Amini" label="Mohsen Amini"/>
<link wikidata="Q64816551" start="6416" end="6422" title="Lankum" label="Lankum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715564" start="6455" end="6476" title="The Banks of Newfoundland" label="Banks of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q96361611" start="6485" end="6499" title="Siobhan Miller" label="Siobhan Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q983618" start="6530" end="6541" title="Dónal Lunny" label="Dónal Lunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q211588" start="6558" end="6568" title="Nick Drake" label="Nick Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974082" start="6614" end="6632" title="Waterfront Hall" label="Belfast Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437161" start="6672" end="6683" title="Kris Drever" label="Kris Drever"/>
<link wikidata="Q99767272" start="6810" end="6829" title="Songs of Separation" label="Songs of Separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29043214" start="6847" end="6861" title="Daoirí Farrell" label="Daoirí Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q101477682" start="6886" end="6899" title="Rachel Newton" label="Rachel Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437161" start="7012" end="7023" title="Kris Drever" label="Kris Drever"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598727" start="7056" end="7078" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land (folk song)" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q29043214" start="7087" end="7101" title="Daoirí Farrell" label="Daoirí Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q559599" start="7133" end="7143" title="Al Stewart" label="Al Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q318374" start="7148" end="7157" title="Ry Cooder" label="Ry Cooder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="7174" end="7187" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="7196" end="7213" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320514" start="7262" end="7278" title="Rhiannon Giddens" label="Rhiannon Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377112" start="7291" end="7306" title="Kathryn Roberts" label="Kathryn Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441147" start="7311" end="7323" title="Sean Lakeman" label="Sean Lakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962679" start="7338" end="7356" title="The Young&amp;#x27;uns" label="The Young&amp;#x27;uns"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627496" start="7377" end="7390" title="Mount the Air" label="Mount the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989799" start="7399" end="7411" title="The Unthanks" label="The Unthanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969219" start="7429" end="7438" title="Sam Kelly (musician)" label="Sam Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760567" start="7463" end="7475" title="Andy Cutting" label="Andy Cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q89760955" start="7496" end="7513" title="Brìghde Chaimbeul" label="Brìghde Chaimbeul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610954" start="7636" end="7643" title="Sam Lee (folk musician)" label="Sam Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q263194" start="7675" end="7691" title="Joan Armatrading" label="Joan Armatrading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551621" start="7696" end="7710" title="Norma Waterson" label="Norma Waterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247603" start="7735" end="7748" title="John McCusker" label="John McCusker"/>
<link wikidata="Q236638" start="7765" end="7776" title="Sandy Denny" label="Sandy Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="7785" end="7802" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962776" start="7851" end="7861" title="Nancy Kerr" label="Nancy Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q55860350" start="7874" end="7889" title="Josienne Clarke" label="Josienne Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7896" end="7906" title="Ben Walker (musician)" label="Ben Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962679" start="7921" end="7939" title="The Young&amp;#x27;uns" label="The Young&amp;#x27;uns"/>
<link wikidata="Q20161871" start="7976" end="7981" title="9 Bach" label="9Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881004" start="7999" end="8008" title="The Rails" label="The Rails"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408221" start="8033" end="8044" title="Sam Sweeney" label="Sam Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754147" start="8065" end="8071" title="Talisk" label="Talisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067420" start="8125" end="8137" title="Peggy Seeger" label="Peggy Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637639" start="8210" end="8222" title="The Gloaming (group)" label="The Gloaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q154216" start="8254" end="8277" title="Cat Stevens" label="Yusuf Islam/Cat Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q437752" start="8282" end="8303" title="Loudon Wainwright III" label="Loudon Wainwright III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819009" start="8328" end="8342" title="Meredydd Evans" label="Meredydd Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192339" start="8359" end="8371" title="Ewan MacColl" label="Ewan MacColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883361" start="8446" end="8457" title="Bella Hardy" label="Bella Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162265" start="8470" end="8503" title="Phillip Henry &amp;amp; Hannah Martin" label="Phillip Henry &amp;amp; Hannah Martin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8518" end="8534" title="The Full English (folk music archive)#Musical collaboration" label="The Full English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8580" end="8596" title="The Full English (folk music archive)#Musical collaboration" label="The Full English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771433" start="8614" end="8643" title="Greg Russell and Ciaran Algar" label="Greg Russell and Ciaran Algar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17037478" start="8668" end="8687" title="Aidan O&amp;#x27;Rourke (musician)" label="Aidan O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q43864974" start="8782" end="8792" title="Lisa Knapp" label="Lisa Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021937" start="8825" end="8843" title="Willie o Winsbury" label="Willie of Winsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467912" start="8852" end="8866" title="Anaïs Mitchell" label="Anaïs Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192609" start="8918" end="8925" title="Clannad" label="Clannad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903579" start="8930" end="8943" title="Martin Carthy" label="Martin Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934694" start="8968" end="8991" title="Cambridge Folk Festival" label="Cambridge Folk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889019" start="9008" end="9019" title="Cecil Sharp" label="Cecil Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="9028" end="9045" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984666" start="9093" end="9102" title="Nic Jones" label="Nic Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377112" start="9115" end="9130" title="Kathryn Roberts" label="Kathryn Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441147" start="9135" end="9147" title="Sean Lakeman" label="Sean Lakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497592" start="9162" end="9165" title="Lau (band)" label="Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972291" start="9186" end="9195" title="Broadside (album)" label="Broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="9204" end="9214" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905741" start="9232" end="9244" title="Blair Dunlop" label="Blair Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007693" start="9269" end="9284" title="Kathryn Tickell" label="Kathryn Tickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771433" start="9305" end="9334" title="Greg Russell and Ciaran Algar" label="Greg Russell and Ciaran Algar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9382" end="9395" title="Emily Portman" label="Emily Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197010" start="9449" end="9458" title="Jim Moray" label="Jim Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q450214" start="9490" end="9498" title="Aly Bain" label="Aly Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q365670" start="9503" end="9513" title="Roy Harper (singer)" label="Roy Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251928" start="9576" end="9590" title="Dougie MacLean" label="Dougie MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q508412" start="9606" end="9617" title="Billy Bragg" label="Billy Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566904" start="9626" end="9652" title="Glasgow Royal Concert Hall" label="Glasgow Royal Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q454425" start="9691" end="9701" title="June Tabor" label="June Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572765" start="9714" end="9722" title="Tim Edey" label="Tim Edey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17386573" start="9729" end="9742" title="Brendan Power (harmonica player)" label="Brendan Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719137" start="9775" end="9795" title="Bonny Bunch of Roses" label="Bonny Bunch of Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q454425" start="9804" end="9814" title="June Tabor" label="June Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379720" start="9821" end="9831" title="Oysterband" label="Oysterband"/>
<link wikidata="Q454425" start="9846" end="9856" title="June Tabor" label="June Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379720" start="9863" end="9873" title="Oysterband" label="Oysterband"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572765" start="9926" end="9934" title="Tim Edey" label="Tim Edey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883361" start="9988" end="9999" title="Bella Hardy" label="Bella Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614135" start="10020" end="10033" title="Steve Tilston" label="Steve Tilston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698557" start="10051" end="10060" title="Lucy Ward (musician)" label="Lucy Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q454425" start="10104" end="10114" title="June Tabor" label="June Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379720" start="10121" end="10131" title="Oysterband" label="Oysterband"/>
<link wikidata="Q478629" start="10163" end="10176" title="The Dubliners" label="The Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q57339" start="10181" end="10191" title="Don McLean" label="Don McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888710" start="10209" end="10225" title="Home Service" label="The Home Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909865" start="10267" end="10278" title="Bill Leader" label="Bill Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521692" start="10317" end="10326" title="The Lowry" label="The Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108515" start="10375" end="10385" title="Chris Wood (folk musician)" label="Chris Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962776" start="10398" end="10408" title="Nancy Kerr" label="Nancy Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133736" start="10415" end="10426" title="James Fagan (musician)" label="James Fagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989961" start="10459" end="10482" title="The Wayfaring Stranger (song)" label="Poor Wayfaring Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581565" start="10491" end="10503" title="Eliza Carthy" label="Eliza Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551621" start="10510" end="10524" title="Norma Waterson" label="Norma Waterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="10539" end="10549" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908187" start="10570" end="10587" title="Moore Moss Rutter" label="Moore Moss Rutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760567" start="10612" end="10624" title="Andy Cutting" label="Andy Cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108515" start="10674" end="10684" title="Chris Wood (folk musician)" label="Chris Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581565" start="10749" end="10761" title="Eliza Carthy" label="Eliza Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551621" start="10768" end="10782" title="Norma Waterson" label="Norma Waterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q317427" start="10813" end="10820" title="Donovan" label="Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="10838" end="10848" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678866" start="10873" end="10897" title="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Friends" label="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380135" start="10913" end="10922" title="Levellers (band)" label="Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270415" start="10990" end="10999" title="Jon Boden" label="Jon Boden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959759" start="11012" end="11025" title="Show of Hands" label="Show of Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497592" start="11040" end="11043" title="Lau (band)" label="Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762440" start="11064" end="11079" title="Hill of Thieves (Cara Dillon album)" label="Hill of Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q467591" start="11089" end="11100" title="Cara Dillon" label="Cara Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796045" start="11130" end="11159" title="Arrogance Ignorance and Greed" label="Arrogance Ignorance and Greed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613061" start="11169" end="11184" title="Steve Knightley" label="Steve Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959759" start="11199" end="11212" title="Show of Hands" label="Show of Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q943578" start="11247" end="11264" title="Sir Patrick Spens" label="Sir Patrick Spens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776592" start="11274" end="11288" title="Martin Simpson" label="Martin Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017227" start="11306" end="11316" title="Sam Carter (musician)" label="Sam Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911853" start="11341" end="11357" title="John Kirkpatrick (musician)" label="John Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="11375" end="11385" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q447032" start="11416" end="11430" title="Nanci Griffith" label="Nanci Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q734254" start="11462" end="11474" title="Dick Gaughan" label="Dick Gaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833786" start="11535" end="11557" title="Transatlantic Sessions" label="Transatlantic Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108515" start="11597" end="11607" title="Chris Wood (folk musician)" label="Chris Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108457" start="11620" end="11631" title="Chris While" label="Chris While"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308368" start="11636" end="11650" title="Julie Matthews" label="Julie Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497592" start="11665" end="11668" title="Lau (band)" label="Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108515" start="11709" end="11719" title="Chris Wood (folk musician)" label="Chris Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q526970" start="11778" end="11792" title="Andy Partridge" label="Andy Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197010" start="11807" end="11816" title="Jim Moray" label="Jim Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602359" start="11850" end="11873" title="The Lark in the Morning" label="The Lark in the Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116575" start="11883" end="11895" title="Jackie Oates" label="Jackie Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116575" start="11913" end="11925" title="Jackie Oates" label="Jackie Oates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11950" end="11964" title="Tom McConville" label="Tom McConville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729710" start="11982" end="11999" title="The Demon Barbers" label="The Demon Barbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q310300" start="12030" end="12042" title="James Taylor" label="James Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="12073" end="12085" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q467103" start="12171" end="12183" title="Julie Fowlis" label="Julie Fowlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701894" start="12196" end="12205" title="John Tams" label="John Tams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167706" start="12210" end="12221" title="Barry Coope" label="Barry Coope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497592" start="12236" end="12239" title="Lau (band)" label="Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247607" start="12260" end="12272" title="Prodigal Son (Martin Simpson album)" label="Prodigal Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776592" start="12282" end="12296" title="Martin Simpson" label="Martin Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776592" start="12349" end="12363" title="Martin Simpson" label="Martin Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741459" start="12428" end="12448" title="The Imagined Village" label="The Imagined Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989799" start="12466" end="12498" title="Rachel Unthank and the Winterset" label="Rachel Unthank and the Winterset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760567" start="12523" end="12535" title="Andy Cutting" label="Andy Cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="12553" end="12563" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q472578" start="12594" end="12605" title="John Martyn (singer)" label="John Martyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q528937" start="12630" end="12645" title="Shirley Collins" label="Shirley Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q858775" start="12665" end="12673" title="Dartford" label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131249" start="12723" end="12735" title="Seth Lakeman" label="Seth Lakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903579" start="12748" end="12761" title="Martin Carthy" label="Martin Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q763897" start="12766" end="12780" title="Dave Swarbrick" label="Dave Swarbrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="12795" end="12805" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500529" start="12826" end="12840" title="Freedom Fields" label="Freedom Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131249" start="12850" end="12862" title="Seth Lakeman" label="Seth Lakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729615" start="12906" end="12920" title="Karine Polwart" label="Karine Polwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646950" start="12953" end="12963" title="John Barleycorn" label="Barleycorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804419" start="12984" end="12997" title="Tim van Eyken" label="Tim van Eyken"/>
<link wikidata="Q596779" start="13023" end="13034" title="Chris Thile" label="Chris Thile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437161" start="13052" end="13063" title="Kris Drever" label="Kris Drever"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="13081" end="13091" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427551" start="13122" end="13131" title="Pentangle (band)" label="Pentangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164775" start="13162" end="13176" title="Danny Thompson" label="Danny Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984666" start="13201" end="13210" title="Nic Jones" label="Nic Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759368" start="13230" end="13242" title="The Ram Folk Club" label="The Ram Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q236638" start="13331" end="13342" title="Sandy Denny" label="Sandy Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145652" start="13345" end="13364" title="Fairport Convention" label="Fairport Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701894" start="13405" end="13414" title="John Tams" label="John Tams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577124" start="13427" end="13452" title="Spiers and Boden" label="John Spiers and Jon Boden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052881" start="13467" end="13472" title="Flook (band)" label="Flook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701894" start="13516" end="13525" title="John Tams" label="John Tams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108515" start="13580" end="13590" title="Chris Wood (folk musician)" label="Chris Wood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13595" end="13606" title="Hugh Lupton (folk musician)" label="Hugh Lupton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718206" start="13639" end="13651" title="The Bitter Withy" label="Bitter Withy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701894" start="13672" end="13681" title="John Tams" label="John Tams"/>
<link wikidata="Q467103" start="13700" end="13712" title="Julie Fowlis" label="Julie Fowlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210490" start="13737" end="13755" title="Michael McGoldrick" label="Michael McGoldrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q648789" start="13786" end="13796" title="Paul Brady" label="Paul Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q539955" start="13827" end="13843" title="Richard Thompson (musician)" label="Richard Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q447652" start="13861" end="13871" title="Kate Rusby" label="Kate Rusby"/>
<link wikidata="Q725884" start="13896" end="13912" title="Ashley Hutchings" label="Ashley Hutchings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="13942" end="13952" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q913069" start="14016" end="14030" title="Liege and Lief" label="Liege and Lief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145652" start="14040" end="14059" title="Fairport Convention" label="Fairport Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903579" start="14099" end="14112" title="Martin Carthy" label="Martin Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q450214" start="14125" end="14133" title="Aly Bain" label="Aly Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181821" start="14138" end="14153" title="Phil Cunningham (folk musician)" label="Phil Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379720" start="14168" end="14178" title="Oysterband" label="Oysterband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438179" start="14215" end="14225" title="Faultlines (album)" label="Faultlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729615" start="14235" end="14249" title="Karine Polwart" label="Karine Polwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729615" start="14328" end="14342" title="Karine Polwart" label="Karine Polwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733354" start="14375" end="14403" title="Famous Flower Of Serving Men" label="Famous Flower Of Serving Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903579" start="14424" end="14437" title="Martin Carthy" label="Martin Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729615" start="14456" end="14470" title="Karine Polwart" label="Karine Polwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007693" start="14495" end="14510" title="Kathryn Tickell" label="Kathryn Tickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q703905" start="14541" end="14567" title="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Jack Elliott" label="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Jack Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351527" start="14612" end="14622" title="Tom Paxton" label="Tom Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q816042" start="14640" end="14650" title="Bellowhead" label="Bellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14670" end="14680" title="Whapweasel" label="Whapweasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413921" start="14705" end="14718" title="Steeleye Span" label="Steeleye Span"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798" start="14738" end="14745" title="Hitchin" label="Hitchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q454425" start="14795" end="14805" title="June Tabor" label="June Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577124" start="14818" end="14843" title="John Spiers and Jon Boden" label="John Spiers and Jon Boden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094016" start="14858" end="14862" title="Danú" label="Danú"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197010" start="14906" end="14915" title="Jim Moray" label="Jim Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819835" start="14962" end="14973" title="Tommy Sands (Irish folk singer)" label="Tommy Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094016" start="14988" end="14992" title="Danú" label="Danú"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933545" start="15026" end="15039" title="Hughie Graeme" label="Hughie Graeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q454425" start="15060" end="15070" title="June Tabor" label="June Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197010" start="15089" end="15098" title="Jim Moray" label="Jim Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776592" start="15123" end="15137" title="Martin Simpson" label="Martin Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q763897" start="15168" end="15182" title="Dave Swarbrick" label="Dave Swarbrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q781634" start="15227" end="15238" title="Steve Earle" label="Steve Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959759" start="15256" end="15269" title="Show of Hands" label="Show of Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753881" start="15294" end="15312" title="Celtic Connections" label="Celtic Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q585941" start="15349" end="15358" title="Wentworth, South Yorkshire" label="Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581565" start="15398" end="15410" title="Eliza Carthy" label="Eliza Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962776" start="15423" end="15433" title="Nancy Kerr" label="Nancy Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133736" start="15438" end="15449" title="James Fagan (musician)" label="James Fagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q434372" start="15464" end="15469" title="Altan (band)" label="Altan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581565" start="15509" end="15521" title="Eliza Carthy" label="Eliza Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202017" start="15580" end="15594" title="Linda Thompson (singer)" label="Linda Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581565" start="15661" end="15673" title="Eliza Carthy" label="Eliza Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577124" start="15691" end="15716" title="John Spiers and Jon Boden" label="John Spiers and Jon Boden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247603" start="15748" end="15761" title="John McCusker" label="John McCusker"/>
<link wikidata="Q257267" start="15792" end="15805" title="Christy Moore" label="Christy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q520296" start="15850" end="15860" title="John Prine" label="John Prine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170766" start="15878" end="15888" title="Roy Bailey (folk singer)" label="Roy Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="15893" end="15902" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379720" start="15927" end="15937" title="Oysterband" label="Oysterband"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="15957" end="15966" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903579" start="16006" end="16019" title="Martin Carthy" label="Martin Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776592" start="16067" end="16081" title="Martin Simpson" label="Martin Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q447652" start="16128" end="16138" title="Kate Rusby" label="Kate Rusby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905380" start="16171" end="16189" title="Black Is the Color (of My True Love&amp;#x27;s Hair)" label="Black Is the Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q467591" start="16209" end="16220" title="Cara Dillon" label="Cara Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q783991" start="16235" end="16253" title="Cherish the Ladies" label="Cherish the Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q467591" start="16271" end="16282" title="Cara Dillon" label="Cara Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776592" start="16314" end="16328" title="Martin Simpson" label="Martin Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q662577" start="16359" end="16373" title="The Chieftains" label="The Chieftains"/>
<link wikidata="Q711515" start="16418" end="16430" title="Ralph McTell" label="Ralph McTell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145652" start="16461" end="16480" title="Fairport Convention" label="Fairport Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000536" start="16500" end="16509" title="Nettlebed" label="Nettlebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366921" start="16527" end="16538" title="Rory McLeod (singer-songwriter)" label="Rory McLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551621" start="16578" end="16592" title="Norma Waterson" label="Norma Waterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701894" start="16628" end="16637" title="John Tams" label="John Tams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701894" start="16704" end="16713" title="John Tams" label="John Tams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094016" start="16728" end="16732" title="Danú" label="Danú"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909640" start="16750" end="16760" title="Bill Jones (musician)" label="Bill Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210490" start="16792" end="16810" title="Michael McGoldrick" label="Michael McGoldrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q332953" start="16841" end="16852" title="Bert Jansch" label="Bert Jansch"/>
<link wikidata="Q353023" start="16884" end="16893" title="Taj Mahal (musician)" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168726" start="16919" end="16929" title="Bob Copper" label="Bob Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056516" start="16980" end="16991" title="Vin Garbutt" label="Vin Garbutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q447652" start="17031" end="17041" title="Kate Rusby" label="Kate Rusby"/>
<link wikidata="Q447652" start="17081" end="17091" title="Kate Rusby" label="Kate Rusby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730255" start="17152" end="17166" title="Maggie Holland" label="Maggie Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759277" start="17199" end="17218" title="The Raggle Taggle Gypsy" label="Raggle Taggle Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14031818" start="17238" end="17253" title="Waterson–Carthy" label="Waterson–Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14031818" start="17268" end="17283" title="Waterson–Carthy" label="Waterson–Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962776" start="17301" end="17311" title="Nancy Kerr" label="Nancy Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133736" start="17316" end="17327" title="James Fagan (musician)" label="James Fagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q529268" start="17359" end="17371" title="Martin Hayes (musician)" label="Martin Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="17397" end="17406" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q210734" start="17438" end="17457" title="Youssou N&amp;#x27;Dour" label="Youssou N&amp;#x27;Dour"/>
<link wikidata="Q529576" start="17486" end="17494" title="Joe Boyd" label="Joe Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698284" start="17499" end="17509" title="Lucy Durán" label="Lucy Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732965" start="17534" end="17547" title="Topic Records" label="Topic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q686319" start="17567" end="17579" title="Westhoughton" label="Westhoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344639" start="17597" end="17617" title="La Bottine Souriante" label="La Bottine Souriante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435791" start="17634" end="17657" title="Scots Trad Music Awards" label="Scots Trad Music Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954674" wikidata="Q5343032" url="?curid=954674" title="Edward G. Breen">
<text>Edward Grimes Breen (June 10, 1908, in Dayton, Ohio – May 8, 1991, in Dayton, Ohio) was an American politician of the Democratic party.

==Biography==
Ed Breen was born in the Phillips House, a fine old hotel in Dayton, Ohio. He was the son of John P. Breen, manager of the Phillips House.

Breen attended Corpus Christi Grammar School and earned his bachelor&#x27;s degree from the University of Dayton. After attending Ohio State University, Breen returned to Dayton to work in the hotel business, where he ran the Hilton Biltmore Hotel and later the Van Cleve Hotel.

During the Second World War, Breen, a Roman Catholic by faith, served as a Major (United States) in the United States Army Air Forces. He saw active duty in North Africa and in Italy. He was released from active duty and awarded the rank of lieutenant colonel in the Infantry Reserve.

In 1945, Breen was elected to the Board of Commissioners of Dayton, Ohio. His fellow commissioners elected him mayor.

In 1948, Breen resigned his seat on the city commission in order to seek the Democratic nomination for a seat in the United States House of Representatives. In that election, Breen successfully unseated Republican incumbent Raymond H. Burke. In 1950, Breen won re-election to the House, defeating Republican challenger Paul F. Schenck. However, ill health prompted Breen to resign from his seat early, on October 1, 1951. His old opponent Schenck was elected in a special election in 1951 to complete his term.

Returning to Dayton, Breen worked in the real estate and insurance industries. A few years later, he re-entered politics, running successfully for a seat on the Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County, Ohio, serving in that capacity from 1955 to 1960.

In 1956 he married Constance Focke and they had two children. Edward Grimes Breen is buried at Calvary Cemetery in Dayton. His son has written a book about his father called &quot;&quot;Lucky Eddie&quot;.&quot; http://www.thelocalhistorycompany.com/books/9780977042982/pages/9780977042982.html

==See also==

*Ohio&#x27;s 3rd congressional district

==References==
 Retrieved on 2008-03-19
* Flynn, Adrianne. “Ex-Mayor Edward Breen, 82, Dies; Served As U.S. Rep, County Commission President.” Dayton &quot;Daily News&quot;, May 9, 1991, page 3A.

== External links ==
*Congressman Edward G. Breen Collection, Special Collections and Archives, Wright State University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5343032" start="0" end="19" title="Edward G. Breen" label="Edward Grimes Breen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="39" end="51" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="78" end="82" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="91" end="99" title="United States of America" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="118" end="128" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092392" start="383" end="403" title="University of Dayton" label="University of Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="421" end="442" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="582" end="598" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="609" end="623" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="646" end="667" title="Major (United States)" label="Major (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="675" end="704" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="748" end="753" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544459" start="812" end="830" title="Lieutenant colonel (United States)" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225230" start="891" end="913" title="List of City Commissioners of Dayton, Ohio" label="Board of Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225230" start="968" end="973" title="List of mayors of Dayton, Ohio" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1093" end="1131" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1179" end="1189" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298821" start="1200" end="1216" title="Raymond H. Burke" label="Raymond H. Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150567" start="1295" end="1310" title="Paul F. Schenck" label="Paul F. Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q485600" start="1675" end="1698" title="Montgomery County, Ohio" label="Montgomery County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080703" start="2055" end="2093" title="Ohio&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Ohio&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954681" wikidata="Q756322" url="?curid=954681" title="Volvo S40">
<text>The Volvo S40 is a series of subcompact executive cars marketed and produced by the Swedish manufacturer Volvo Cars from 1995 to 2012, offered as a more mainstream alternative to the compact executive Volvo S60 to compete in a lower pricing bracket. The S40 was more or less positioned against premium-leaning small family cars like the Volkswagen Jetta as well as some mass-market large family cars.

The first generation (1995–2004) was introduced in 1995 with the S40 (S from saloon) and V40 (V from versatility, estate) cars.

The second generation was released in 2003, and the estate variant became differentiated from the sedan, having its name changed to [[Volvo V50|V50]].

The range was replaced by the Volvo V40 five door hatchback in 2012.

== First generation (1995–2004)==
During August 1995, Volvo released its new series, with the intention of calling the cars S4 and F4. However, as Audi had already reserved the &quot;S4&quot; name, Volvo opted to name the range S40 (saloon), and V40 (estate). These cars were manufactured at the Nedcar factory at Born in the Netherlands (a pre Ford joint venture between Volvo and Mitsubishi Motors) and based on a common platform with the Mitsubishi Carisma, later used by the Proton Waja. They were also the last Volvos to be produced at the Born plant; a lineage that had begun in the early 1970s with Volvo&#x27;s collaboration with DAF that had led to the Volvo 66 and the Volvo 300 series.

In the United Kingdom, it cost approximately 50% more than the related Mitsubishi Carisma. The car helped change perceptions of Volvo: &quot;The S40/V40 range was the car that finally persuaded buyers that Volvo really could build a credible compact executive car&quot;, reported the RAC. For the 2000 model year, Volvo expanded the S40/V40&#x27;s market to North America, where this range went on sale exclusively with the 1.9 liter turbo.

The V40, with a drag coefficient of 0.32, was the first whole model to be introduced under the direction of the British designer Peter Horbury, Volvo’s design director, and was marketed in Australia, South America and the Far East. The V40 was named the &quot;Most Beautiful Estate Car in the World&quot; at an Italian award ceremony. The official premiere was at the Frankfurt Motor Show, in September 1995, with the V40 premiering in December 1995, at the Bologna Motor Show.

In July 2000, Volvo updated the 40 Series (&quot;Phase II&quot;), implementing a number of technical improvements, including improved engine management, diesel direct fuel injection, extra safety features, larger brake discs, new front suspension and steering, revised rear suspension, larger tyres and a wider track.

A minor facelift gave more streamlining, slightly different front wings and front bumper, and larger front indicators, as well as minor instruments and fascia redesign.

In late 2002 there was a subtle update to the range. On the outside there was a new &quot;egg crate&quot; style grille and colour-keyed trim mouldings. Inside, there was a three-spoke steering wheel and new instruments with four dials. Other changes include improved fuel economy, new side-impact curtain airbags, updated seats and a new key with integrated remote.

The 40 Series cars were equipped with four-cylinder engines, such as a Renault-sourced 1.9 turbo diesel or 1.6 (1587 cc), 1.8 (1731 cc, later increased to 1783 cc), 2.0T (1948 cc), 1.9 T4 (1855 cc, later increased to 1948 cc) or 2.0 (1948 cc) fuel injected gasoline engines. All of the gasoline engines are derivatives of the Volvo Modular series which started life in the Volvo 960 and was seen in both 5 and 6 cylinder layouts in Volvo&#x27;s bigger FWD cars.

There was also a 1.8 L (1834 cc) petrol direct injection engine provided by Mitsubishi as part of the platform sharing between the 40 series and the Carisma. The Volvo S40/V40 series was a completely new car from the ground up, only one engine – the 1.9 turbo diesel – carried over from the old 400 Series.

The low (2.0T) and high (1.9 T4) pressure turbo variants were positioned at the top of the motor range. The 2.0T was rounded down and badged as 1.9T and was the only engine available in North America. The five speed manual transmission, widely available in Europe, was not certified in North American S40s, with the five speed automatic as the only option. No electric CVT was planned, unlike the 440 HTA / High Tech Auto CVT that had been released before the 400 series was completely phased out.

In the United Kingdom, trim levels were S, XS, SE and CD. Later on, trim levels offered were supplemented with SE Lux and Sport Lux trim designations. A limited edition &#x27;Xi&#x27; trim level was also offered for a short run on Phase 1 and Phase 1.5 cars, often painted yellow with black bezel headlamps.

The Volvo S40 was the first car to earn a four star Euro-NCAP safety rating.

===Engines===

===Sales===

====S40====

Total produced: 576,543

====V40 sales====

Total produced: 423,491

===Limited editions===

====Super Tourer (Australia)====

A special edition of the S40 T4 and V40 T4 sold in Australia in 2000. These were available in Panama Yellow, black or silver and came with headlights with black bezels, leather upholstery and 16&quot; &quot;Ares&quot; alloy wheels.

====Sports Pack====

Introduced in February 2003 was the S40 and V40 Sports Pack. These models featured the sports chassis with Nivomat body levelling, 17&quot; &quot;Arcadia&quot; wheels, headlamps with black bezels, clear side side marker lights, body-coloured trim and chrome door handles.

These were available only in Silver, Sapphire Black and Virtual Blue (all metallic), and featured side sills and the lower sections of the front and rear spoilers painted in Titanium Grey metallic. Interior colour was black with combination cloth/leather trim.

===Motorsport===

The S40 was homologated for racing in the Super Touring category on 1 January 1997. It competed in the British Touring Car Championship with Tom Walkinshaw Racing between 1997 and 1999 with Rickard Rydell winning the 1998 title. In Australia, Rickard Rydell and Jim Richards won the 1998 AMP Bathurst 1000. The S40 also competed in the Australian Super Touring Championship with Volvo Dealer Racing in 1998 and 1999, with Volvo winning the Manufacturers Championship in its second year. It also competed in the Swedish Touring Car Championship and the 2003 Norwegian Touring Car Championship.
== Second generation (2003–2012)==
&quot;For the wagon variant, see Volvo V50, for convertible variant, see Volvo C70, for hatchback, see Volvo C30&quot;

First shown at the September 2003 Frankfurt Motor Show, with production commencing in October, the second generation S40 introduced a new design based on the Volvo P1 platform built at the Volvo Cars factory in Ghent, Belgium. Going on sale part way through the 2004 model year, it is sometimes known as the 2004.5 Volvo S40. 4,566 examples were built in calendar year 2003, with 16 cars having been registered in Sweden. A few months later, the V40 was replaced by the estate V50, also based on the P1 platform and built in Ghent.

The S40 was nominated for the &quot;World Car of the Year&quot; award for 2005, and won the Canadian Car of the Year &quot;Best New Sport Compact&quot; award for 2005. It was also elected the &quot;South African Car of the Year&quot; for 2005 by the &quot;South African Guild of Motoring Journalists&quot;.

The chassis for this car and the majority of its components were developed by Volvo, however similar mechanical components can be found in the Mazda3 and the European Ford Focus. It had the latest generation of Volvo&#x27;s modular five cylinder engines; the first of Volvo&#x27;s smaller range to get more than four cylinders.

The inline-fives were frequently improved upon by Volvo since the engine&#x27;s debut in 1991 for the 1992 model year Volvo 850. The top-of-the-line S40/V50 T5 AWD, as well as the 2.4 and 2.4i, powertrain is still made by Volvo. The transmission is developed with Getrag at Volvo&#x27;s Köping Transmission Center in Sweden, and the AWD system bought from Haldex Traction of Sweden.

The S40/V50 T5 (one of the several variants) features the 2.5 L B5254T3 (later B5254T7) (2521 cc) five-cylinder fuel-injected engine with a high pressure turbocharger. The valvetrain has four valves per cylinder and is a DOHC design.

The engine is transversely mounted at the front of the vehicle and was available with the M66W (front wheel drive) or M66C (all wheel drive) drivetrains. In the United States, the manual (six speed) transmission was only available on the V50 in 2006, 2007 and 2010 and only with AWD and R-line trim.

The initial 2.0 diesel engine was the DW10, produced by PSA. A new range of engines and transmissions were introduced at the end of May 2010 (see &quot;engine specifications&quot; below).

There was also 1.8 L (Mazda L engine) petrol version available in the European markets.
===Engines===

===Marketing===
Volvo launched an advertising campaign for the S40 titled &quot;The Mystery of Dalarö,&quot; using a documentary style video approach. The eight minute film was credited to fictitious Venezuelan film maker Carlos Soto. In fact, as was disclosed later, it was directed by Spike Jonze.

The film is set on 25 October 2003, where 32 people supposedly purchased a Volvo S40, at the same local Volvo dealership in Dalarö, a small village to the south east of Stockholm. In addition to this film, a four minute documentary of the documentary, calling into question the validity of the events, was posted as Soto&#x27;s &quot;personal edit&quot; on his alleged homepage.

The S40 was the first Volvo car to be launched in China by the brand under the Changan Ford joint venture and commenced production in March 2006. Engines choices consisted of the 2.0, 2.4 and 2.5 litre petrol engines paired with either a 5 speed manual or 6 speed dual clutch gearbox.

===Facelift===
The S40 was refreshed for April 2007. Improvements include improved audio systems, increased storage space and new safety features like emergency brake lights which flash rapidly during hard braking to alert traffic behind the car. The new S40 also comes with optional active bi xenon headlights which point the light beam in the direction of the road as it curves (standard in SE Lux models).

There was also an optional BLIS (blind spot information system) camera located on the side mirrors which alerts the driver of passing vehicles beside the car.

Volvo released the 2.0 litre diesel Powershift on the third week of February 2008, except in Ireland, where it was released in the last week of May, because of delivery intervals.

The T5 model received a new engine (the B5254T7) with a performance increase of , giving an output of at the crank The D5 engine became available with a manual gearbox offering of torque and an automatic transmission offering in the second half of 2007.

The model of 2009 saw rear end boot lid changes, with wider spacing of the &#x27;Volvo&#x27; lettering and larger characters, as in the newer Volvo models.

In 2010, the new, larger, circular Volvo logo appeared on the front grille, in the United States, a manual transmission was briefly available with the T5 AWD version. In North America, the naturally aspirated five cylinder engine, all wheel drive, and manual transmission were all dropped for the model year of 2011, leaving only the automatic, front wheel drive T5 in base and R-Design trims. The model year of 2011 was the last for the S40 in the United States and Canada.

===Engine specifications (2011)===
From the end of May 2010, a new range of engines were available for the so called &quot;2011 model&quot;.

The range now included three petrol engines (1.6, 2.0 and T5, the latter only available with front-wheel drive and automatic transmission), four diesel engines (the existing DRIVe and the new D2, D3 and D4) and the 2.0F flexible-fuel engine that can run either on normal petrol or E85, an ethanol petrol mixture. Production ended in May 2012.

The updated 2.0 and T5 and the new D2, D3 and D4 are compliant with the Euro 5 emission standard (the rest are Euro 4 compliant), and the DRIVe included a start-stop system for reduced fuel consumption and emissions. New six speed gearboxes are used in the D2 (manual: B6 D2), D3 and D4 (manual: M66D, automatic: Aisin AWF21).
(*) Available from September 2010

Note updated: In 2012 the last variant of the S40 2.0 Comfort, was the same 2.0 Petrol Engine, but with a PowerShift 6 speed automatic transmition. Adding to this, was a little differences in headlights and tail lights.

=== S40 sales ===

Total produced: 602,910 (1995–2012)

==Successor==
The S40 (with it siblings V50 and C30) were discontinued in 2012. The closest replacements in Volvo&#x27;s lineup at the time were the V40 (introduced in 2012), along with the existing S60 and V60. With this strategy, Volvo aimed to streamline its lineup and compete more directly with manufacturers such as BMW, Audi, and Mercedes-Benz.

In 2016, Volvo presented the Concept 40.1 (SUV) and 40.2 (sedan) as previews of a future 40-series. These concepts hinted at a potential successor to the S40 and V50. Reports suggested that Volvo was considering a broader 40-series lineup, including a sedan, a wagon, a hatchback, a coupe, a convertible, an SUV, and a crossover.

Ultimately, Volvo introduced three models in the compact premium segment: the XC40/EX40, the EC40, and the Polestar 2. The XC40, launched in 2017, became Volvo&#x27;s primary compact model, while the fully electric EC40 followed in 2023. Meanwhile, the Polestar 2, introduced in 2020, served as a sedan-like alternative under Volvo&#x27;s performance brand, Polestar. However, a direct sedan or station wagon successor to the S40 and V50 was never produced.

==See also==
* Volvo V50, estate variant of the second generation
* Volvo C30, three door hatchback bearing the same design as the second generation
* Volvo C70, coupé and convertible version of both the first and the second generation
* Volvo S70, mid size car bearing a similar front end design with the first generation

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q756322" start="4" end="13" title="Volvo S40" label="Volvo S40"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155305" start="29" end="53" title="subcompact executive car" label="subcompact executive car"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="105" end="115" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123538" start="201" end="210" title="Volvo S60" label="Volvo S60"/>
<link wikidata="Q946808" start="310" end="327" title="small family cars" label="small family cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q697152" start="337" end="353" title="Volkswagen Jetta" label="Volkswagen Jetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940287" start="382" end="399" title="large family cars" label="large family cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q756322" start="467" end="470" title="Volvo S40" label="S40"/>
<link wikidata="Q756322" start="491" end="494" title="Volvo S40" label="V40"/>
<link wikidata="Q756322" start="663" end="680" title="Volvo S40" label="[[Volvo V50|V50]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574600" start="713" end="722" title="Volvo V40 (P1)" label="Volvo V40"/>
<link wikidata="Q167158" start="1049" end="1055" title="VDL Nedcar" label="Nedcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="1135" end="1152" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327305" start="1194" end="1212" title="Mitsubishi Carisma" label="Mitsubishi Carisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271445" start="1232" end="1243" title="Proton Waja" label="Proton Waja"/>
<link wikidata="Q27489" start="1391" end="1394" title="DAF Trucks" label="DAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754746" start="1415" end="1423" title="Volvo 66" label="Volvo 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475410" start="1432" end="1448" title="Volvo 300 series" label="Volvo 300 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="1909" end="1925" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900865" start="2022" end="2035" title="Peter Horbury" label="Peter Horbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q57583" start="2261" end="2281" title="Frankfurt Motor Show" label="Frankfurt Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187361" start="2351" end="2369" title="Bologna Motor Show" label="Bologna Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784109" start="3266" end="3279" title="Straight-four engine" label="four-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866398" start="3554" end="3574" title="Volvo Modular engine" label="Volvo Modular series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761910" start="3724" end="3747" title="Gasoline direct injection" label="petrol direct injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q223400" start="4859" end="4868" title="Euro-NCAP" label="Euro-NCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505306" start="5902" end="5915" title="Super Touring" label="Super Touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q849783" start="5963" end="5995" title="British Touring Car Championship" label="British Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q927748" start="6001" end="6022" title="Tom Walkinshaw Racing" label="Tom Walkinshaw Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q933917" start="6050" end="6064" title="Rickard Rydell" label="Rickard Rydell"/>
<link wikidata="Q918327" start="6077" end="6087" title="1998 British Touring Car Championship" label="1998 title"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6092" end="6101" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070604" start="6122" end="6134" title="Jim Richards (racing driver)" label="Jim Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593311" start="6143" end="6165" title="1998 AMP Bathurst 1000" label="1998 AMP Bathurst 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824732" start="6196" end="6233" title="Australian Super Touring Championship" label="Australian Super Touring Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395750" start="6239" end="6258" title="Volvo Dealer Racing" label="Volvo Dealer Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q529174" start="6371" end="6403" title="Swedish Touring Car Championship" label="Swedish Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601683" start="6412" end="6451" title="2003 Norwegian Touring Car Championship season" label="2003 Norwegian Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077010" start="6521" end="6530" title="Volvo V50" label="Volvo V50"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6561" end="6570" title="Volvo C70#Second generation (2006–2013)" label="Volvo C70"/>
<link wikidata="Q835043" start="6591" end="6600" title="Volvo C30" label="Volvo C30"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101436" start="6766" end="6783" title="Volvo P1/Mazda BK/Ford Global C-car Platform" label="Volvo P1 platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="6819" end="6824" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987622" start="7177" end="7198" title="World Car of the Year" label="World Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029809" start="7233" end="7257" title="Canadian Car of the Year" label="Canadian Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095456" start="7353" end="7368" title="Car of the Year" label="Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q911466" start="7592" end="7598" title="Mazda3" label="Mazda3"/>
<link wikidata="Q209029" start="7616" end="7626" title="Ford Focus" label="Ford Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866398" start="7660" end="7702" title="Volvo Modular engine" label="Volvo&amp;#x27;s modular five cylinder engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="7938" end="7941" title="Four-wheel drive" label="AWD"/>
<link wikidata="Q548212" start="8042" end="8048" title="Getrag" label="Getrag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570803" start="8134" end="8149" title="Haldex Traction" label="Haldex Traction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8226" end="8233" title="Volvo Modular engine#B5254T3" label="B5254T3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8241" end="8248" title="Volvo Modular engine#B5254T7" label="B5254T7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482297" start="8260" end="8273" title="straight-5" label="five-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="8274" end="8287" title="Fuel injection" label="fuel-injected"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="8316" end="8328" title="turbocharger" label="turbocharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430995" start="8349" end="8373" title="multi-valve" label="four valves per cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="8383" end="8387" title="DOHC" label="DOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q611714" start="8411" end="8423" title="transverse engine" label="transversely"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304402" start="8736" end="8740" title="PSA EW/DW engine" label="DW10"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="9190" end="9199" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q259913" start="9277" end="9288" title="Spike Jonze" label="Spike Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q748257" start="9415" end="9421" title="Dalarö" label="Dalarö"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="9460" end="9469" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25138439" start="9750" end="9762" title="Changan Ford" label="Changan Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467901" start="10563" end="10573" title="Powershift" label="Powershift"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10748" end="10755" title="Volvo Modular engine#B5254T7" label="B5254T7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="10861" end="10867" title="Manual transmission" label="manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="10902" end="10924" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637223" start="11498" end="11506" title="Volvo R" label="R-Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q502048" start="11767" end="11780" title="petrol engine" label="petrol engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="11831" end="11848" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="11853" end="11875" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="11883" end="11896" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483990" start="11958" end="11971" title="flexible-fuel" label="flexible-fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799454" start="12019" end="12022" title="E85" label="E85"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="12027" end="12034" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q932442" start="12154" end="12160" title="Euro 5" label="Euro 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="12161" end="12178" title="emission standard" label="emission standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q932442" start="12193" end="12199" title="Euro 4" label="Euro 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q845900" start="12237" end="12254" title="start-stop system" label="start-stop system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="12313" end="12322" title="gearboxes" label="gearboxes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12351" end="12356" title="B6 D2" label="B6 D2"/>
<link wikidata="Q409907" start="12395" end="12400" title="Aisin" label="Aisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655152" start="12401" end="12406" title="AWTF-80 SC" label="AWF21"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="13043" end="13046" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="13048" end="13052" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="13058" end="13071" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077010" start="13879" end="13888" title="Volvo V50" label="Volvo V50"/>
<link wikidata="Q835043" start="13932" end="13941" title="Volvo C30" label="Volvo C30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332044" start="14015" end="14024" title="Volvo C70" label="Volvo C70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537829" start="14102" end="14111" title="Volvo S70" label="Volvo S70"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954682" wikidata="Q393034" url="?curid=954682" title="Ages">
<text>Ages may refer to:
*Advanced glycation end-products, known as AGEs
*Ages, Kentucky, census-designated place, United States 
*&quot;Ages&quot; (album) by German electronic musician Edgar Froese
*The geologic time scale, a system of chronological measurement that relates stratigraphy to time
*Arnold Ages (1935-2020), Canadian scholar, writer, and journalist

==See also==
*Age (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q393034" start="0" end="4" title="Ages" label="Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556837" start="20" end="50" title="Advanced glycation end-product" label="Advanced glycation end-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692138" start="68" end="82" title="Ages, Kentucky" label="Ages, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606507" start="125" end="149" title="Ages (album)" label="&amp;quot;Ages&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="198" end="217" title="geologic time scale" label="geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q100708401" start="292" end="303" title="Arnold Ages" label="Arnold Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q416981" start="373" end="393" title="Age (disambiguation)" label="Age (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954684" wikidata="Q1574600" url="?curid=954684" title="Volvo V40 (2012–2019)">
<text>| height = 
| weight = 
| designer = 
| sp = 

The Volvo V40 is a small family car (C-segment in Europe) manufactured and marketed by Volvo Cars from 2012 to 2019. It was unveiled at the 2012 Geneva Motor Show, and was on sale in Europe between 2012 and 2019.

==Models==

===V40===

The V40 was designed by American Chris Benjamin, the interior is the work of Pontus Fontaeus, and was the last Volvo to be designed under Steve Mattin, before he departed the company. It is built on the Global C platform with modifications to the electric power steering, and revised spring and damper settings.

The engine lineup at launch are: two petrol engines; a 1.6 litre EcoBoost I4 producing either 150 or 180 hp, dependent on specification, and a 2.5 litre Volvo B525 I5 producing 254 hp, and two diesel engines; a 1.6 litre PSA Peugeot Citroën / Ford Duratorq engine, which produces 115 hp, whilst only emitting 94 g/km of CO2, and a 2.0 litre I5 Volvo diesel engine available in two versions, 150 hp and 177 hp. In some countries, the V40 T5 uses a 2.0 litre I5 (B5204T9) producing 213 hp @ 6000 rpm and 300 nm from 2,700 to 5,000 rpm.

From the model year of 2014, Volvo has begun fitting its in-house developed Drive E (VEA) diesel and petrol engines to the V40. As of January 2015, these engines are available in the new V40 D4 (replacing the previous five cylinder D4) and V40 T5 (replacing the petrol five cylinder T5). Also available is the IntelliSafe safety precrash system.

Available in both the V40 and V40 Cross Country bodies, the D4 Drive E includes a four-cylinder twin turbo diesel engine rated and , a six speed manual transmission tuned for improved fuel economy, pressure feedback from each fuel injector, reduced friction, and a smart valve solution on the cooling system for a more rapid heat up phase after a cold start.

The T5 Drive-E includes a four-cylinder turbo petrol engine rated and , with eight speed automatic transmission.

These new engines replace the older, but identically branded, five cylinder engines. After introduction of the VEA D4 and T5, the 1.6 D2 and 2.0 five cylinder D3 are replaced with VEA 2.0 D2 and D3 engines. The 1.6 EcoBoost and 2.0 five cylinder are replaced with VEA 2.0 T2, T3, and T4 engines. For some petrol automatic models, a de stroked version of the VEA 2.0, with 1.5 litre displacement, is used for T2 and T3.

=== Pre-facelift ===
=== 2016 facelift ===
A facelifted V40 made an appearance. This new version of the V40 includes the Thor&#x27;s hammer headlights on all variants of V40, as featured on the XC90 II, S90 II and V90 II. Also added the option opened for straw patterns on the interior seats.
== Volvo V40 Cross Country (2013–2019) ==
The Cross Country is a version of the Volvo V40 with protective body panels, bigger wheels and tyres along with an increased ride height. Its T4 and T5 petrol variants feature Haldex Gen-5 All Wheel Drive as an option, along with hill descent control. The V40 Cross Country is equipped with more powerful engines than the regular V40.

==Engines==

The 1.5 petrol VEA is a de stroked version of the 2.0 petrol VEA, with matching bores of 82.0mm, but the 1.5 having a stroke of 70.9mm compared to the 2.0 stroke of 93.2mm

==Awards==
* &quot;Best Executive Hatch&quot;, at the &quot;Scottish Car of the Year&quot; awards in 2012, which was held in Glasgow, Scotland on 14 October 2012.
* &quot;Auto Express Safety Award 2013&quot;, held at Grand Connaught Rooms, London on 2 July 2013.
* &quot;Best Medium Family Car and 2013 Car of the Year&quot;, by the motoring website Carsite.co.uk on 2 July 2013.
* Tow Car Awards 2013: The V40 Cross Country was recognized for its towing performance, with a 30-60 mph time of 11.7 seconds when towing a caravan.
* Road Safety Award 2014: The V40 received the Road Safety Award in 2014, acknowledging its innovative safety features and high Euro NCAP ratings.
* Tow Car Awards 2015: The V40 Cross Country variant was praised for its towing capabilities, achieving a 30-60 mph time of 9.8 seconds with a caravan in tow.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1574600" start="51" end="60" title="Volvo V40 (2012–2019)" label="Volvo V40"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266730" start="66" end="82" title="small family car" label="small family car"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266730" start="84" end="93" title="C-segment" label="C-segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="134" end="144" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo Cars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="187" end="209" title="Geneva Motor Show#2012" label="2012 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="230" end="236" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4285048" start="422" end="434" title="Steve Mattin" label="Steve Mattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101436" start="487" end="504" title="Ford C1 platform" label="Global C platform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="662" end="673" title="Ford EcoBoost engine#EcoBoost I-4" label="EcoBoost I4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="750" end="763" title="Volvo Modular engine#2.5" label="Volvo B525 I5"/>
<link wikidata="Q275623" start="818" end="837" title="Groupe PSA" label="PSA Peugeot Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748650" start="840" end="860" title="Ford Duratorq engine" label="Ford Duratorq engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482297" start="1054" end="1056" title="Straight-five engine" label="I5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866398" start="1058" end="1065" title="Volvo Modular engine" label="B5204T9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001988" start="1442" end="1453" title="IntelliSafe" label="IntelliSafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001988" start="1461" end="1476" title="precrash system" label="precrash system"/>
<link wikidata="Q819308" start="2938" end="2958" title="hill descent control" label="hill descent control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095456" start="3299" end="3314" title="Car of the Year" label="Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="3355" end="3362" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401164" start="3447" end="3468" title="Grand Connaught Rooms" label="Grand Connaught Rooms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954686" wikidata="Q7158960" url="?curid=954686" title="Pedagogical pattern">
<text>A pedagogical pattern is the re-usable form of a solution to a problem or task in pedagogy, analogous to how a design pattern is the re-usable form of a solution to a design problem. Pedagogical patterns are used to document and share best practices of teaching. A network of interrelated pedagogical patterns is an example of a pattern language.

== Overview ==
In a 2001 paper for SIGCSE, Joseph Bergin wrote:

== Example structure of a pattern ==
Mitchell Weisburgh proposed nine aspects to documenting a pedagogical pattern for a certain skill. Not every pattern needs to include all nine. His listing is reproduced below:

* &quot;Name&quot; – single word or short phrase that refers to the pattern. This allows for rapid association and retrieval.
* &quot;Problem&quot; – definition of a problem, including its intent or a desired outcome, and symptoms that would indicate that this problem exists.
* &quot;Context&quot; – preconditions which must exist in order for that problem to occur; this is often a situation. When forces conflict, the resolutions of those conflicts is often implied by the context.
* &quot;Forces&quot; – description of forces or constraints and how they interact. Some of the forces may be contradictory. For example: being thorough often conflicts with time or money constraints.
* &quot;Solution&quot; – instructions, possibly including variants. The solution may include pictures, diagrams, prose, or other media.
* &quot;Examples&quot; – sample applications and solutions, analogies, visual examples, and known uses can be especially helpful, help user understand the context
* &quot;Resulting Context&quot; – result after the pattern has been applied, including postconditions and side effects. It might also include new problems that might result from solving the original problem.
* &quot;Rationale&quot; – the thought processes that would go into selecting this pattern, The rationale includes an explanation of why this pattern works, how forces and constraints are resolved to construct a desired outcome.
* &quot;Related Patterns&quot; – differences and relationships with other patterns, possibly predecessor, antecedents, or alternatives that solve similar problems.

== See also ==
* Modeling (psychology)
* Teacher education
* Teaching method

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* In this article, pedagogical patterns are called &quot;learning design patterns&quot;.

==External links==
*Pedagogical Patterns site
*E-LEN, tutorial on making e-learning design pattern
*Fourteen Pedagogical Patterns by Joseph Bergin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7158960" start="2" end="21" title="Pedagogical pattern" label="pedagogical pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="82" end="90" title="pedagogy" label="pedagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253831" start="111" end="125" title="design pattern" label="design pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="167" end="173" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q830382" start="235" end="248" title="best practice" label="best practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294584" start="329" end="345" title="pattern language" label="pattern language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390318" start="383" end="389" title="SIGCSE" label="SIGCSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149367" start="2230" end="2251" title="Modeling (psychology)" label="Modeling (psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374230" start="2254" end="2271" title="Teacher education" label="Teacher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813494" start="2274" end="2289" title="Teaching method" label="Teaching method"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954691" wikidata="Q1463985" url="?curid=954691" title="Soprano saxophone">
<text>The soprano saxophone is a small, high-pitched member of the saxophone family of woodwind instruments invented in the 1840s by Belgian instrument maker Adolphe Sax. Built in B♭ an octave above the tenor saxophone (or rarely, slightly smaller in C), the soprano is the third-smallest member of the saxophone family, which consists (from smallest to largest) of the soprillo, sopranino, soprano, alto, tenor, baritone, bass, contrabass, and subcontrabass. The soprillo and sopranino are rare instruments, making the soprano the smallest saxophone in common use.

==The instrument==
A transposing instrument pitched in the key of B, modern soprano saxophones with a high F key have a range from concert A3 to E6 (written low B to high F) and are therefore pitched one octave above the tenor saxophone. There is also a soprano saxophone pitched in C, which is uncommon; most examples were produced in America in the 1920s.

The soprano has all the keys of other saxophone models (with the exception of the low A on some baritones and altos). Soprano saxophones were originally keyed from low B to high E, but a low B mechanism was patented in 1887 and by 1910 nearly all saxophones were keyed to low B including sopranos. During the 1920s it became standard for sopranos to be keyed to high F. Starting in the 1950s, high F was offered as an option on some sopranos, and by the 1970s most professional-level instruments had a high F key. Nearly all sopranos made today are keyed to high F as standard, and some recent professional sopranos (e.g. those made by Yanagisawa, Selmer, and Yamaha) may have a high G key next to the F key. Additionally, skilled players can make use of the altissimo register, which allows them to cover these notes and play even higher, usually regardless of their instrument&#x27;s keyed range.

Many sopranos made since the 1990s feature detachable necks and will include one straight and one downward-curved neck. A fully straight soprano must be held upward and outward while playing, which allows it to project well and can allow for a more energetic appearance in performance. A curved neck allows the instrument to be held somewhat downward and still maintain a proper mouthpiece angle, which makes for easier use of a music stand and can reduce fatigue in the right arm for some players. Some also believe that a curved neck gives the soprano a warmer, less nasal tone, although this is the subject of debate among players. However, some players, technicians, and engineers prefer one-piece sopranos over those with detachable necks because the neck receiver/tenon system is prone to excessive wear and can develop leaks over time, hindering the instrument&#x27;s playability if not corrected. Due to many players&#x27; preference for curved necks, occasionally one-piece instruments are bent during manufacturing above the octave key (e.g. the Yamaha YSS-62R and YSS-82ZR). Some manufacturers also produce fully curved sopranos which look much like a small alto saxophone with a straighter neck/crook, as well as &#x27;tipped-bell&#x27; sopranos which are straight but have the bell angled upward somewhat and are typically used with a curved neck (these are often called &#x27;saxellos&#x27; for their resemblance to the somewhat rare Saxello model produced by King in the 1920s, though an actual Saxello&#x27;s bell is angled more and its bore is different). All variants have the same keys and range as the traditional straight soprano, but as with the necks, some players believe curved and tipped-bell sopranos sound warmer and less nasal.

Due to the higher pitch of the soprano, it is more sensitive with respect to intonation than the lower saxophones, so a player must have more skill with breath support, tongue and soft palate position, and embouchure (collectively known as voicing). It is also less forgiving of poor maintenance than lower saxophones. This has led to the common belief that soprano is either inherently out of tune, or far more difficult to play than lower saxophones, but many experienced players and teachers disagree with these sentiments.

Soprano saxophone mouthpieces are available in various designs, allowing players to tailor their tone as desired.

==In classical music==
The soprano saxophone is mainly used as a solo and chamber instrument in classical music, though it is occasionally used in a concert band or orchestra. It is included in the saxophone quartet and plays a lead role. Many solo pieces have been written for it by composers such as Heitor Villa-Lobos, Alan Hovhaness, Jennifer Higdon, Takashi Yoshimatsu, Charles Koechlin, John Mackey, Miklos Maros, Marc Mellits, Belinda Reynolds, John Corigliano, Rolf Martinsson, Sven-David Sandström, Kalevi Aho, Anders Hillborg, Britta Byström, Victoria Borisova-Ollas, , Paula af Malmborg Ward and Ann-Sofi Söderqvist

As an orchestral instrument, it has been used in several compositions. It was used by Richard Strauss in his Sinfonia Domestica, where included in the music are parts for four saxophones, including a soprano saxophone in C. It is also used in Maurice Ravel&#x27;s &quot;Boléro&quot; and has a featured solo directly following the tenor saxophone&#x27;s solo. Vincent d&#x27;Indy includes a soprano in his opera &quot;Fervaal&quot;.

Notable classical soprano saxophonists include Carina Rascher, Christine Rall, Michael Hernandez, Eugene Rousseau, Kenneth Tse, Jean-Yves Fourmeau, Jean-Denis Michat, Vincent David, John Harle, Mariano Garcia, Claude Delangle, Arno Bornkamp, Timothy McAllister, Christopher Creviston and Anders Paulsson.

==In jazz==
While not as popular as the alto and tenor saxes in jazz, the soprano saxophone has played a role in its evolution. Greats of the jazz soprano sax include 1930s virtuoso Sidney Bechet, 1950s innovator Steve Lacy, and, beginning with his landmark 1961 album &quot;My Favorite Things&quot;, John Coltrane.

Other well-known jazz players include: Wayne Shorter, Mack Goldsbury, Paul McCandless, Johnny Hodges, Walter Parazaider, Oliver Nelson, Bob Berg, Joe Farrell, Lucky Thompson, Sonny Fortune, Anthony Braxton, Sam Rivers, Gary Bartz, Bennie Maupin, Branford Marsalis, Kirk Whalum, Jan Garbarek, Danny Markovitch of Marbin, Paul Winter, Dave Liebman, Evan Parker, Hanah Jon Taylor, Sam Newsome, Kenny G, Jane Ira Bloom and Charlie Mariano (including in his work with bassist Eberhard Weber).

Other notable soprano saxophonists include Julian Smith, Joshua Redman, Jay Beckenstein, Dave Koz, Grover Washington Jr., Ronnie Laws, LeRoi Moore, Sarah Skinner of Red Dirt Skinners, and Nigerian Afrobeat multi-instrumentalist Fela Kuti.

Big band music sometimes calls for an alto or tenor saxophone player to double on soprano saxophone, particularly the lead alto.

==In popular culture==
Similar to the flute, the soprano saxophone is culturally associated with smooth jazz and easy listening. Thus, it is often the subject of various instrumental &quot;background music&quot; played in elevators, hotels, supermarkets, shopping malls and other indoor facilities.

Kenny G has become a colloquial icon of the instrument, featuring in occasional commercials and internet memes. Julian Smith, inspired by the work of Kenny G, placed third on &quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; in 2009, doing a solo performance in each of three appearances with a soprano saxophone.

In some popular music interpretations, the soprano saxophone is commonly paired with FM-type electric piano and electronic drum sounds to create a smooth, R&amp;B-like arrangement. It is also popular in Japanese music, most commonly within the AOR and &quot;city pop&quot; genre.

== Similar instruments ==
Because of its sometimes similar sound to the oboe, the soprano saxophone can be confused with it by listeners. The soprano saxophone may also be used as a substitute when an oboe is not available.

The soprano saxophone is also sometimes confused with the B clarinet. The clarinet has a distinctly different timbre, is usually much quieter, can play an augmented fourth lower and is commonly played as much as a fifth higher (though the soprano saxophone can also be played this high with altissimo, it is uncommon for a player to do so). The saxophone is made of brass and is either lacquered or plated with silver, gold, or occasionally black nickel, while the clarinet is either black or distinctly wood-grained, with silver or gold keys.

In 2001, François Louis created the aulochrome, a woodwind instrument made of two joined soprano saxophones, which can be played either in unison or in harmony.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*List of saxophonists

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1463985" start="4" end="21" title="Soprano saxophone" label="soprano saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="61" end="70" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="81" end="100" title="woodwind instrument" label="woodwind instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q181995" start="152" end="163" title="Adolphe Sax" label="Adolphe Sax"/>
<link wikidata="Q163026" start="364" end="372" title="soprillo" label="soprillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q656922" start="374" end="383" title="sopranino saxophone" label="sopranino"/>
<link wikidata="Q445275" start="394" end="398" title="Alto saxophone" label="alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="400" end="405" title="tenor saxophone" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q808218" start="407" end="415" title="baritone saxophone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q810551" start="417" end="421" title="bass saxophone" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783263" start="423" end="433" title="contrabass saxophone" label="contrabass"/>
<link wikidata="Q284715" start="439" end="452" title="subcontrabass saxophone" label="subcontrabass"/>
<link wikidata="Q217306" start="582" end="604" title="transposing instrument" label="transposing instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q910143" start="815" end="845" title="C soprano saxophone" label="soprano saxophone pitched in C"/>
<link wikidata="Q367931" start="1556" end="1566" title="Yanagisawa Wind Instruments" label="Yanagisawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850648" start="1568" end="1574" title="Henri Selmer Paris" label="Selmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="1580" end="1586" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1679" end="1688" title="Altissimo#Saxophone" label="altissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q930133" start="2249" end="2260" title="music stand" label="music stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="2876" end="2882" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742043" start="3294" end="3298" title="King Musical Instruments" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343038" start="3655" end="3665" title="intonation (music)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q811123" start="3731" end="3745" title="Diaphragmatic breathing" label="breath support"/>
<link wikidata="Q9614" start="3747" end="3753" title="tongue" label="tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056395" start="3758" end="3769" title="soft palate" label="soft palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q175234" start="3784" end="3794" title="embouchure" label="embouchure"/>
<link wikidata="Q671722" start="4124" end="4135" title="Mouthpiece (woodwind)" label="mouthpieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="4295" end="4302" title="chamber music" label="chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="4317" end="4332" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="4370" end="4382" title="concert band" label="concert band"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="4386" end="4395" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011052" start="4419" end="4436" title="saxophone quartet" label="saxophone quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q203514" start="4523" end="4541" title="Heitor Villa-Lobos" label="Heitor Villa-Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q542232" start="4543" end="4557" title="Alan Hovhaness" label="Alan Hovhaness"/>
<link wikidata="Q289468" start="4559" end="4574" title="Jennifer Higdon" label="Jennifer Higdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368689" start="4576" end="4594" title="Takashi Yoshimatsu" label="Takashi Yoshimatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q72543" start="4596" end="4612" title="Charles Koechlin" label="Charles Koechlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752667" start="4614" end="4625" title="John Mackey (composer)" label="John Mackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q450620" start="4673" end="4688" title="John Corigliano" label="John Corigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978465" start="4690" end="4705" title="Rolf Martinsson" label="Rolf Martinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q920770" start="4707" end="4727" title="Sven-David Sandström" label="Sven-David Sandström"/>
<link wikidata="Q521079" start="4729" end="4739" title="Kalevi Aho" label="Kalevi Aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q491037" start="4741" end="4756" title="Anders Hillborg" label="Anders Hillborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941422" start="4758" end="4772" title="Britta Byström" label="Britta Byström"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940135" start="4774" end="4797" title="Victoria Borisova-Ollas" label="Victoria Borisova-Ollas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="4935" end="4950" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q846689" start="4958" end="4976" title="Sinfonia Domestica" label="Sinfonia Domestica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="5092" end="5105" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q327331" start="5119" end="5125" title="Boléro" label="Boléro"/>
<link wikidata="Q313584" start="5208" end="5227" title="Vincent d&amp;#x27;Indy" label="Vincent d&amp;#x27;Indy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069779" start="5266" end="5273" title="Fervaal" label="Fervaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q986511" start="5329" end="5343" title="Rascher Saxophone Quartet" label="Carina Rascher"/>
<link wikidata="Q986511" start="5345" end="5359" title="Rascher Saxophone Quartet" label="Christine Rall"/>
<link wikidata="Q587336" start="5380" end="5395" title="Eugene Rousseau (saxophonist)" label="Eugene Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390761" start="5397" end="5408" title="Kenneth Tse" label="Kenneth Tse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170043" start="5410" end="5428" title="Jean-Yves Fourmeau" label="Jean-Yves Fourmeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q509448" start="5464" end="5474" title="John Harle" label="John Harle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096620" start="5492" end="5507" title="Claude Delangle" label="Claude Delangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794879" start="5509" end="5522" title="Arno Bornkamp" label="Arno Bornkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803915" start="5524" end="5542" title="Timothy McAllister" label="Timothy McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354154" start="5570" end="5585" title="Anders Paulsson" label="Anders Paulsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="5652" end="5656" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313519" start="5770" end="5783" title="Sidney Bechet" label="Sidney Bechet"/>
<link wikidata="Q504641" start="5801" end="5811" title="Steve Lacy (saxophonist)" label="Steve Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956380" start="5857" end="5887" title="My Favorite Things (John Coltrane album)" label="&amp;quot;My Favorite Things&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="5889" end="5902" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q317161" start="5944" end="5957" title="Wayne Shorter" label="Wayne Shorter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5959" end="5973" title="Mack Goldsbury" label="Mack Goldsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q330611" start="5975" end="5990" title="Paul McCandless" label="Paul McCandless"/>
<link wikidata="Q455176" start="5992" end="6005" title="Johnny Hodges" label="Johnny Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965783" start="6007" end="6024" title="Walter Parazaider" label="Walter Parazaider"/>
<link wikidata="Q720687" start="6026" end="6039" title="Oliver Nelson" label="Oliver Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q605063" start="6041" end="6049" title="Bob Berg" label="Bob Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q254605" start="6051" end="6062" title="Joe Farrell" label="Joe Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349922" start="6064" end="6078" title="Lucky Thompson" label="Lucky Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q491089" start="6080" end="6093" title="Sonny Fortune" label="Sonny Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q572924" start="6095" end="6110" title="Anthony Braxton" label="Anthony Braxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q722432" start="6112" end="6122" title="Sam Rivers (jazz musician)" label="Sam Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494823" start="6124" end="6134" title="Gary Bartz" label="Gary Bartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q817878" start="6136" end="6149" title="Bennie Maupin" label="Bennie Maupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q454819" start="6151" end="6168" title="Branford Marsalis" label="Branford Marsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493594" start="6170" end="6181" title="Kirk Whalum" label="Kirk Whalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q290083" start="6183" end="6195" title="Jan Garbarek" label="Jan Garbarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755142" start="6217" end="6223" title="Marbin" label="Marbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338162" start="6225" end="6236" title="Paul Winter" label="Paul Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175237" start="6238" end="6250" title="Dave Liebman" label="Dave Liebman"/>
<link wikidata="Q706941" start="6252" end="6263" title="Evan Parker" label="Evan Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216584" start="6283" end="6294" title="Sam Newsome" label="Sam Newsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q295777" start="6296" end="6303" title="Kenny G" label="Kenny G"/>
<link wikidata="Q546394" start="6305" end="6319" title="Jane Ira Bloom" label="Jane Ira Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q710462" start="6324" end="6339" title="Charlie Mariano" label="Charlie Mariano"/>
<link wikidata="Q368393" start="6376" end="6390" title="Eberhard Weber" label="Eberhard Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442403" start="6437" end="6449" title="Julian Smith (saxophonist)" label="Julian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q361927" start="6451" end="6464" title="Joshua Redman" label="Joshua Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q940085" start="6466" end="6481" title="Jay Beckenstein" label="Jay Beckenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173262" start="6483" end="6491" title="Dave Koz" label="Dave Koz"/>
<link wikidata="Q463678" start="6493" end="6514" title="Grover Washington Jr." label="Grover Washington Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2166019" start="6516" end="6527" title="Ronnie Laws" label="Ronnie Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809697" start="6529" end="6540" title="LeRoi Moore" label="LeRoi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955464" start="6559" end="6576" title="Red Dirt Skinners" label="Red Dirt Skinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="6582" end="6590" title="Nigerian" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q388296" start="6591" end="6599" title="Afrobeat" label="Afrobeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313868" start="6622" end="6631" title="Fela Kuti" label="Fela Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="6634" end="6642" title="Big band" label="Big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="6802" end="6807" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q831354" start="6861" end="6872" title="smooth jazz" label="smooth jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q848399" start="6877" end="6891" title="easy listening" label="easy listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432201" start="6953" end="6969" title="elevator music" label="background music"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="6986" end="6994" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="6997" end="7002" title="hotel" label="hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="7005" end="7016" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="7019" end="7032" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q295777" start="7064" end="7071" title="Kenny G" label="Kenny G"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442403" start="7176" end="7188" title="Julian Smith (saxophonist)" label="Julian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q295777" start="7214" end="7221" title="Kenny G" label="Kenny G"/>
<link wikidata="Q556444" start="7245" end="7270" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="7375" end="7388" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q139300" start="7452" end="7459" title="Yamaha DX7" label="FM-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="7460" end="7474" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327480" start="7479" end="7494" title="electronic drum" label="electronic drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="7522" end="7529" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q257533" start="7570" end="7584" title="Music of Japan" label="Japanese music"/>
<link wikidata="Q428656" start="7611" end="7614" title="Album-oriented rock" label="AOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q11307326" start="7625" end="7633" title="city pop" label="city pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="7720" end="7724" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="7933" end="7941" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q441739" start="8164" end="8173" title="altissimo" label="altissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821802" start="8454" end="8464" title="aulochrome" label="aulochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864322" start="8606" end="8626" title="List of saxophonists" label="List of saxophonists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954692" wikidata="Q734495" url="?curid=954692" title="Bud Tingwell">
<text>Charles William Tingwell AM (3 January 1923 – 15 May 2009), known professionally as Bud Tingwell or Charles &#x27;Bud&#x27; Tingwell, was an Australian film, television, theatre and radio actor. One of the veterans of Australian film, he acted in his first motion picture in 1946 and went on to appear in more than 100 films and numerous TV programs in both the United Kingdom and Australia.

==Early life and military service==
Tingwell was born in the Sydney suburb of Coogee, the son of William Harvey Tingwell and Enid (née Green). William volunteered as a surf lifesaver at Coogee Surf Life Saving Club where, in 1922, a colleague noticed Enid&#x27;s pregnancy and asked, &#x27;What&#x27;s budding there?&#x27;, and &#x27;Bud&#x27; became the nickname for their infant son. As an adolescent, Bud was encouraged by his father to train as an accountant, but Tingwell failed the entrance exam.

While still at school, he became a cadet at Sydney radio station 2CH, soon becoming the youngest radio announcer in Australia.

===Second World War===
In 1941, aged 18, Tingwell volunteered for war service overseas with the Royal Australian Air Force. Under the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan, personnel from Commonwealth air forces formed part of a joint training and assignment system. Consequently, Tingwell trained as a pilot in Canada during 1942. Despite damaging a Harvard training aircraft in August, he later qualified as a pilot and was commissioned as a pilot officer that December. He was posted to the Mediterranean Theatre and underwent operational training with No. 74 Operational Training Unit RAF, in British Palestine, and qualified to fly the Hawker Hurricane and Supermarine Spitfire.

In January 1944, he was posted to No. 680 Squadron RAF, a photo reconnaissance unit, and flew 75 sorties in Mosquitos and Spitfires during the Italian campaign. Other aircraft that Tingwell was qualified to fly included the Bristol Blenheim, Martin Baltimore, Bristol Beaufighter and Airspeed Oxford. He was promoted to flying officer in June 1943 and flight lieutenant in December 1944.

Towards the end of the war, Tingwell was transferred back to Australia. He was posted to No. 5 Operational Training Unit RAAF as a flying instructor in June 1945, and then in December 1945, after the war had ended, he was posted to No. 87 Squadron RAAF, flying photo-reconnaissance Mosquitoes, until his demobilisation in March 1946.

Tingwell&#x27;s war service earned him the 1939–45 Star, Italy Star, Defence Medal, War Medal 1939–1945, and Australia Service Medal 1939–1945. He remained a reservist into the 1950s.

==Post-war life and acting career==
===Australia===
After returning to Australia, Tingwell married his childhood sweetheart, Audrey May Wilson. They were to have two children, Christopher and Virginia.

He joined Doris Fitton&#x27;s Independent Theatre company and appeared on stage from the mid-1940s in such classics as &quot;The Little Foxes&quot; by Lillian Hellman and Jean Giraudoux&#x27;s &quot;The Madwoman of Chaillot&quot;

In 1946, Tingwell was given his first film role, in &quot;Smithy&quot;, cast as an RAAF control tower officer – winning the role since he could supply his own RAAF uniform.

Tingwell had an excellent supporting role in &quot;Bitter Springs&quot; (1950), made by Ealing Studios with Chips Rafferty; Tingwell played Rafferty&#x27;s bigoted son. He had a similar role in &quot;Kangaroo&quot; (1952), a Hollywood-financed film shot in Australia for 20th Century Fox. He then appeared in &quot;I Found Joe Barton&quot; (1952), the first TV show filmed in Australia.

Fox liked Tingwell&#x27;s work in &quot;Kangaroo&quot; and invited him to Los Angeles to play the role of Lt. Harry Carstairs in &quot;The Desert Rats&quot;, in which he appeared opposite Chips Rafferty, James Mason and Richard Burton. They offered him a long-term contract but Tingwell turned it down because he wanted to return to Australia.

Tingwell played the lead in &quot;King of the Coral Sea&quot; (1954) alongside Rafferty. In 1954, he co-starred with Gordon Chater in &quot;Top of the Bill&quot;, the first of the famous satirical revues staged at Sydney&#x27;s Phillip Street Theatre.

===England===
The Australian film and radio industry slumped with the advent of television and Tingwell decided to move to the UK. He used the opportunity of a role in Ealing&#x27;s &quot;The Shiralee&quot; (1957), which was filmed in Australia and London. Tingwell travelled to England to complete his scenes and decided to stay.

The following year, he took on his first recurring television role, as Australian surgeon Alan Dawson in the live TV serial &quot;Emergency Ward 10&quot; and its film spin-off &quot;Life in Emergency Ward 10&quot; (1959).

He had small roles in Ealing&#x27;s &quot;Dunkirk&quot; (1958), then &quot;Bobbikins&quot; (1959), &quot;Cone of Silence&quot; (1960), and &quot;Tarzan the Magnificent&quot; (1960).

Tingwell played the role of Inspector Craddock in all four films of the &quot;Miss Marple&quot; series, starring Margaret Rutherford, from 1961 to 1964: &quot;Murder, She Said&quot; (1961), &quot;Murder at the Gallop&quot; (1963), &quot;Murder Most Foul&quot; (1964) and &quot;Murder Ahoy!&quot; (1964). For Hammer Films he appeared in &quot;The Secret of Blood Island&quot; (1964) and &quot;&quot; (1966).

He had the lead in a TV series &quot;An Enemy of the State&quot; (1965).

In the late 1960s, he performed various minor voice roles for the Gerry Anderson &quot;Supermarionation&quot; TV series &quot;Thunderbirds&quot; and &quot;Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons&quot;, besides appearing in the first series of &quot;Catweazle&quot;.

In 1969 until the end of the play&#x27;s run, he appeared as Robert Danvers in the long running farce &quot;There&#x27;s a Girl in My Soup&quot; at the Comedy Theatre, London.

He was the recurring character of motel manager Kevin McArthur in &quot;Crossroads&quot; in the late 1960s and early 1970s. (Vincent Ball played McArthur in 1970–1973). He had a small role in &quot;Nobody Runs Forever&quot; (1968) with Rod Taylor.

===Return to Australia===
Tingwell appeared in many other films during his time in Britain, spending a total of 16 years as a &quot;London Aussie&quot;. In 1973, he returned to Australia with his wife and children, and shortly after won the role of Inspector Reg Lawson in the long-running TV series &quot;Homicide&quot;. This was followed by small roles in a number of major Australian films, such as &quot;Breaker Morant&quot; (1980), &quot;Puberty Blues&quot; (1981) and &quot;All the Rivers Run&quot; (1983). He also played the recurring role of farmer Ted Campbell in the soap &quot;A Country Practice&quot; in the late 1980s and early 1990s and as the Narrator from &quot;The Flying Scotsman in Australia&quot;

===Revival in popularity===
Tingwell&#x27;s career went through a quiet period during the late 1980s and early 1990s, until he took on the role of &#x27;Gramps&#x27; in &quot;Charlie the Wonderdog&quot;, a recurring segment on &quot;The Late Show&quot;, in 1993. His role in &quot;The Late Show&quot; was later to win him a major role as lawyer Lawrence Hammill in the film &quot;The Castle&quot; (1997). He later stated that this role helped him to recover from the death of his wife the previous year.

After the success of &quot;The Castle&quot;, Tingwell&#x27;s career underwent a revival during the late 1990s and early 2000s. This saw him take on small roles in the commercial films &quot;The Craic&quot; (1999) and &quot;The Dish&quot; (2000), and in the TV mini-series &quot;Changi&quot;, as well as the lead role in the romantic drama film &quot;Innocence&quot; (2000). He would also appear on sketch show &quot;Totally Full Frontal,&quot; playing himself, as well as a recurring guest role in the soap opera &quot;Neighbours&quot; from 2000 to 2003, playing Henry O&#x27;Rourke. He had previously appeared in the soap in 1993 as Bert Willis. He appeared as John Conroy in the musical theatre production &quot;The Man from Snowy River: Arena Spectacular&quot;, which toured Australian capital cities twice during 2002.

In 2004, Tingwell published a memoir, &quot;Bud: A Life&quot;. In 2006, he launched his own website, which attracted 500 registered users in just over a week. On 5 October that year, he created his first blog. He continued to act regularly until his death, in a number of films and TV programmes including eight episodes of &quot;Bed of Roses&quot; that aired in 2010. Among his last appearances, he hosted both &quot;Celebrity Circus&quot; and &quot;20 to 1&quot; and appeared on a celebrity special of &quot;Temptation&quot; with his daughter, Virginia.

==Accolades==

Tingwell was inducted into the Logie Hall of Fame in 1994. In 2008, he was inducted into Australian Film Walk of Fame in honour of his career and achievements in film and television.

Tingwell was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia in the Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours of June 1999.

===Honours, awards and nominations===
==Death==
Audrey Tingwell died in 1996. Bud Tingwell died in Epworth Hospital in Melbourne, thirteen years later, after a long battle with prostate cancer, on 15 May 2009. He was 86. He was given a state funeral, which was held at St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, Melbourne, on 20 May.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==Radio (partial)==
==Theatre==

===As actor===

===As writer / director===

==Discography==
===Charting singles===
==Publications==
==References==
==External links==
* Bud Tingwell at the National Film and Sound Archive
* &quot;Tingwell Takes Off&quot;, Royal Australian Air Force News
* Obituary in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;
* Obituary in &quot;The Independent&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q734495" start="0" end="24" title="Bud Tingwell" label="Charles William Tingwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="25" end="27" title="Member of the Order of Australia" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q734495" start="84" end="96" title="Bud Tingwell" label="Bud Tingwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q734495" start="100" end="132" title="Bud Tingwell" label="Charles &amp;#x27;Bud&amp;#x27; Tingwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973146" start="218" end="233" title="Australian film" label="Australian film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="454" end="460" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915712" start="471" end="477" title="Coogee, New South Wales" label="Coogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166856" start="579" end="607" title="Coogee Surf Life Saving Club" label="Coogee Surf Life Saving Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633077" start="962" end="965" title="2CH" label="2CH"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="1121" end="1147" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q166259" start="1159" end="1197" title="British Commonwealth Air Training Plan" label="British Commonwealth Air Training Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1214" end="1226" title="British Commonwealth" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40021" start="1377" end="1384" title="North American Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="1470" end="1483" title="pilot officer" label="pilot officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="1520" end="1541" title="Mediterranean, Middle East and African theatres of World War II" label="Mediterranean Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097768" start="1556" end="1576" title="Operational conversion unit" label="operational training"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="1623" end="1640" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="1667" end="1683" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="1688" end="1708" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043752" start="1745" end="1765" title="No. 680 Squadron RAF" label="No. 680 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="1769" end="1789" title="photo reconnaissance" label="photo reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633520" start="1808" end="1814" title="sortie" label="sortie"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="1819" end="1828" title="de Havilland Mosquito" label="Mosquitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="1854" end="1870" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Italian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q330417" start="1935" end="1951" title="Bristol Blenheim" label="Bristol Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493988" start="1953" end="1969" title="Martin Baltimore" label="Martin Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q831463" start="1971" end="1990" title="Bristol Beaufighter" label="Bristol Beaufighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q409219" start="1995" end="2010" title="Airspeed Oxford" label="Airspeed Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="2031" end="2045" title="flying officer" label="flying officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="2063" end="2080" title="flight lieutenant" label="flight lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043653" start="2189" end="2225" title="No. 5 Operational Training Unit RAAF" label="No. 5 Operational Training Unit RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043849" start="2332" end="2352" title="No. 87 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 87 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309070" start="2478" end="2490" title="1939–45 Star" label="1939–45 Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702037" start="2492" end="2502" title="Italy Star" label="Italy Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q524516" start="2504" end="2517" title="Defence Medal (United Kingdom)" label="Defence Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q684444" start="2519" end="2538" title="War Medal 1939–1945" label="War Medal 1939–1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823601" start="2544" end="2577" title="Australia Service Medal 1939–1945" label="Australia Service Medal 1939–1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297929" start="2833" end="2845" title="Doris Fitton" label="Doris Fitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017305" start="2853" end="2872" title="Independent Theatre" label="Independent Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552630" start="2948" end="2964" title="The Little Foxes" label="The Little Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q233701" start="2974" end="2989" title="Lillian Hellman" label="Lillian Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q309974" start="2994" end="3008" title="Jean Giraudoux" label="Jean Giraudoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q905658" start="3022" end="3046" title="The Madwoman of Chaillot" label="The Madwoman of Chaillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12127551" start="3112" end="3118" title="Smithy (1946 film)" label="Smithy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919025" start="3279" end="3293" title="Bitter Springs (film)" label="Bitter Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q72081" start="3316" end="3330" title="Ealing Studios" label="Ealing Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074634" start="3336" end="3350" title="Chips Rafferty" label="Chips Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210106" start="3428" end="3436" title="Kangaroo (1952 film)" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="3499" end="3515" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977183" start="3543" end="3561" title="I Found Joe Barton" label="I Found Joe Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q479462" start="3751" end="3766" title="The Desert Rats (film)" label="The Desert Rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074634" start="3804" end="3818" title="Chips Rafferty" label="Chips Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q209186" start="3820" end="3831" title="James Mason" label="James Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="3836" end="3850" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412332" start="3995" end="4016" title="King of the Coral Sea" label="King of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584962" start="4078" end="4091" title="Gordon Chater" label="Gordon Chater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4101" end="4116" title="Top of the Bill" label="Top of the Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185821" start="4189" end="4211" title="Phillip Street Theatre" label="Phillip Street Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763858" start="4402" end="4414" title="The Shiralee (1957 film)" label="The Shiralee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370751" start="4676" end="4693" title="Emergency Ward 10" label="Emergency Ward 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545146" start="4728" end="4753" title="Life in Emergency Ward 10" label="Life in Emergency Ward 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041350" start="4811" end="4818" title="Dunkirk (1958 film)" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934664" start="4844" end="4853" title="Bobbikins" label="Bobbikins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159466" start="4874" end="4889" title="Cone of Silence (film)" label="Cone of Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349184" start="4914" end="4936" title="Tarzan the Magnificent" label="Tarzan the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q193531" start="5030" end="5041" title="Miss Marple" label="Miss Marple"/>
<link wikidata="Q230143" start="5065" end="5084" title="Margaret Rutherford" label="Margaret Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q197233" start="5111" end="5127" title="Murder, She Said" label="Murder, She Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q339029" start="5148" end="5168" title="Murder at the Gallop" label="Murder at the Gallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q492124" start="5189" end="5205" title="Murder Most Foul (film)" label="Murder Most Foul"/>
<link wikidata="Q492108" start="5229" end="5241" title="Murder Ahoy!" label="Murder Ahoy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="5260" end="5272" title="Hammer Films" label="Hammer Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763127" start="5294" end="5320" title="The Secret of Blood Island" label="The Secret of Blood Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q48782662" start="5397" end="5418" title="An Enemy of the State" label="An Enemy of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q596137" start="5500" end="5514" title="Gerry Anderson" label="Gerry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q609765" start="5521" end="5537" title="Supermarionation" label="Supermarionation"/>
<link wikidata="Q288085" start="5560" end="5572" title="Thunderbirds (TV series)" label="Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035150" start="5589" end="5622" title="Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons" label="Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons"/>
<link wikidata="Q671513" start="5677" end="5686" title="Catweazle" label="Catweazle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343392" start="5756" end="5770" title="Robert Danvers" label="Robert Danvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782633" start="5803" end="5833" title="There&amp;#x27;s A Girl In My Soup (comedy)" label="There&amp;#x27;s a Girl in My Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q628071" start="5944" end="5954" title="Crossroads (British TV series)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931660" start="5997" end="6009" title="Vincent Ball" label="Vincent Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q10337179" start="6070" end="6089" title="Nobody Runs Forever" label="Nobody Runs Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q308459" start="6108" end="6118" title="Rod Taylor" label="Rod Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="6260" end="6266" title="Aussie" label="Aussie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855346" start="6427" end="6435" title="Homicide (Australian TV series)" label="Homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195774" start="6529" end="6543" title="Breaker Morant (film)" label="Breaker Morant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283835" start="6564" end="6577" title="Puberty Blues (film)" label="Puberty Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496957" start="6601" end="6619" title="All the Rivers Run" label="All the Rivers Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359414" start="6709" end="6727" title="A Country Practice" label="A Country Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746320" start="7072" end="7085" title="The Late Show (1990s Australian TV series)" label="The Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746320" start="7120" end="7133" title="The Late Show (1992 TV series)" label="The Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471493" start="7219" end="7229" title="The Castle (1997 Australian film)" label="The Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727942" start="7534" end="7543" title="The Craic" label="The Craic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410845" start="7567" end="7575" title="The Dish" label="The Dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829249" start="7622" end="7628" title="Changi (TV series)" label="Changi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035913" start="7694" end="7703" title="Innocence (2000 film)" label="Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508053" start="7760" end="7780" title="Totally Full Frontal" label="Totally Full Frontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="7863" end="7873" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372200" start="7907" end="7926" title="Henry O&amp;#x27;Rourke" label="Henry O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022128" start="7978" end="7989" title="Bert Willis" label="Bert Willis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8058" end="8101" title="The Man from Snowy River: Arena Spectacular" label="The Man from Snowy River: Arena Spectacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878965" start="8498" end="8510" title="Bed of Roses (TV series)" label="Bed of Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057708" start="8586" end="8602" title="Celebrity Circus (Australian TV series)" label="Celebrity Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630630" start="8619" end="8626" title="20 to 1" label="20 to 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699016" start="8678" end="8688" title="Temptation (Australian game show)" label="Temptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576976" start="8771" end="8789" title="List of Logie Hall of Fame inductees" label="Logie Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824163" start="8829" end="8857" title="Australian Film Walk of Fame" label="Australian Film Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="8949" end="8981" title="Member of the Order of Australia" label="Member of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951939" start="8989" end="9018" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501076" start="9133" end="9149" title="Epworth Freemasons" label="Epworth Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="9211" end="9226" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="9270" end="9283" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892155" start="9303" end="9327" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Melbourne" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954693" wikidata="Q4417840" url="?curid=954693" title="Cold War Recognition Certificate">
<text>The Cold War Recognition Certificate was authorized by the United States Congress in 1997 to recognize &quot;all members of the Armed Forces and qualified Federal government civilian personnel who faithfully and honorably served the United States during the Cold War Era from September 2, 1945, to December 26, 1991&quot;. The Department of Defense designated the Department of the Army as the executive agent for the Cold War Recognition Certificate Program.

== See also == 
* Awards and decorations of the United States government

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4417840" start="4" end="36" title="Cold War Recognition Certificate" label="Cold War Recognition Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="59" end="81" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="128" end="140" title="United States Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075260" start="155" end="182" title="United States federal civil service" label="Federal government civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="233" end="246" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="258" end="270" title="Cold War" label="Cold War Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="327" end="348" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328562" start="364" end="386" title="United States Department of the Army" label="Department of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098165" start="479" end="533" title="Awards and decorations of the United States government" label="Awards and decorations of the United States government"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954696" wikidata="Q134957" url="?curid=954696" title="Antidesma">
<text>Antidesma is a genus of tropical plant in the family Phyllanthaceae formally described by Linnaeus in 1753. 
It is native to tropical Africa, S + E + SE Asia, Australia, and various oceanic islands. The greatest diversity occurs in Southeast Asia.

==Description==
&quot;Antidesma&quot; is a variable genus which may be short and shrubby or tall and erect, approaching 30 metres in height. It has large oval shaped leathery evergreen leaves up to about 20 centimetres long and seven wide. The flowers have a strong, somewhat unpleasant scent. The staminate flowers are arranged in small bunches and the pistillate flowers grow on long racemes which will become the long strands of fruit. The fruits are spherical and just under a centimeter wide, hanging singly or paired in long, heavy bunches. They are white when immature and gradually turn red, then black. When they are still white they have sour and astringent taste, sour taste when they are red and have sweet and sour taste when they are black.

The evergreen (sometimes deciduous) simple leaves have fine hairs and show no glands. They grow in an alternate arrangement, with entire, symmetrical blades. They are connected to the stem with a petiole (leaf stalk) and stipules (appendage at the base of a leaf stalk).

The flowers grow in a raceme, with 1 bract per flower, on a short pedicel (tiny stalk, supporting a single flower). Their color is light yellowish green, but may turn red when mature. These plants are dioecious, i.e. unisexual, with male and female flowers on separate plants. There are 3 to 8 fused sepals, but no petals. The male flowers have 2 to 8 stamens, but no pistils. The female flowers have 2 to 6 stigmas. They have a 1-locular ovary with 2 ovules.

The globose to ellipsoid fruits resemble a drupe. Their color varies from green to white, red and black. The fleshy and juicy fruits are edible with a sour to bitter sweet taste. Some individuals find &quot;Antidesma bunius&quot; berries to have a bitter taste. Those who detect this bitter taste (about 15% of subjects tested) cannot taste PTC, and similarly those who can taste PTC (about 68% of the subjects) cannot taste any bitterness in &quot;Antidesma bunius&quot;, while a minority of people cannot taste bitterness in either.

==Species==
There are 101 accepted species in the genus, as of May 2021. They are:
The following taxa have been revised:
*&quot;Antidesma obliquinervium&quot; , now synonym for &quot;Antidesma montanum&quot; var. &quot;montanum&quot;
*&quot;Antidesma pentandrum&quot; , now synonym for &quot;Antidesma montanum&quot; var. &quot;montanum&quot;
*&quot;Antidesma subolivaceum&quot; , now synonym for &quot;Antidesma tomentosum&quot; var. &quot;tomentosum&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*Antidesma (Flora of Thailand)
*Malaysian Euphorbiaceae</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="24" end="32" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="33" end="38" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q133206" start="53" end="67" title="Phyllanthaceae" label="Phyllanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="134" end="140" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="153" end="157" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="159" end="168" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="232" end="246" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1048" end="1054" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="1201" end="1208" title="Petiole (botany)" label="petiole"/>
<link wikidata="Q304216" start="1226" end="1233" title="stipule" label="stipule"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="1281" end="1287" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q158583" start="1299" end="1305" title="raceme" label="raceme"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="1314" end="1319" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="1478" end="1487" title="Plant sexuality" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="1629" end="1635" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="1645" end="1651" title="pistil" label="pistil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="1763" end="1768" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2079" end="2082" title="Phenylthiocarbamide#Role in taste" label="PTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11044855" start="2457" end="2475" title="Antidesma montanum" label="Antidesma montanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11044855" start="2566" end="2584" title="Antidesma montanum" label="Antidesma montanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15510795" start="2677" end="2697" title="Antidesma tomentosum" label="Antidesma tomentosum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954699" wikidata="Q542070" url="?curid=954699" title="San Pietro in Vincoli">
<text>San Pietro in Vincoli (; Saint Peter in Chains) is a Roman Catholic titular church and minor basilica in Rome, Italy. The church is on the Oppian Hill near Cavour metro station, a short distance from the Colosseum. The name alludes to the Biblical story of the Liberation of Peter.

This church is best known for housing Michelangelo&#x27;s statue of Moses, part of the tomb of Pope Julius II. 
Following the death of Pio Laghi, Donald Wuerl became the Cardinal-Priest in 2010.

Housed in the adjacent building, formerly a convent associated with the church, is the Faculty of Engineering of La Sapienza University. Confusingly, this academic institution also carries the epithet &quot;San Pietro in Vincoli&quot;.

==History==

Also known as the Basilica Eudoxiana (, it was first rebuilt on older foundations in 432–440 to house the relic of the chains that bound Saint Peter when he was imprisoned in Jerusalem, the episode called &quot;Liberation of Saint Peter&quot;. The Empress Eudoxia (wife of Emperor Valentinian III), who received them as a gift from her mother, Aelia Eudocia, presented the chains to Pope Leo I. It was probably during a pilgrimage in 438-439 that Aelia Eudocia had received the chains as a gift from Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem.

The chain is now kept in a reliquary under the main altar in the basilica. Since 1894, a link of the chain has been housed in St Peter&#x27;s Church, Rutland, Vermont. Around the world, numerous churches to St Peter bear the &quot;Ad Vincula&quot; suffix, relating to the basilica and relic.

Of interest in this context are St Peter&#x27;s &quot;two&quot; imprisonments. According to legend, when Leo compared the Jerusalem chain to that of St Peter&#x27;s final imprisonment in the Mamertine Prison, in Rome, the two chains miraculously fused together.

The basilica, consecrated in 439 by Sixtus III, has undergone several reconstructions, among them a restoration by Pope Adrian I, and further work in the eleventh century. From 1471 to 1503, when he was elected Pope Julius II, Cardinal Della Rovere, the nephew of Pope Sixtus IV, achieved notable rebuilding. The front portico, attributed to Baccio Pontelli, was added in 1475. The cloister (1493–1503) has been attributed to Giuliano da Sangallo. The vault was lowered in 1705 under the architect Francesco Fontana, and there was another renovation in 1875.

==Interior==
The interior has a nave and two aisles, with three apses divided by antique Doric columns. The aisles are surmounted by cross-vaults, while the nave has an 18th-century coffered ceiling, frescoed in the centre by Giovanni Battista Parodi, portraying the &quot;Miracle of the Chains&quot; (1706). In this scene, based purely on a fable, Pope Alexander heals the neck goiter of the mythical Saint Balbina by touching her with the chains that had once bound St Peter.
Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;Moses&quot; (completed in 1515), while originally intended as part of a massive 47-statue, free-standing funeral monument for Pope Julius II, became the centerpiece of the Pope&#x27;s funeral monument and tomb in this, the church of della Rovere family. Moses is depicted with horns, connoting &quot;the radiance of the Lord&quot;, due to the similarity in the Hebrew words for &quot;beams of light&quot; and &quot;horns&quot;. This kind of iconographic symbolism was common in early sacred art, and for an artist horns are easier to sculpt than rays of light.

Other works of art include two canvases of &quot;Saint Augustine&quot; and &quot;St Margaret&quot; by Guercino, the monument of Cardinal Girolamo Agucchi designed by Domenichino, who is also the painter of a sacristy fresco depicting the &quot;Liberation of St Peter&quot; (1604). The altarpiece on the first chapel to the left is a &quot;Deposition&quot; by Cristoforo Roncalli. The tomb of Cardinal Nicholas of Kues (d 1464), with its relief, &quot;Cardinal Nicholas before St Peter&quot;, is by Andrea Bregno. Painter and sculptor Antonio del Pollaiuolo is buried at the left side of the entrance. He is the Florentine sculptor who added the figures of Romulus and Remus to the sculpture of the Capitoline Wolf on the Capitol. Inside a portico at the entrance is the original sculpture When I was Naked, created by Canadian artist Timothy Schmalz as part of the Matthew 25 collection installed throughout Rome on the occasion of the Extraordinary Jubilee of Mercy. 

The tomb monument of Cardinal Cinzio Aldobrandini was erected 1705–07 by prince Giovanni Battista Pamphili Aldobrandini to a design by his architect Carlo Francesco Bizzaccheri and with the sculptures of putti and a winged skeleton by Pierre Le Gros the Younger.

In 1876 archeologists discovered the tombs of those once believed to be the seven Maccabean martyrs depicted in 2 Maccabees 7–41. It is highly unlikely that these are in fact the Jewish martyrs that had offered their lives in Jerusalem. They are remembered each year on 1 August, the same day as the miracle of the fusing of the two chains.

The third altar in the left aisle holds a mosaic of Saint Sebastian from the seventh century. This mosaic is related to an outbreak of plague in Pavia, in northern Italy. The relics of Sebastian were taken there in order to stop a 680 outbreak of plague, since Sebastian was believed to have been born in Lombardy, and an altar was constructed for his relics at a San Pietro in Vincoli in Pavia. As a symbol of the subsequently reinforced relationship between Pavia and Rome, an identical altar to Sebastian was built at the Roman church of the same name, resulting in a parallel cult for the saint in both regions.

== List of Cardinal-Priests since 1405 == 
List of the cardinals titular of the church
:...
* Deusdedit (c. 1078 – c. 1098)
* Albericus (attested 1100)
* Benedictus (c. 1102 – c. 1127)
* Matthaeus (c. 1127 – c. 1137)
* Comes (1138 – 1139)
* Guillelmus of Pavia (1158 – 1176)
* Antonio Arcioni (12 June 1405 – 21 July 1405)
* Antonio Correr (9 May 1408 – 9 May 1409)
* João Afonso Esteves da Azambuja (6 June 1411 – 23 January 1415)
* Juan de Cervantes (27 May 1426 – 27 March 1447)
* Nicholas of Cusa (3 January 1449 – 12 August 1464)
* Francesco della Rovere (20 November 1467 – 10 August 1471)
* Giuliano della Rovere (22 December 1471 – 1 November 1503)
* Galeotto Franciotti della Rovere (6 December 1503 – 11 September 1507)
* Sisto Gara della Rovere (11 September 1507 – 8 March 1517)
* Leonardo Grosso della Rovere (9 March 1517 – 17 September 1520)
* Silvio Passerini (17 September 1520 – 5 January 1521)
* Albrecht von Brandenburg (5 January 1521 – 24 September 1545)
* Jacopo Sadoleto (27 November 1545 – 18 October 1547)
* Jean du Bellay (26 October 1547 – 9 April 1548)
* Giulio della Rovere (9 April 1548 – 12 April 1570)
* Antoine Perrenot de Granvella (9 June 1570 – 9 July 1578)
* Giovanni Antonio Serbelloni (12 April 1570 – 9 June 1570)
* Markus Sitticus von Hohenems Altemps (3 October 1578 – 17 August 1579)
* Stanislaus Hosius (9 July 1578 – 3 October 1578)
* Alfonso Gesualdo (17 August 1579 – 5 December 1580)
* Marco Antonio Colonna (5 December 1580 – 13 October 1586)
* Girolamo della Rovere (14 January 1587 – 7 February 1592)
* Alessandro Ottaviano de&#x27; Medici (14 February 1592 – 21 February 1600)
* François de Joyeuse (27 April 1594 – 24 March 1604)
* Girolamo Agucchi (25 June 1604 – 27 April 1605)
* Cinzio Passeri Aldobrandini (1 June 1605 – 1 January 1610)
* Lanfranco Margotti (11 January 1610 – 28 February 1611)
* Bartolomeo Cesi (5 December 1611 – 7 January 1613)
* Bonifazio Bevilacqua Aldobrandini (7 January 1613 – 29 March 1621)
* Michelangelo Tonti (13 October 1621 – 21 April 1622)
* François d&#x27;Escoubleau de Sourdis (29 March 1621 – 13 October 1621)
* Luigi Capponi (2 May 1622 – 20 August 1629)
* Laudivio Zacchia (17 September 1629 – 30 August 1637)
* Antonio Barberini (7 September 1637 – 26 May 1642)
* Bernardino Spada (22 May 1642 – 19 February 1646)
* Marzio Ginetti (19 February 1646 – 23 September 1652)
* Giovanni Battista Maria Pallotta (23 September 1652 – 21 April 1659)
* Ulderico Carpegna (21 April 1659 – 21 November 1661)
* Alderano Cybo (21 November 1661 – 24 May 1676)
* Emmanuel Théodose de la Tour d&#x27;Auvergne de Bouillon (19 October 1676 – 19 October 1689)
* Savo Millini (12 December 1689 – 10 February 1701)
* Pierre de Bonzi (19 October 1689 – 28 November 1689)
* Marcello Durazzo (21 February 1701 – 27 April 1710)
* Fulvio Astalli (7 May 1710 – 16 April 1714)
* Ferdinando d&#x27;Adda (16 April 1714 – 21 January 1715)
* Lorenzo Casoni (21 January 1715 – 19 November 1720)
* Lorenzo Corsini (16 December 1720 – 19 November 1725)
* Gianantonio Davia (19 November 1725 – 11 February 1737)
* Vincenzo Petra (11 February 1737 – 16 September 1740)
* Francesco Antonio Finy (16 September 1740 – 11 March 1743)
* Nicolò Maria Lercari (11 March 1743 – 21 March 1757)
* Antonio Andrea Galli (23 May 1757 – 24 March 1767)
* Gaetano Fantuzzi Gottifredi (6 April 1767 – 1 October 1778)
* Lazzaro Opizio Pallavicino (14 December 1778 – 23 February 1785)
* Giuseppe Doria Pamphili (11 April 1785 – 20 September 1802)
* Girolamo Della Porta (20 September 1802 – 5 September 1812)
* Tommaso Arezzo (29 April 1816 – 29 May 1820)
* Paolo Giuseppe Solaro (24 November 1823 – 9 September 1824)
* Joachim-Jean-Xavier d’Isoard (17 September 1827 – 15 April 1833)
* Castruccio Castracane degli Antelminelli (29 July 1833 – 22 January 1844)
* Niccola Paracciani Clarelli (25 January 1844 – 22 February 1867)
* Luis de la Lastra y Cuesta (12 July 1867 – 5 May 1876)
* Giovanni Simeoni (18 December 1876 – 14 January 1892)
* Ignatius Persico (19 January 1893 – 7 December 1895)
* Adolphe Perraud (25 June 1896 – 10 February 1906)
* Désiré-Joseph Mercier (18 April 1907 – 23 January 1926)
* Luigi Capotosti (24 June 1926 – 16 February 1938)
* Teodósio de Gouveia (22 February 1946 – 6 February 1962)
* Leo Joseph Suenens (22 March 1962 – 6 May 1996)
* Jean Marie Balland (21 February 1998 – 1 March 1998)
* Louis-Marie Billé (21 February 2001 – 22 July 2001)
* Pio Laghi (26 February 2002 – 10 January 2009)
* Donald Wuerl (20 November 2010 – present)
==References==
==Bibliography==
*Federico Gizzi, &quot;Le chiese medievali di Roma&quot;, Newton Compton/Rome, 1998.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q542070" start="0" end="21" title="San Pietro in Vincoli" label="San Pietro in Vincoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="53" end="67" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092939" start="68" end="82" title="titular church" label="titular church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846867" start="87" end="101" title="minor basilica" label="minor basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="105" end="109" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036262" start="139" end="150" title="Oppian Hill" label="Oppian Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227413" start="156" end="162" title="Cavour (Rome Metro)" label="Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="204" end="213" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670201" start="261" end="280" title="Liberation of Peter" label="Liberation of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="321" end="340" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989744" start="341" end="356" title="Moses (Michelangelo)" label="statue of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246112" start="370" end="374" title="List of extant papal tombs" label="tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q651551" start="378" end="392" title="Tomb of Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q527095" start="418" end="427" title="Pio Laghi" label="Pio Laghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q386256" start="429" end="441" title="Donald Wuerl" label="Donald Wuerl"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="453" end="468" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal-Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="592" end="614" title="La Sapienza" label="La Sapienza University"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="835" end="840" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="866" end="877" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="904" end="913" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670201" start="940" end="965" title="Liberation of Saint Peter" label="Liberation of Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q232329" start="985" end="992" title="Licinia Eudoxia" label="Eudoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170026" start="1010" end="1025" title="Valentinian III" label="Valentinian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q229307" start="1073" end="1086" title="Aelia Eudocia" label="Aelia Eudocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43954" start="1112" end="1122" title="Pope Leo I" label="Pope Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996896" start="1229" end="1236" title="Juvenal of Jerusalem" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q722604" start="1287" end="1296" title="reliquary" label="reliquary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591345" start="1386" end="1408" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church and Mount St. Joseph Convent Complex" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q25893" start="1410" end="1426" title="Rutland (city), Vermont" label="Rutland, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035634" start="1744" end="1760" title="Mamertine Prison" label="Mamertine Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q167065" start="1852" end="1862" title="Pope Sixtus III" label="Sixtus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q103292" start="1931" end="1944" title="Pope Adrian I" label="Pope Adrian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="2027" end="2041" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q163514" start="2080" end="2094" title="Pope Sixtus IV" label="Pope Sixtus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="2135" end="2142" title="portico" label="portico"/>
<link wikidata="Q576325" start="2158" end="2173" title="Baccio Pontelli" label="Baccio Pontelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="2198" end="2206" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q312365" start="2242" end="2262" title="Giuliano da Sangallo" label="Giuliano da Sangallo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2314" end="2331" title="Francesco Fontana (architect)" label="Francesco Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="2408" end="2412" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="2440" end="2444" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="2465" end="2470" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q640104" start="2558" end="2564" title="coffer" label="coffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221706" start="2567" end="2574" title="ceiling" label="ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563742" start="2602" end="2626" title="Giovanni Battista Parodi" label="Giovanni Battista Parodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q508782" start="2778" end="2791" title="Saint Balbina" label="Saint Balbina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989744" start="2854" end="2891" title="Michelangelo&amp;#x27;s Moses" label="Michelangelo&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Moses&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="3006" end="3020" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q327194" start="3113" end="3132" title="della Rovere family" label="della Rovere family"/>
<link wikidata="Q125343295" start="3143" end="3162" title="horns of Moses" label="depicted with horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q334262" start="3544" end="3552" title="Guercino" label="Guercino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="3570" end="3578" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107669" start="3579" end="3595" title="Girolamo Agucchi" label="Girolamo Agucchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q320118" start="3608" end="3619" title="Domenichino" label="Domenichino"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711026" start="3727" end="3737" title="altarpiece" label="altarpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365963" start="3781" end="3791" title="Deposition from the Cross" label="Deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091136" start="3801" end="3820" title="Cristoforo Roncalli" label="Cristoforo Roncalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q154751" start="3843" end="3859" title="Nicholas of Kues" label="Nicholas of Kues"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="3879" end="3885" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q493515" start="3940" end="3953" title="Andrea Bregno" label="Andrea Bregno"/>
<link wikidata="Q318640" start="3976" end="3998" title="Antonio del Pollaiuolo" label="Antonio del Pollaiuolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="4098" end="4115" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q408623" start="4140" end="4155" title="Capitoline Wolf" label="Capitoline Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q123592828" start="4231" end="4247" title="When I Was Naked" label="When I was Naked"/>
<link wikidata="Q19161702" start="4276" end="4291" title="Timothy Schmalz" label="Timothy Schmalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610189" start="4378" end="4408" title="Extraordinary Jubilee of Mercy" label="Extraordinary Jubilee of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q710327" start="4442" end="4461" title="Cinzio Aldobrandini" label="Cinzio Aldobrandini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4492" end="4531" title="Pamphili family#Family tree" label="Giovanni Battista Pamphili Aldobrandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659370" start="4561" end="4588" title="Carlo Francesco Bizzaccheri" label="Carlo Francesco Bizzaccheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q284865" start="4616" end="4621" title="putti" label="putti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093685" start="4647" end="4673" title="Pierre Le Gros the Younger" label="Pierre Le Gros the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359988" start="4752" end="4775" title="Woman with seven sons" label="seven Maccabean martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183332" start="5070" end="5085" title="Saint Sebastian" label="Saint Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="5163" end="5168" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q109229391" start="5789" end="5799" title="Benedictus of S. Pietro in vincoli" label="Benedictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657000" start="5960" end="5974" title="Antonio Correr (cardinal)" label="Antonio Correr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700978" start="6069" end="6086" title="Juan de Cervantes" label="Juan de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q154751" start="6119" end="6135" title="Nicholas of Cusa" label="Nicholas of Cusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q163514" start="6172" end="6194" title="Francesco della Rovere" label="Francesco della Rovere"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="6233" end="6254" title="Giuliano della Rovere" label="Giuliano della Rovere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084763" start="6494" end="6510" title="Silvio Passerini" label="Silvio Passerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q682478" start="6614" end="6629" title="Jacopo Sadoleto" label="Jacopo Sadoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q518967" start="6669" end="6683" title="Jean du Bellay" label="Jean du Bellay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366369" start="6719" end="6738" title="Giulio della Rovere" label="Giulio della Rovere"/>
<link wikidata="Q451178" start="6772" end="6801" title="Antoine Perrenot de Granvella" label="Antoine Perrenot de Granvella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707655" start="6832" end="6859" title="Giovanni Antonio Serbelloni" label="Giovanni Antonio Serbelloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q599397" start="6892" end="6928" title="Markus Sitticus von Hohenems Altemps" label="Markus Sitticus von Hohenems Altemps"/>
<link wikidata="Q61962" start="6965" end="6982" title="Stanislaus Hosius" label="Stanislaus Hosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373399" start="7016" end="7032" title="Alfonso Gesualdo" label="Alfonso Gesualdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132716" start="7190" end="7226" title="Alessandro Ottaviano de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Alessandro Ottaviano de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q542804" start="7267" end="7286" title="François de Joyeuse" label="François de Joyeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q710327" start="7371" end="7398" title="Cinzio Passeri Aldobrandini" label="Cinzio Passeri Aldobrandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886081" start="7490" end="7505" title="Bartolomeo Cesi (cardinal)" label="Bartolomeo Cesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910138" start="7543" end="7576" title="Bonifazio Bevilacqua Aldobrandini" label="Bonifazio Bevilacqua Aldobrandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q444489" start="7612" end="7630" title="Michelangelo Tonti" label="Michelangelo Tonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091388" start="7667" end="7704" title="François d&amp;#x27;Escoubleau de Sourdis" label="François d&amp;#x27;Escoubleau de Sourdis"/>
<link wikidata="Q747549" start="7741" end="7754" title="Luigi Capponi" label="Luigi Capponi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218593" start="7787" end="7803" title="Laudivio Zacchia" label="Laudivio Zacchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q599744" start="7843" end="7860" title="Antonio Barberini" label="Antonio Barberini"/>
<link wikidata="Q822934" start="7896" end="7912" title="Bernardino Spada" label="Bernardino Spada"/>
<link wikidata="Q508442" start="7948" end="7962" title="Marzio Ginetti" label="Marzio Ginetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q381635" start="8004" end="8036" title="Giovanni Battista Maria Pallotta" label="Giovanni Battista Maria Pallotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q980628" start="8075" end="8092" title="Ulderico Carpegna" label="Ulderico Carpegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q961920" start="8130" end="8143" title="Alderano Cybo" label="Alderano Cybo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338441" start="8179" end="8235" title="Emmanuel Théodose de la Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne de Bouillon" label="Emmanuel Théodose de la Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne de Bouillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82649" start="8327" end="8342" title="Pierre de Bonzi" label="Pierre de Bonzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8436" end="8450" title="Fulvio Astalli" label="Fulvio Astalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366303" start="8482" end="8504" title="Ferdinando d&amp;#x27;Adda" label="Ferdinando d&amp;#x27;Adda"/>
<link wikidata="Q669526" start="9063" end="9086" title="Giuseppe Doria Pamphili" label="Giuseppe Doria Pamphili"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253552" start="9363" end="9403" title="Castruccio Castracane degli Antelminelli" label="Castruccio Castracane degli Antelminelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254153" start="9439" end="9466" title="Niccola Paracciani Clarelli" label="Niccola Paracciani Clarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q746874" start="9563" end="9579" title="Giovanni Simeoni" label="Giovanni Simeoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256534" start="9619" end="9635" title="Ignatius Persico" label="Ignatius Persico"/>
<link wikidata="Q365794" start="9674" end="9689" title="Adolphe Perraud" label="Adolphe Perraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q468097" start="9726" end="9747" title="Désiré-Joseph Mercier" label="Désiré-Joseph Mercier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876140" start="9784" end="9799" title="Luigi Capotosti" label="Luigi Capotosti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142187" start="9836" end="9855" title="Teodósio de Gouveia" label="Teodósio de Gouveia"/>
<link wikidata="Q544424" start="9895" end="9913" title="Leo Joseph Suenens" label="Leo Joseph Suenens"/>
<link wikidata="Q542273" start="9945" end="9963" title="Jean Marie Balland" label="Jean Marie Balland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152407" start="10000" end="10017" title="Louis-Marie Billé" label="Louis-Marie Billé"/>
<link wikidata="Q527095" start="10054" end="10063" title="Pio Laghi" label="Pio Laghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q386256" start="10103" end="10115" title="Donald Wuerl" label="Donald Wuerl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954700" wikidata="Q5966660" url="?curid=954700" title="I'm OK – You're OK">
<text>I&#x27;m OK – You&#x27;re OK is a 1967 self-help book by psychiatrist Thomas Anthony Harris. It is a practical guide to transactional analysis as a method for solving problems in life.

The book made the &quot;New York Times&quot; Best Seller list in 1972 and remained there for almost two years. It is estimated by the publisher to have sold over 15 million copies to date and to have been translated into over a dozen languages.&lt;ref name=&quot;drthomasharris.com/im&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==Content==
In the preface, Harris praises the then-new procedure of transactional analysis (TA, or as Harris often refers to it, P-A-C) as a major innovation addressing the slow process and limited results that he and other psychiatric practitioners believed was characteristic of conventional psychiatry.

===Harris&#x27; context for the book===

Rather than working with abstract concepts of consciousness, Harris suggests that the pioneering work of brain surgeon Wilder Penfield in uncovering the neurological basis of memory could offer complementary insights grounded in observable reality.
Specifically, Harris emphasizes reports of Penfield&#x27;s experiments stimulating small areas of the brains of conscious patients undergoing brain surgery (the brain does not have any pain receptors, so this can be done in relative comfort for the patient). Though the patients were conscious that they were on an operating table, the stimulation also caused them to recall specific past events in vivid detail—not just facts of the event, but as a vivid &quot;reliving&quot; of &quot;what the patient saw and heard and felt and understood&quot; when the memory was created. Based on these experiments, Harris postulates that the brain records past experiences like a tape recorder, in such a manner that it is possible subsequently to relive past experiences with all their original emotional intensity.

Harris continues by linking his interpretation of Penfield&#x27;s experiments to the work of Eric Berne, whose model of psychotherapy is based on the idea that emotionally intense memories from childhood are ever-present in adults. Their influence can be understood by carefully analysing the verbal and non-verbal interchanges (&#x27;transactions&#x27;) between people, hence Berne&#x27;s name for his model: &quot;Transactional Analysis&quot;. Harris sees great merit in the ability of TA to define basic units through which human behaviour can be analysed—the &#x27;strokes&#x27; that are given and received in a &#x27;transaction&#x27; between two or more people—and a standardised language for describing those strokes. This readily understood standardisation, and the association Harris develops between TA and Penfield&#x27;s neuroscience, gives TA a degree of credibility not possessed by earlier abstract models such as that developed by Freud.

===Parent, Adult, Child (P-A-C) model===

After describing the context for his belief of the significance of TA, Harris describes TA, starting from the observation that a person&#x27;s psychological state seems to change in response to different situations. The question is, &quot;from what&quot; and &quot;to what&quot; does it change? Harris answers this through a simplified introduction to TA, explaining Berne&#x27;s proposal that there are three states into which a person can switch: the &quot;Parent&quot;, the &quot;Adult&quot; and the &quot;Child&quot;.

Harris describes the mental state called the &quot;Parent&quot; by analogy, as a collection of &quot;tape recordings&quot; of external influences that a child observed adults doing and saying. The recording is a long list of rules and admonitions about the way the world is that the child was expected to believe unquestioningly. Many of these rules (for example: &quot;Never run out in front of traffic&quot;) are relatively basic, often relating to immediate physical need or danger; others (e.g. &quot;...you can never trust a cop&quot;, &quot;...busy hands are happy hands&quot;) are more complex and concern more subtle or nuanced regions. Nevertheless, Harris asserts that both the former and the latter are &#x27;recorded&#x27; in the child&#x27;s memory in the same manner, as &#x27;Parent&#x27; dictations, rather than actually understood concepts or philosophical precepts.

In parallel with those &quot;Parent&quot; recordings, the &quot;Child&quot; is a simultaneous recording of &quot;internal&quot; events—how life felt as a child. Harris equates these with the vivid recordings that Wilder Penfield was able to cause his patients to re-live by stimulating their brains. Harris proposes that, as adults, when we feel discouraged, it is as if we are re-living those Child memories yet the stimulus for re-living them may no longer be relevant or helpful in our lives.

According to Harris, humans start developing a third mental state, the &quot;Adult&quot;, about the time children start to walk and begin to achieve some measure of control over their environment. Instead of learning ideas directly from parents into the Parent, or experiencing simple emotion as the Child, children begin to be able to explore and examine the world and form their own opinions. They test the assertions of the Parent and Child and either update them or learn to suppress them. Thus the Adult inside us all develops over time, but it is very fragile and can be readily overwhelmed by stressful situations. Its strength is also tested through conflict between the simplistic ideas of the Parent and reality. Sometimes, Harris asserts, it is safer for a person to believe a lie than to acknowledge the evidence in front of them. This is called &quot;Contamination of the Adult&quot;.

===Four life positions===
The phrase &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot; is one of four &quot;life positions&quot; that each of us may take. The four positions are:
# &quot;I&#x27;m Not OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot;
# &quot;I&#x27;m Not OK, You&#x27;re Not OK&quot;
# &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re Not OK&quot;
# &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot;
The most common position is &quot;I&#x27;m Not OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot;. As children we see that adults are large, strong and competent and that we are little, weak and often make mistakes, so we conclude &quot;I&#x27;m Not OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot;. Children who are abused may conclude &quot;I&#x27;m Not OK, You&#x27;re Not OK&quot; or &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re Not OK&quot;, but these are much less common. The emphasis of the book is helping people understand how their life position affects their communications (transactions) and relationships with practical examples.

&quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot; continues by providing practical advice to begin decoding the physical and verbal clues required to analyze transactions. For example, Harris suggests signs that a person is in a Parent ego state can include the use of evaluative words that imply judgment based on an automatic, axiomatic and archaic value system: words like &#x27;stupid, naughty, ridiculous, disgusting, should or ought&#x27; (though the latter can also be used in the Adult ego state).

Harris introduces a diagrammatic representation of two classes of communication between individuals: &quot;complementary transactions&quot;, which can continue indefinitely, and &quot;crossed transactions&quot;, which cause a cessation of communication (and frequently an argument). Harris suggests that crossed transactions are problematic because they &quot;hook&quot; the Child ego state of one of the participants, resulting in negative feelings. Harris suggests that awareness of this possibility, through TA, can give people a choice about how they react when confronted with an interpersonal situation which makes them feel uncomfortable. Harris provides practical suggestions regarding how to stay in the Adult ego state, despite the provocation.

Having described a generalized model of the ego states inside human beings, and the transactions between them, Harris then describes how individuals differ. He argues that insights can be gained by examining the degree to which an individual&#x27;s Adult ego state is &quot;contaminated&quot; by the other ego states. He summarizes contamination of the Adult by the Parent as &quot;prejudice&quot; and contamination of the Adult by the Child as &quot;delusion&quot;. A healthy individual is able to separate these states. Yet, Harris argues, a functioning person does need all three ego states to be present in their psyche in order for them to be complete. Someone who &quot;excludes&quot; (i.e. blocks out) their Child completely cannot play and enjoy life; while someone who excludes their Parent ego state can be a danger to society (they may become a manipulative psychopath who does not feel shame, remorse, embarrassment or guilt).

Harris also identifies from his medical practice examples of individuals with blocked out Adult ego states, who were psychotic, terrified and varied between the Parent ego state&#x27;s archaic admonitions about the world and the raw emotional state of the Child, making them non-treatable by therapy. For such cases, Harris endorses drug treatments, or electro-convulsive therapy, as a way to temporarily disrupt the disturbing ego states, allowing the &quot;recommissioning&quot; of the Adult ego state by therapy. Harris reports a similar approach to treating bipolar disorder.

The second half of the book begins by briefly describing the six ways that TA practitioners recognize individuals use to structure time, to make life seem meaningful. Harris continues by offering practical case studies showing applications of TA to marriage and the raising of both children and adolescents. This section of &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot; concludes as Harris describes when TA can be relevant to an individual&#x27;s life, and how and by whom it might be delivered. He promotes the idea that TA is not just a method for specialists, but can be shared and used by many people.

Having described such a structured method of dealing with the challenges of human psychology, the final two chapters of the book discuss the question of improving morality and society. In particular, he asks, if people are not to succumb to domination by the Parent ego state, how can individuals enlightened through TA know how they &quot;should&quot; live their lives? Starting from his axiomatic statement &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot;, he acknowledges that accepting it at face value raises the same philosophical dilemmas as the problem of evil does for believers in a just, omnipotent God. Harris continues to explore aspects of Christianity with reference to TA, together with more generalized questions about the nature of religion.

The final chapter of &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot; refers to social issues contemporary at the time of writing, including the Cold War, Vietnam War and the contemporary controversial research of individuals&#x27; response to authority conducted by psychologist Stanley Milgram. Harris applies TA to these issues and concludes his book with the hope that nations will soon gain the maturity to engage in Adult to Adult dialogue, rather than conducting diplomacy in the collective archaic ego states of Parent or Child, which he sees as causing war and disharmony.

==Editions==
The book was published first during 1969 in the United States by Harper &amp; Row, then republished as &quot;I&#x27;m OK- You&#x27;re OK&quot; (). In the United Kingdom it was published first during 1970 by Jonathan Cape with the title &quot;The Book of Choice&quot;. It is still in print, published by Harpercollins.

==Criticism==
The work of Wilder Penfield concerning human memory, which appeared to Harris to give TA special credibility because it implied a direct association with neuroscience, has not proved readily repeatable. Data from 2008 show the mechanism by which OK vs. not OK judgements of value are made in the insula, moment to moment, so Harris&#x27; notion is supported.

Harris&#x27;s assertion that a child does not mature with the life position &quot;I&#x27;m OK – You&#x27;re OK&quot; without therapy has been criticised as positioning TA as a quasi-religious soteriology. Harris&#x27; assertion that all children start out with an &quot;I&#x27;m not OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot; life position was contested by his friend Eric Berne, the originator of TA, who believed that the natural state of a child was feeling &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot;. Several decades have elapsed since Harris published &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot;, some of the cultural references are less accessible to contemporary readers not familiar with the period.

==Influence on popular culture==

The title of the book has since become commonly used, often as a dismissive categorization of all popular psychology philosophies as being overly accepting. The phrase &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot; is a common cliché in Anglophone culture, at least among an older generation more accustomed to hearing the phrase. Examples of the influence elsewhere are:
* Wendy Kaminer wrote a critique of the self-help business during 1992, named &quot;I&#x27;m Dysfunctional, You&#x27;re Dysfunctional&quot;.
* In the popular television show &quot;ALF&quot;, season four, episode five ALF takes on the topic of TA with direct reference to OKness, and even says to Willie, &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re OK&quot;.
* In the comedy &quot;Airplane II: The Sequel&quot;, the case carried by the bomber also contains a copy of &quot;I&#x27;m Alright, You&#x27;re Alright&quot;.
* It is also referenced in a Kannada movie called &quot;Beladingala Baale&quot;. The main character explains this to his friend&#x27;s wife when she asks him why her husband is open and different—A person grows in four stages: first he thinks I&#x27;m ok, the world is not ok; second he feels he&#x27;s not ok, the world is not ok; third he thinks he&#x27;s not ok, the world is ok; in the end at the fourth stage he realizes that I&#x27;m ok, the world is also ok and she should bring her husband to this fourth stage.
* In an episode of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, the character Dr. Marvin Monroe refers to his self-help book &quot;I&#x27;m OK, You&#x27;re Sick and Twisted&quot;.
* In the first episode of the fifth season of &quot;What We Do in the Shadows&quot;, the character Nandor talks about working through his anger issues with the book. Throughout the episode, he ends conversations with people not saying &quot;I&#x27;m okay, you&#x27;re okay,&quot; despite it often being a non sequitur.
* The second half of the 13th episode of Taz-Mania is titled &quot;I&#x27;m Okay, You&#x27;re Taz&quot;

==See also==
* &quot;Games People Play&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* http://www.ericberne.com/ – Dr. Eric Berne
* http://www.drthomasharris.com/im-ok-youre-ok-book-thomas-harris/ – Information on Dr. Thomas A. Harris and I&#x27;m OK – You&#x27;re OK</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6498453" start="39" end="48" title="self-help" label="self-help"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422046" start="70" end="91" title="Thomas Anthony Harris" label="Thomas Anthony Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q623513" start="120" end="142" title="transactional analysis" label="transactional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="204" end="247" title="New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q711394" start="962" end="977" title="Wilder Penfield" label="Wilder Penfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="1018" end="1024" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="1234" end="1247" title="brain surgery" label="brain surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="1761" end="1774" title="tape recorder" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q44836" start="1992" end="2002" title="Eric Berne" label="Eric Berne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543" start="9180" end="9206" title="electro-convulsive therapy" label="electro-convulsive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="9389" end="9405" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9529" end="9543" title="Transactional analysis#Ways of time structuring" label="structure time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062821" start="10554" end="10569" title="problem of evil" label="problem of evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="10655" end="10667" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="10751" end="10759" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="10898" end="10906" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="10908" end="10919" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191474" start="10955" end="10963" title="Milgram experiment" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q208236" start="11033" end="11048" title="Stanley Milgram" label="Stanley Milgram"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11397" end="11410" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="11414" end="11430" title="Harper &amp;amp; Row" label="Harper &amp;amp; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11503" end="11517" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277534" start="11556" end="11569" title="Jonathan Cape" label="Jonathan Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="11652" end="11665" title="Harpercollins" label="Harpercollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q711394" start="11694" end="11709" title="Wilder Penfield" label="Wilder Penfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q326255" start="12234" end="12245" title="soteriology" label="soteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44836" start="12392" end="12402" title="Eric Berne" label="Eric Berne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874033" start="12858" end="12876" title="popular psychology" label="popular psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q156351" start="12980" end="12986" title="cliché" label="cliché"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="12990" end="13000" title="Anglophone" label="Anglophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567250" start="13127" end="13140" title="Wendy Kaminer" label="Wendy Kaminer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059502" start="13149" end="13157" title="critique" label="critique"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498453" start="13165" end="13174" title="self-help" label="self-help"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966227" start="13209" end="13258" title="I&amp;#x27;m Dysfunctional, You&amp;#x27;re Dysfunctional" label="I&amp;#x27;m Dysfunctional, You&amp;#x27;re Dysfunctional"/>
<link wikidata="Q264221" start="13305" end="13308" title="ALF (TV series)" label="ALF"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13492" end="13515" title="Airplane II: The Sequel" label="Airplane II: The Sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="13658" end="13665" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881835" start="13685" end="13702" title="Beladingala Baale" label="Beladingala Baale"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="14174" end="14186" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637582" start="14362" end="14387" title="What We Do in the Shadows (TV series)" label="What We Do in the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463792" start="14670" end="14679" title="Taz-Mania" label="Taz-Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q834383" start="14755" end="14772" title="Games People Play (book)" label="Games People Play"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954711" wikidata="Q5157237" url="?curid=954711" title="Compulsory Basic Training">
<text>In the United Kingdom, the term Compulsory Basic Training (abbreviated to CBT) is a preliminary vehicular training course which must be completed by people wishing to ride a motorcycle or moped unaccompanied on the road, and remains valid for 2 years upon completion. It was introduced in Great Britain on 1 December 1990 as a means of reducing accidents on the road caused by inexperienced drivers by reviewing aspects of riding both on and off the road with a qualified motorcycle instructor registered with an Approved Training Body (ATB). If a full car licence was obtained before 1 February 2001 it is not necessary to complete a CBT course to ride a moped.

A CBT allows a rider to ride a moped up to 50 cc with a provisional licence from 16 years of age, and a motorbike up to 125 cc from 17 years of age.

Compulsory Basic Training consists of five elements;
* Element A - Introduction and eyesight test.
* Element B - Learning the controls of the motorcycle.
* Element C - Off-road riding.
* Element D - Road briefing and safety talk.
* Element E - Practical on-road riding.

Northern Ireland introduced CBT in 2011. As of 21 February 2011 learner riders in Northern Ireland must complete CBT before being allowed on the road unaccompanied. Those who obtained their provisional motorcycle/moped licence before the implementation of CBT in Northern Ireland had until 21 February 2012 to pass their motorbike test, or else take CBT to continue riding as a learner. Those who passed a car test prior to 21 February 2011 have their full moped entitlement preserved without having to take CBT.

Once passing the CBT, riders can begin practising on the roads alone for their full moped or motorcycle test.

==Bibliography==
# United Kingdom Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency. 2006. &quot;Driver Licensing for Motorcyclists&quot; [Online] Available: http://www.dvla.gov.uk/media/pdf/leaflets/inf31.pdf [18 August 2006]
# United Kingdom Government, Directgov. 2008. &quot;About compulsory basic training&quot; [Online] Available: http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/Motoring/LearnerAndNewDrivers/RidingMotorcyclesAndMopeds/DG_4022430 [11 May 2008]
# United Kingdom Driving Standards Agency. 2001. &quot;Motorcycle Safety Program&quot; (Definition of Compulsory Basic Training syllabus) [Online] Available http://www.dsa.gov.uk/download.asp?path=/documents/foi/other/ia00086pa.pdf
# UNITED KINGDOM. 1998. Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52). OPSI Archives [Laws]
# UNITED KINGDOM. 1998. Road Traffic (Vehicle Testing) Act 1999. OPSI Archives [Laws]
# UNITED KINGDOM. 1998. Statutory Instrument 1998 No. 20 - The Motor Vehicles (Driving Licences) (Amendment) Regulations OPSI Archives [Laws]
# UNITED KINGDOM. 2003. Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 166 - The Motor Vehicles (Driving Licences) (Amendment) Regulations OPSI Archives [Laws]
# United Kingdom Department for Transport. 2007. &quot;The Official Highway Code&quot;&quot; United Kingdom Driving Standards Agency

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7" end="21" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157237" start="32" end="57" title="Compulsory Basic Training" label="Compulsory Basic Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157237" start="74" end="77" title="Compulsory Basic Training" label="CBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918277" start="96" end="114" title="Motorcycle training" label="vehicular training"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="174" end="184" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201783" start="188" end="193" title="moped" label="moped"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="289" end="302" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q201783" start="656" end="661" title="moped" label="moped"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1085" end="1101" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="954718" wikidata="Q577485" url="?curid=954718" title="Prochlorophyta">
<text>Prochlorophyta is a group of photosynthetic bacteria, an important component of picoplankton. These oligotrophic organisms are abundant in nutrient poor tropical waters and use a unique photosynthetic pigment, divinyl-chlorophyll, to absorb light and acquire energy. Prochlorophyta lack red and blue phycobilin pigments and have stacked thylakoids, making them distinctly different from Cyanobacteria (or Cyanophyta), but some authors consider them as part of the Cyanobacteria, as the group Prochlorales.

== Discovery and naming ==
This unique group of phytoplankton, with no phycobilin pigments, were initially found in 1975 near the Great Barrier Reef and off the coast of Mexico (&quot;Prochloron&quot;). Prochlorophyta was soon assigned as a new algal sub-class in 1976 by Ralph A. Lewin of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Other phytoplankton that lacked phycobilin pigments were later found in freshwater lakes in the Netherlands by Tineke Burger-Wiersma and colleagues and were termed &quot;Prochlorothrix&quot; (additional reading on &quot;Prochlorothrix&quot; can be found in a journal article by A.V. Pinevich ). In 1986 &quot;Prochlorococcus&quot; was found by Sallie W. (Penny) Chisholm and colleagues. &quot;Prochlorococcus&quot; may be responsible for a significant portion of the global primary production.

== Morphology ==
Prochlorophytes are very small microbes generally between 0.2 and 2 μm (photosynthetic picoplankton). They morphologically resemble Cyanobacteria (formerly known as Blue Green Algae). Members of Prochlorophyta have been found as coccoid (spherical) (Coccus) shaped, as in &quot;Prochlorococcus&quot;, and as filaments, as in &quot;Prochlorothrix&quot;.

== See also ==
*Cyanobacteria
*&quot;Prochloron&quot;
*&quot;Prochlorococcus&quot;
*Photosynthetic picoplankton

== References ==
== External links ==
* Prochlorophytes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q577485" start="0" end="14" title="Prochlorophyta" label="Prochlorophyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="29" end="43" title="Photosynthesis" label="photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="44" end="52" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382538" start="80" end="92" title="picoplankton" label="picoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q412631" start="300" end="310" title="phycobilin" label="phycobilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="387" end="400" title="Cyanobacteria" label="Cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q577485" start="492" end="504" title="Prochlorophyta" label="Prochlorales"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="555" end="568" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q412631" start="578" end="588" title="phycobilin" label="phycobilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="637" end="655" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247357" start="691" end="701" title="Prochloron" label="Prochloron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888439" start="779" end="793" title="Ralph A. Lewin" label="Ralph A. Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q604029" start="801" end="836" title="Scripps Institution of Oceanography" label="Scripps Institution of Oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q412631" start="870" end="880" title="phycobilin" label="phycobilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645284" start="1147" end="1162" title="Prochlorococcus" label="Prochlorococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794852" start="1182" end="1208" title="Sallie W. (Penny) Chisholm" label="Sallie W. (Penny) Chisholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645284" start="1231" end="1246" title="Prochlorococcus" label="Prochlorococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382533" start="1422" end="1449" title="photosynthetic picoplankton" label="photosynthetic picoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="1482" end="1495" title="Cyanobacteria" label="Cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="1515" end="1531" title="Blue Green Algae" label="Blue Green Algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753295" start="1600" end="1606" title="Coccus" label="Coccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645284" start="1628" end="1643" title="Prochlorococcus" label="Prochlorococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="1720" end="1733" title="Cyanobacteria" label="Cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247357" start="1741" end="1751" title="Prochloron" label="Prochloron"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645284" start="1765" end="1780" title="Prochlorococcus" label="Prochlorococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382533" start="1788" end="1815" title="Photosynthetic picoplankton" label="Photosynthetic picoplankton"/>
</links>
</doc>
