<doc id="962433" wikidata="Q2454921" url="?curid=962433" title="Ancient warfare">
<text>Ancient warfare is war that was conducted from the beginning of recorded history to the end of the ancient period. The difference between prehistoric and ancient warfare is more organization oriented than technology oriented. The development of first city-states, and then empires, allowed warfare to change dramatically. Beginning in Mesopotamia, states produced sufficient agricultural surplus. This allowed full-time ruling elites and military commanders to emerge. While the bulk of military forces were still farmers, the society could portion off each year. Thus, organized armies developed for the first time. These new armies were able to help states grow in size and become increasingly centralized.

In Europe and the Near East, the end of antiquity is often equated with the Fall of Rome in 476 AD, the wars of the Eastern Roman Empire on its Southwestern Asian and North African borders, and the beginnings of the Muslim conquests in the 7th century. In China, it can also be seen as ending of the growing role of mounted warriors needed to counter the ever-growing threat from the north in the 5th century and the beginning of the Tang dynasty in 618 AD. In India, the ancient period ends with the decline of the Gupta Empire (6th century) and the beginning of the Muslim conquests there from the 8th century. In Japan, the ancient period is considered to end with the rise of feudalism in the Kamakura period in the 12–13th century.

Early ancient armies continued to primarily use bows and spears, the same weapons that had been developed in prehistoric times for hunting. The findings at the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, have been interpreted as evidence of inter-group conflict and warfare in antiquity, but this interpretation has been challenged. Early armies in Egypt and China followed a similar pattern of using massed infantry armed with bows and spears.
Infantry at this time was the dominant form of war, partially due to the camel saddle and the stirrup not being invented yet. The infantries at this time would be divided into ranged and shock, with shock infantry either charging to cause penetration of the enemy line or hold their own. These forces would ideally be combined, thus presenting the opponent with a dilemma: group the forces and leave them vulnerable to ranged, or spread them out and make them vulnerable to shock. This balance would eventually change as technology allowed for chariots, cavalry, and artillery to play an active role on the field.

No clear line can be drawn between ancient and medieval warfare. The characteristic properties of medieval warfare, notably heavy cavalry and siege engines such as the trebuchet were first introduced in Late Antiquity. The main division within the ancient period is at the beginning Iron Age with the introduction of cavalry (resulting in the decline of chariot warfare), of naval warfare (Sea Peoples), and the development of an industry based on ferrous metallurgy which allowed for the mass production of metal weapons and thus the equipment of large standing armies.
The first military power to profit from these innovations was the Neo-Assyrian Empire, which achieved a hitherto unseen extent of centralized control, the first &quot;world power&quot; to extend over the entire Fertile Crescent (Mesopotamia, the Levant and Egypt).
== Chariots ==
As states grew in size, the speed of mobilization became crucial because central power could not hold if rebellions could not be suppressed rapidly. The first solution to this was the chariot, which was initially used in the Middle East from around 1800 BC. First pulled by oxen and donkeys, they allowed rapid traversing of the relatively flat lands of the Middle East. The chariots were light enough that they could easily be floated across rivers. Improvements in the ability to train horses soon allowed them to be used to pull chariots, possibly as early as 2100 BC, and their greater speed and power made chariots even more efficient. The major limitation of the use of chariots was terrain; while very mobile on flat, hard, open ground, it was very difficult to traverse more difficult terrain, such as rough ground, even sparse trees or bushes, small ravines or streams, or marsh. In such terrain, chariots were less maneuverable than common foot soldiers, and later cavalry.

The chariot was so powerful for transportation and warfare that it became the key weapon in the Ancient Near East in the 2nd millennium BC. The typical chariot was worked by two men: one would be a bowman who would fire at enemy forces, while the other would control the vehicle. Over time, chariots were developed to carry up to five warriors. In China, chariots became the central weapon of the Shang dynasty, allowing them to unify a great area.

Although chariots have been compared to modern-day tanks in the role they played on the battlefield, i.e. shock attacks, this is disputed, with scholars pointing out that chariots were vulnerable and fragile, and required a level terrain while tanks are all-terrain vehicles; thus chariots were unsuitable for use like modern tanks as a physical shock force. The chief advantage of the chariot was the tactical mobility they provided to bowmen. Tightly packed infantry was the formation of choice, in order for ancient generals to maintain command and control during the battle as well as for mutual protection. But a force of chariots could stand off at long range and rain arrows down on the infantrymen&#x27;s heads. Because of their speed, any attempts to charge the chariots could be easily evaded. If, on the other hand, an infantry unit spread out to minimize the damage from arrows, they would lose the benefit of mutual protection and the charioteers could easily overrun them.

Thus any force facing chariots was in a tactical dilemma, making chariots indispensable to armies of those times. But they were complicated equipment that required specialized craftsmen to maintain them. This made chariots expensive to own. When chariots were owned by individuals within a society, it tended to give rise to a warrior class of specialists and a feudal system (an example of which can be seen in Homer&#x27;s The Iliad). Where chariots were publicly owned, they helped in the maintenance and establishment of a strong central government, e.g. the New Egyptian Kingdom. Chariot usage peaked in the Battle of Kadesh in 1274 BC, which was probably the largest chariot battle ever fought, involving perhaps 5,000 chariots.

== Naval warfare ==
Naval warfare in the ancient world can be traced back to the Mediterranean in the third millennium BC, from evidence of paintings in the Cyclades and models of ships which were made across the Aegean. Ships were used for civilian transport and trade, as well as for military purposes. They were propelled by both rowing and sailing, but since the Mediterranean is known for its inconsistent weather patterns, rowing was probably the primary means of propulsion.

The first documented, physical evidence of a naval battle is found in a relief painting located in the temple of Medinet Habu, near Luxor, Egypt. It shows the victory of Ramses III over the &#x27;Sea-Peoples&#x27; in the Nile river delta in the early twelfth century BC. These &#x27;Sea-Peoples&#x27; were originally believed to be of Philistine and Phoenician descent, while there is speculation that there could be some Greek influence in their seafaring. Even before this relief painting, there are earlier records of the practice of sea battles as early as 2550 BC under the Egyptian pharaoh Sahue, who reportedly used transport vessels to escort his armies to foreign shores. There is even further evidence from earlier sources that illustrate seafaring and military action around the Nile Delta during the early dynastic period in Egypt, following into the reign of Ramses II

Before that victory of Ramses III, the state of Egypt had no access to the kind of timber needed to build seafaring vessels and warships on a large scale. Instead of importing large quantities of timber to build warships, Egyptian naval architects and early engineers began to convert the common Egyptian riverboats. They reconfigured the size of the ship and added heavy trees for longitudinal support of the hull on the open sea. The warships constructed in this way contributed to that victory. The relief painting shows in great detail how fighting was conducted in a naval battle. It shows Egyptian warships with over twenty rows of oarsmen along with infantry troops and archers fighting in apparent hand-to-hand combat with the opposing naval force. This raises a question to the theory that there was no actual naval weaponry developed at this time but rather a reliance upon maneuvering tactics and strategy in order to engage with infantry troops.

=== The trireme ===
Among the great innovations of naval warfare in the ancient world there are few that can surpass the trireme style warship in terms of efficiency, strategy, and overall effectiveness. The first depiction of this &#x27;longship&#x27; style vessel can be found in Homer&#x27;s &quot;The Iliad&quot; as a means of transport of armed men and supplies to areas of conflict across the seas. These ships were said to have consisted of two separate levels that could have held up to 60 men per level, all operating oars in unison to propel the ship. The upper level of oarsmen would sit in single-file fashion, pulling their oars through what is called a top wale or some sort of oar-port; while the men in the lower rows would sit in the ships&#x27; hold also rowing through lower oar-ports. It is also said that each oar throughout the ship would be made in length proportionate to the physique of an average Greek man.
Manned crews for these massive warships would have been quite impressive, but accounts vary in actual numbers of men from source to source. Herodotus of Halicarnassus was a Greek historian in the fourth century BC who, through his accounts, said that these triremes would consist of at least two hundred men manning all positions. With these massive crews, these ships were able to work at maximum capacity and efficiency in regards to speed, navigation, and transport. While these ships were built for maximum efficiency, there is room for debate about the conditions and space aboard the ship itself. It is estimated that out of the 200 man crew, around 170 of those men would have been oarsmen with respective positions below deck. These oarsmen below deck would sit on thwarts and kept their personal storage items beneath them, reassuring the theory that these ships would be very crowded with little room for anything other than operational functions.

What exactly these Greek triremes were capable of in battle is debated. There are various different accounts that lay down foundations of what equipment was used and how these ships engaged in combat. The main military applications of Greek triremes, besides the transport of troops and supplies, would be the advantages of ramming tactics. Developments and innovations of the Greek trireme evolved over time, especially in respect to ramming tactics. Naval architects during this time saw fit to bring about full effectiveness and damaging power to these ships. By doing this, the amount of manpower would stay consistent, i.e., keeping the same amount of rowing power but shortening the length of the ship to condense the ramming power while keeping speed and agility consistent. This new ideology of warfare and naval tactics would prove to be prudent to the overall military applications of the trireme, and soon would become the principal combative strategy of the Greek navy and other navies alike.

The Greek trireme, soon after its appearance in the Aegean, would become the standard warship throughout the Mediterranean as sovereign states such as Egypt and the Persian Empire would adopt the design of these ships and apply them to their own military applications. One major attraction of the Greek design was not only its efficient ramming capability but also its ability to travel long distances at fair speeds. One account from the Athenian soldier and historian Xenophon describes the voyage of the Athenian fleet commander Iphicrates through unfriendly waters and the strategy he used combined with the sheer sailing power of the trireme.

This primary source account can be interpreted as functional and efficient use of the Greek trireme: maximizing its speed through rugged and unfriendly seas while also utilizing specific military strategy in order to ensure the most prudent and effective outcome was what led to the success of the trireme across all kinds of empires and civilizations throughout the Mediterranean. The trireme would later become a vital piece of naval weaponry throughout the Persian Wars, for both the Greeks and the Persian Empire, as well as the base standard for the formation of the Roman navy.

The Persian Wars were the first to feature large-scale naval operations: not only sophisticated fleet engagements with dozens of triremes on each side, but also combined land-sea operations. Ships in the ancient world could operate only on the relatively quiet waters of seas and rivers; the oceans were off limits. Navies were almost always used as auxiliaries to land forces, often essential to bringing them supplies. They would rarely strike out on their own. With only limited-range weapons, naval galleys would often attempt to ram their opponents with their reinforced bow to cause damage or sink the enemy warships which often caused the two ships to become joined, and initiated a boarding battle. Only occasionally was a decisive naval battle fought, such as the Battle of Lade in which a Persian navy destroyed the Greek navy.

== Tactics and weapons ==
=== Strategy ===
Ancient strategy focused broadly on the twin goals of convincing the enemy that continued war was more costly than submitting, and of making the most gain possible from war.

Forcing the enemy to submit generally consisted of defeating their army in the field. Once the enemy force was routed, the threat of siege, civilian deaths, and the like often forced the enemy to the bargaining table. However, this goal could be accomplished by other means. Burning enemy fields would force the choice of surrendering or fighting a pitched battle. Waiting an enemy out until their army had to disband due to the beginning of the harvest season or running out of payment for mercenaries presented an enemy with a similar choice. The exceptional conflicts of the ancient world were when these rules of warfare were violated. The Spartan and Athenian refusal to accept surrender after many years of war and near bankruptcy in the Peloponnesian War is one such exceptional example, as is the Roman refusal to surrender after the Battle of Cannae.

A more personal goal in war was simple profit. This profit was often monetary, as was the case with the raiding culture of the Gallic tribes. But the profit could be political, as great leaders in war were often rewarded with government office after their success. These strategies often contradict modern common sense as they conflict with what would be best for the states involved in the war.

=== Tactics ===

Effective tactics varied greatly, depending on:
# The army&#x27;s size
# Unit types
# Terrain
# The weather
# Positional advantage
# Skill level
# Individual battle experience
# Individual morale
# Armament (quantity and quality)

=== Weapons ===

Ancient weapons included the spear, the atlatl with light javelin or similar projectile, the bow and arrow, the sling; polearms such as the spear, falx and javelin; hand-to-hand weapons such as swords, spears, clubs, maces, axes, and knives. Catapults, siege towers, and battering rams were used during sieges.
The Ancient Greeks left behind many examples of their weapons through their burial practices. In &quot;Arms and Armour of the Greeks&quot;, Snodgrass states that the rapier-like swords found within Mycenean tombs tended to be brittle due to their length and slim designs. During the Bronze Age, two new types of swords made a debut: the horned and cruciform varieties. The horned sword was named after the horn-like appearance of the handguard and was the preferred weapon for cutting strikes. The cruciform sword was derived from the Minoan dagger&#x27;s flanged hilt and rounded handguards set at right angles. Spears remained the preferred means for thrusting attacks, but the Palace Period saw the addition of a socketed base to the weapon. This new period also saw a shift in the role of the bow and arrow from hunting implements to full-fledged weapons. As Greek civilization progressed, the need for weapons changed and by the Late Period of Mycenae, weapons had become shorter and more suited for use in work environments rather than battles.

Macedon was known more traditionally for having a strong cavalry rather than infantry. During Alexander&#x27;s reign, the Sarissophori came into being and this was unique to Alexander&#x27;s time in power. While the cavalry was more prominent, the Macedon infantry, made up of the poor and peasant classes, formed into a new and unique branch of the military that was different from the hoplite. These warriors were armed with a huge pike weapon called a sarissa as well as the army being equipped with slings, which used almond-shaped bronze bullets that were engraved with either Philip&#x27;s name or that of one of his generals. For siege warfare, the Macedonians used an arrow-firing catapult. For armor, they were equipped with a metal helmet, greaves, and a shield covered with bronze.

In &quot;The Archaeology of Weapons&quot;, a broader account of ancient weaponry is set out through the investigation of European weapons. Oakeshott believes that at some point between 1500 and 100 BC that the sword developed from the knife in both Minoan Crete and Celtic Britain and strongly resembles the rapier. During the Bronze Age in the same general region, several other swords were developed: the Hallstatt first appeared during this Age but did not become widely used until the Iron Age, the Carps Tongues, and the Rhone Valley swords. The Hallstatt swords gained prominence during the Iron Age and were a long sword with a rather curious point that was one of three shapes: rounded, a square shape, or similar to a fishtail, and were the preferred weapon for use in a chariot. The Carps Tongues blade were also rather large swords with the edges running parallel for two-thirds of the blade before narrowing to the usually point. The last sword is that of the Rhone Valley and is generally considered more of small sword or an overly large dagger with each hilt uniquely cast in bronze. The pommel of this type of dagger has the ends drawn out into two thin points that curve in towards the blade. Along with Hallstatt swords, there were found to be spears, similar to the spearheads found in Mycenae they were quite large at fifteen inches and having a hollow socket however they were unique in that they had a small collar of bronze near where they attached to the shaft.

Within India&#x27;s long history there are several different regimes that produced unique weapons. The list of weapons primarily used in India are the battle axe, the bow and arrow, spears, spikes, the barbed dart, the sword, the iron club, the javelin, the iron arrow, and the scimitar. One sword type is the katar blade. These are equipped with sword-breaking bars and both the shape and size would depend on whether the bearer was cavalry or an infantryman. A curved sword such as the talwar or shamshir was ideal for a cutting motion delivered from horseback. There were three early iron sword types: the leaf-shaped, spoon-shaped and the parallel sword, each ideal for thrusting and jabbing as opposed to a striking or cutting motion. The Rajputs, Gurkhas, Nagas, and Coorg and Malabar each developed a weapon unique to themselves. The Rajputs wielded the khanda which is a broad and straight sword with a wider point. The Gurkhas had two swords that they preferred to use: the kukri, a short sword that angled towards a wide tip, and the kora, their historical war sword which was around 60 centimeters with a single edge that was rather narrow near the handler and curving towards the front. The daos had a blade equal to two feet in length that had a wide and square-like tip and the handle was made of either wood or ivory; these were the weapons that came to popularity for the Nagas. The Ayudha katti was a single-edged blade also near two feet long but with no handle and wielded by the Coorg and Malabar. In Southern India, the Borobudur and the Veragal, either shaped like a hook or a wavy design, were the swords in use. A rather unique weapon used in India is the Baghnakh, which is similar to a knuckle duster and was used to slit the opponent&#x27;s throat or belly.

Armor in India can be found dating back to 500 BC and Vedic literature; there are several different types: leather and fabric, scale, brigandine, lamellar, mail, plate, and a combination of mail and plate. In &quot;Arms and Armour: Traditional Weapons of India&quot; it is said that the wrastrana, a breastplate, had been in use since prehistoric times, though the most popular is the char-aina meaning four mirrors is a coat of mail overlaid with four elaborately designed plates. The helmets consisted of a sliding nose guard with a piece of chainmail hanging from it designed to protect the neck and shoulders. Armor was not just limited to human soldiers but extended to their horses and elephants as well. The horse armor was made up of mail and plates or lamellae which covered the neck, chest, and hindquarters underneath which was some form of padding to keep it in place while a faceplate protected the animal&#x27;s face. The elephants, used as a battering ram or to break and trample enemy lines, were also donned in armor for battle. The elephant&#x27;s head was covered by a steel mask and covered half of the trunk while the throat and sides were protected by lamellae armor while the tusks were tipped with sharp metal.

=== Sieges ===

Siege warfare of the ancient Near East took place behind walls built of mud bricks, stone, wood or a combination of these materials depending on local availability. The earliest representations of siege warfare date to the Protodynastic Period of Egypt, c. 3000 BC, while the first siege equipment is known from Egyptian tomb reliefs of the 24th century BC showing wheeled siege ladders. Assyrian palace reliefs of the 9th to 7th centuries BC display sieges of several Near Eastern cities. Though a simple battering ram had come into use in the previous millennium, the Assyrians improved siege warfare. The most common practice of siege warfare was, however, to lay siege and wait for the surrender of the enemies inside. Due to the problem of logistics, long-lasting sieges involving anything but a minor force could seldom be maintained.

Ancient siege warfare varied from each civilization and how each city was defended differently and had to approach with different tactics. One way to ensure an army used all its troops in its siege is shown when its explained how a chariot can be used in a siege, saying that, &quot;During the sieges, the chariots, and mostly in the Neo-Assyrian armies, were surely employed to patrol and protect the flanks and the rear of the besiegers&#x27; lines and camp.&quot; (UF 41 p. 5).

This shows that generals had to find new tactics to incorporate parts of their army that wouldn&#x27;t work in the siege, as shown with the chariots on patrol duty and ensuring the army was safe from a flank attack from the enemy army. This strategy ensures that all forces are used and contributing to the battle effort and helping gain victory for them and all pulling their weight as well.

== By culture ==
=== Ancient Near East ===
==== Mesopotamia ====

==== Egypt ====

Throughout most of its history, ancient Egypt was unified under one government. The main military concern for the nation was to keep enemies out. The arid plains and deserts surrounding Egypt were inhabited by nomadic tribes who occasionally tried to raid or settle in the fertile Nile river valley. The Egyptians built fortresses and outposts along the borders east and west of the Nile Delta, in the Eastern Desert, and in Nubia to the south. Small garrisons could prevent minor incursions, but if a large force was detected a message was sent for the main army corps. Most Egyptian cities lacked city walls and other defenses.

The first Egyptian soldiers carried a simple armament consisting of a spear with a copper spearhead and a large wooden shield covered by leather hides. A stone mace was also carried in the Archaic period, though later this weapon was probably only in ceremonial use, and was replaced with the bronze battle axe. The spearmen were supported by archers carrying a composite bow and arrows with arrowheads made of flint or copper. No armour was used during the 3rd and early 2nd millennium BC. As the dynasties expanded and grew upon the last that fell to gain new territory and control new people for the empire of Egypt. One of the ways the dynasties were different were the new technologies used in the later dynasties against the enemy. One example is the armies of Ramesses&#x27; II faced off against the Hittites in the Battle of Qadesh. Both armies have cavalry units supporting their infantry and scouts to get updates on the movements. These advances differ from two groups attacking head-on for control of an area and facing losses on both sides

The major advance in weapons technology and warfare began around 1600 BC when the Egyptians fought and defeated the Hyksos people, who ruled Lower Egypt at the time. It was during this period the horse and chariot were introduced into Egypt. Other new technologies included the sickle sword, body armour and improved bronze casting. In the New Kingdom, the Egyptian military changed from levy troops into a firm organization of professional soldiers. Conquests of foreign territories, like Nubia, required a permanent force to be garrisoned abroad. The Egyptians were mostly used to slowly defeating a much weaker enemy, town-by-town until beaten into submission. The preferred tactic was to subdue a weaker city or kingdom one at a time resulting in the surrender of each fraction until complete domination was achieved. The encounter with other powerful Near Eastern kingdoms like Mitanni, the Hittites, and later the Assyrians and Babylonians, made it necessary for the Egyptians to conduct campaigns far from home. The next leap forwards came in the Late Period (712–332 BC), when mounted troops and weapons made of iron came into use. After the conquest by Alexander the Great, Egypt was heavily Hellenized and the main military force became the infantry phalanx. The ancient Egyptians were not great innovators in weapons technology, and most weapons technology innovation came from Western Asia and the Greek world.

These soldiers were paid with a plot of land for the provision of their families. After fulfillment of their service, the veterans were allowed retirement to these estates. Generals could become quite influential at the court, but unlike other feudal states, the Egyptian military was completely controlled by the king. Foreign mercenaries were also recruited; first Nubians (Medjay), and later also Libyans and Sherdens in the New Kingdom. By the Persian period, Greek mercenaries entered service into the armies of the rebellious pharaohs. The Jewish mercenaries at Elephantine served the Persian overlords of Egypt in the 5th century BC. Although, they might also have served the Egyptian pharaohs of the 6th century BC.

As far as had been seen from the royal propaganda of the time, the king or the crown prince personally headed the Egyptian troops into battle. The army could number tens of thousands of soldiers, so the smaller battalions consisting of 250 men, led by an officer, may have been the key of command. The tactics involved a massive strike by archery followed by infantry and/or chariotry attacking the broken enemy lines. The enemies could, however, try to surprise the large Egyptian force with ambushes and by blocking the road as the Egyptian campaign records informs us.

Within the Nile valley itself, ships and barges were important military elements. Ships were vital for providing supplies for the troops. The Nile river had no fords so barges had to be used for river crossings. Dominating the river often proved necessary for prosecuting sieges, like the Egyptian conquest of the Hyksos capital Avaris. Egypt had no navy to fight naval battles at sea before the Late Period. However, a battle involving ships took place at the Egyptian coast in the 12th century BC between Ramesses III and seafaring raiders.

==== Persia ====

Ancient Persia first emerged as a major military power under Cyrus the Great. Its form of warfare was based on massed infantry in light armor to pin the enemy force whilst cavalry dealt the killing blow. Cavalry was used in huge numbers but it is not known whether they were heavily armored or not. Most Greek sources claim the Persians wore no armor, but we do have an example from Herodotus which claims that an unhorsed cavalry officer wore a gold cuirass under his red robes. Chariots were used in the early days but during the later days of the Persian Empire they were surpassed by horsemen. During the Persian Empire&#x27;s height, they even possessed war elephants from North Africa and distant India. The elite of the Persian Army were the famous Persian Immortals, a 10,000 strong unit of professional soldiers armed with a spear, a sword and a bow. Archers also formed a major component of the Persian army.

Persian tactics primarily had four stages involving archers, infantry and cavalry. The archers, who wielded longbows, would fire waves of arrows before the battle, attempting to cut the enemy numbers down prior battle. The cavalry would then attempt to run into the enemy and sever communications between generals and soldiers. Infantry would then proceed to attack the disoriented soldiers, subsequently weakened from the previous attacks.

=== Nubia ===
The Kerma culture was the first Nubian kingdom to unify much of the region. The Classic Kerma Culture, named for its royal capital at Kerma, was one of the earliest urban centers in the Nile region. Kerma culture was militaristic. This is attested by the many bronze daggers or swords as well as archer burials found in their graves. The Kingdom of Kush began to emerge around 1000 BC, 500 years after the end of the Kingdom of Kerma.
The first period of the kingdom&#x27;s history, the &#x27;Napatan&#x27;, was succeeded by the &#x27;Meroitic period&#x27;, when the royal cemeteries relocated to Meroë around 300 BC.

Bowmen were the most important force components throughout Kushite military history. Archaeology has also revealed the use of the crossbow in Kush. Siege engines were deployed in Kushite siege warfare; for instance, during Piye&#x27;s invasion of Ashmunein in the 8th century BC. Other Kushite weapons included War Elephants, chariots, armor. At its peak, the kingdom of Kush stretched all the way from Nubia to the Near East.

=== Asia ===
==== India ====

During the Vedic period (fl. 1500–500 BC), the &quot;Vedas&quot; and other associated texts contain references to warfare. The earliest allusions to a specific battle are those to the Battle of the Ten Kings in which extensive use of chariots between inter-tribal wars was found in Mandala 7 of the Rigveda.

The two great ancient epics of India, &quot;Ramayana&quot; and &quot;Mahabharata&quot; (–500 BC) are centered on conflicts and refer to military formations, theories of warfare and esoteric weaponry. Valmiki&#x27;s &quot;Ramayana&quot; describes Ayodhya&#x27;s military as defensive rather than aggressive. The city, it says, was strongly fortified and was surrounded by a deep moat. &quot;Ramayana&quot; describes Ayodhya in the following words: &quot;The city abounded in warriors undefeated in battle, fearless and chinskilled in the use of arms, resembling lions guarding their mountain caves&quot;. &quot;Mahabharata&quot; describes various military techniques, including the &quot;Chakravyuha&quot;.

The world&#x27;s first recorded military application of war elephants is in the Mahabharatha. From India, war elephants were brought to the Persian Empire where they were used in several campaigns. The Persian king Darius III employed about 50 Indian elephants in the Battle of Gaugamela (331 BC) fought against Alexander the Great. In the Battle of the Hydaspes River, the Indian king Porus, who ruled in Punjab, with his smaller army of 200 war elephants, 2,000 cavalry and 20,000 infantry, presented great difficulty for Alexander the Great&#x27;s larger army of 4,000 cavalry and 50,000 infantry, though Porus was eventually defeated. At this time, the Nanda Empire further east in northern and eastern India had an army of 6000 war elephants, 80,000 cavalry, 200,000 infantry and 8,000 armed chariots.

Chanakya (–275 BC) was a professor of political science at Takshashila University, and later the prime minister of emperor Chandragupta Maurya, the founder of the Maurya Empire. Chanakya wrote the &quot;Arthashastra&quot;, which covered various topics on ancient Indian warfare in great detail, including various techniques and strategies relating to war. These included the earliest uses of espionage and assassinations. These techniques and strategies were employed by Chandragupta Maurya, who was a student of Chanakya, and later by Ashoka (304–232 BC).

Chandragupta Maurya conquered the Magadha Empire and expanded to all of northern India, establishing the Maurya Empire, which extended from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal. In 305 BC, Chandragupta defeated Seleucus I Nicator, who ruled the Seleucid Empire and controlled most of the territories conquered by Alexander the Great. Seleucus eventually lost his territories in Southern Asia, including southern Afghanistan, to Chandragupta. Seleucus exchanged territory west of the Indus for 500 war elephants and offered his daughter to Chandragupta. In this matrimonial alliance, the enmity turned into friendship, and Seleucus&#x27; dispatched an ambassador, Megasthenes, to the Mauryan court at Pataliputra. As a result of this treaty, the Maurya Empire was recognized as a great power by the Hellenistic World, and the kings of Egypt and Syria sent their own ambassadors to his court. According to Megasthenes, Chandragupta Maurya built an army consisting of 30,000 cavalry, 10,000 war elephants, and 600,000 infantry, which was the largest army known in the ancient world. Ashoka went on to expand the Maurya Empire to almost all of South Asia, along with much of Afghanistan and parts of Persia. Ashoka eventually gave up on warfare after converting to Buddhism.

The Cholas were the first rulers of the Indian subcontinent to maintain a navy and use it to expand their dominion overseas. Vijayalaya Chola defeated the Pallavas and captured Thanjavur. In the early 10th century the Chola king Parantaka I defeated the Pandyan king Maravarman Rajasimha II and invaded Sri Lanka. The Rashtrakuta ruler Krishna III defeated and killed Parantaka I&#x27;s son Rajaditya in about 949.

Uttama Chola reigned 970–985. Inscriptions tell that at least from his time, Chola warriors wore waist coats of armour. Hence, one regiment was called &quot;Niyayam-Uttama-Chola-tterinda-andalakattalar&quot;. Paluvettaraiyar Maravan Kandanar served as a general under Uttama and his predecessor, Sundara.

Rajaraja Chola began his military career with the conquest of the Cheras in the Kandalur War. He captured the Pandya ruler Amara Bhujanga, the town of Vizhinjam, and a part of Sri Lanka. In the 14th year of his reign (998–999) he conquered the Gangas of Mysore, the Nolambas of Bellary and Eastern Mysore, Tadigaipadi, Vengi, Coorg, the Pandyas and the Chalukyas of the Deccan. During the next three years, he subdued Quilon and the northern kingdom of Kalinga with the help of his son Rajendra Chola I. Rajendra later completed the conquest of Sri Lanka, crossed the Ganges, and marched across Kalinga to Bengal. He sent out a great naval expedition that occupied parts of Java, Malaya, and Sumatra. The Cholas were brought down by the Hoysalas from the west and Pandyas from the south.

==== China ====
Ancient China during the Shang dynasty was a Bronze Age society based on chariot armies. An archaeological study of Shang sites at Anyang have revealed extensive examples of chariots and bronze weapons. The overthrow of the Shang by the Zhou saw the creation of a feudal social order, resting militarily on a class of aristocratic chariot warriors (士).

In the Spring and Autumn period, warfare increased. &quot;Zuo zhuan&quot; describes the wars and battles among the feudal lords during the period. Warfare continued to be stylised and ceremonial even as it grew more violent and decisive. The concept of military hegemon (霸) and his &quot;way of force&quot; (霸道) came to dominate Chinese society. Sun Tzu created a book that still applies to today&#x27;s modern armies, The Art of War.

Formations of the army can be clearly seen from the Terracotta Army of Qin Shi Huang, the first Emperor in the history of China to be successful in the unification of different warring states. Light infantry acting as shock troops lead the army, followed by heavy infantry as the main body of the army. Wide usage of cavalry and chariots behind the heavy infantry also gave the Qin army an edge in battles against the other warring states.

Warfare became more intense, ruthless and much more decisive during the Warring States period, in which great social and political change was accompanied by the end of the system of chariot warfare and the adoption of mass infantry armies. Cavalry was also introduced from the northern frontier, despite the cultural challenge it posed for robe-wearing Chinese men. Chinese river valley civilizations would adopt nomadic &quot;pants&quot; for their cavalry units and soldiers.

==== Japanese ====
Horses and bows were very important in Japan and were used in warfare from very early times, as shown in statues and artifacts found in tombs of early chieftains. Samurai eventually became very skilled in using the horse. Because their main weapon at this time was the bow and arrow, early samurai exploits were spoken of in Japanese war tales as the &quot;Way of the Horse and Bow&quot;. Horse and bow combined was a battlefield advantage to the early samurai. A bunch of arrows made of mainly wood with poison-tipped points was worn on a warrior&#x27;s right side so he could quickly knock and release an arrow mid-gallop.

Although they weren&#x27;t as important as the bow, swords of various sizes and types were also part of an early samurai&#x27;s armory. They were mostly for close-quarters engagements. Many different kinds of spears were also used. One, the naginata, was a curved blade fixed to the end of a pole several feet long. This was known as a &#x27;woman&#x27;s spear&#x27; because samurai girls were taught to use it from an early age. A device called the kumade, which resembled a long-handled garden rake, was used to catch the clothing or helmet of enemy horsemen and unseat them.

Common samurai archers had armor made of lamellae pieces laced together with colorful cords. The lightweight armor allowed for greater freedom of movement, faster speed, and reduced fatigue for horse and rider.

The early Yamato period had seen a continual engagement in the Korean Peninsula until Japan finally withdrew, along with the remaining forces of the Baekje Kingdom. Several battles occurred in these periods as the Emperor&#x27;s succession gained importance. By the Nara period, Honshū was completely under the control of the Yamato clan. Near the end of the Heian period, samurai became a powerful political force, thus starting the feudal period.

=== Ancient Greece ===
In general, most features of the hoplite panoply of classical Greek antiquity, were already known during the Late Bronze Age by Mycenaean Greeks (–1100 BC). Mycenaean Greek society invested in the development of military infrastructure, while military production and logistics were supervised directly from the palatial centers.

Infantry did almost all of the fighting in Greek battles. The Greeks did not have any notable cavalry tradition except the Thessalians. Hoplites, Greek infantry, fought with a long spear and a large shield, the aspis. Light infantry (psiloi) peltasts, served as skirmishers.

Despite the fact that most Greek cities were well fortified (with the notable exception of Sparta) and Greek siege technology was not up to the task of breaching these fortifications by force, most land battles were pitched ones fought on flat-open ground. This was because of the limited period of service Greek soldiers could offer before they needed to return to their farms; hence, a decisive battle was needed to settle matters at hand. To draw out a city&#x27;s defenders, its fields would be threatened with destruction, threatening the defenders with starvation in the winter if they did not surrender or accept battle.

This pattern of warfare was broken during the Peloponnesian War, when Athens&#x27; command of the sea allowed the city to ignore the destruction of the Athenian crops by Sparta and her allies by shipping grain into the city from the Crimea. This led to a warfare style in which both sides were forced to engage in repeated raids over several years without reaching a settlement. It also made sea battle a vital part of warfare. Greek naval battles were fought between triremes – long and speedy rowing ships which engaged the enemy by ramming and boarding actions.

==== Hellenistic Era ====

During the time of Philip II of Macedon and Alexander the Great, the Macedonians were regarded as the most complete well co-ordinated military force in the known world. Although they are best known for the achievements of Alexander the Great, his father Philip II of Macedon created and designed the fighting force Alexander used in his conquests. Before this time and for centuries their military prowess was nowhere near that the sarissa phalanx offered.

However, prior to the improvements made by Philip II of Macedon armies fought in the traditional manner of the Greeks; that of the hoplite phalanx.

Philip provided his Macedonian soldiers in the phalanx with sarissa, a spear which was 4–6 meters in length. The sarissa, when held upright by the rear ranks of the phalanx (there were usually eight ranks), helped hide maneuvers behind the phalanx from the view of the enemy. When held horizontal by the front ranks of the phalanx, enemies could be run through from far away. The hoplite type troops were not abandoned, but were no longer the core of the army.

In 358 BC he met the Illyrians in battle with his reorganized Macedonian phalanx and utterly defeated them. The Illyrians fled in panic, leaving the majority of their 9,000-strong army dead. The Macedonian army invaded Illyria and conquered the southern Illyrian tribes.

After the defeat of the Illyrians, Macedon&#x27;s policy became increasingly aggressive. Paeonia was already forcefully integrated into Macedon under Philip&#x27;s rule. In 357 BC Philip broke the treaty with Athens and attacked Amphipolis which promised to surrender to the Athenians in exchange for the fortified town of Pydna, a promise he did not keep. The city fell back in the hands of Macedonia after an intense siege. Then he secured possession over the gold mines of nearby Mount Pangaeus, which would enable him to finance his future wars.

In 356 BC the Macedonian army advanced further eastward and captured the town of Crenides (near modern Drama) which was in the hands of the Thracians, and which Philip renamed after himself to Philippi. The Macedonian eastern border with Thrace was now secured at the river Nestus (Mesta).
Philip next marched against his southern enemies. In Thessaly he defeated his enemies and by 352 BC, he was firmly in control of this region. The Macedonian army advanced as far as the pass of Thermopylae which divides Greece in two parts, but it did not attempt to take it because it was strongly guarded by a joint force of Athenians, Spartans, and Achaeans.

Having secured the bordering regions of Macedon, Philip assembled a large Macedonian army and marched deep into Thrace for a long conquering campaign. By 339 BC after defeating the Thracians in series of battles, most of Thrace was firmly in Macedonian hands save the most eastern Greek coastal cities of Byzantium and Perinthus who successfully withstood the long and difficult sieges. But both Byzantium and Perinthus would have surely fallen had it not been for the help they received from the various Greek city-states, and the Persian king himself, who now viewed the rise of Macedonia and its eastern expansion with concern. Ironically, the Greeks invited and sided with the Persians against the Macedonians, although Persia had been the nation hated the most by Greece for more than a century. The memory of the Persian invasion of Greece some 150 years prior was still alive, but the current politics for the Macedonians had put it aside.

Much greater would be the conquests of his son, Alexander the Great, who would add to the phalanx a powerful cavalry, led by his elite Companions, and flexible, innovative formations and tactics. He advanced Greek style of combat, and was able to muster large bodies of men for long periods of time for his campaigns against Persia.

=== Iron Age Europe ===
==== Roman Empire ====
The Roman army was the world&#x27;s first professional army. It had its origins in the citizen army of the Republic, which was staffed by citizens serving mandatory duty for Rome. The reforms of Marius around 100 BC turned the army into a professional structure, still largely filled by citizens, but citizens who served continuously for 20 years before being discharged.

The Romans were also noted for making use of auxiliary troops, non-Romans who served with the legions and filled roles that the traditional Roman military could not fill effectively, such as light skirmish troops and heavy cavalry. Later in the Empire, these auxiliary troops, along with foreign mercenaries, became the core of the Roman military. By the late Empire, tribes such as the Visigoths were bribed to serve as mercenaries.

The Roman navy was traditionally considered less important, although it remained vital for the transportation of supplies and troops, also during the great purge of pirates from the Mediterranean sea by Pompey the Great in the 1st century BC. Most of Rome&#x27;s battles occurred on land, especially when the Empire was at its height and all the land around the Mediterranean was controlled by Rome.

But there were notable exceptions. The First Punic War, a pivotal war between Rome and Carthage in the 3rd century BC, was largely a naval conflict. And the naval Battle of Actium established the Roman empire under Augustus.

==== Balkans ====
The Illyrian king Bardyllis turned part of south Illyria into a formidable local power in the 4th century BC. He managed to become king of the Dardanians and include other tribes under his rule. However, their power was weakened by bitter rivalries and jealousy. The army was composed by peltasts with a variety of weapons.

The Thracians fought as peltasts using javelins and crescent or round wicker shields. Missile weapons were favored but close combat weaponry was carried by the Thracians as well. These close combat weapons varied from the dreaded rhomphaia and falx
to spears and swords. Thracians shunned armor and greaves and fought as light as possible favoring mobility above all other traits and had excellent horsemen.

The Dacian tribes, located in modern-day Romania and Moldova, were part of the greater Thracian family of peoples. They established a highly militarized society and, during the periods when the tribes were united under one king (82–44 BC, 86–106 AD) posed a major threat to the Roman provinces of Lower Danube. Dacia was conquered and transformed into a Roman province in 106 after a long, hard war.

==== Celtic ====

Tribal warfare appears to have been a regular feature of Celtic societies. While epic literature depicts this as more of a sport focused on raids and hunting rather than organised territorial conquest, the historical record is more of tribes using warfare to exert political control and harass rivals, for economic advantage, and in some instances to conquer territory.

The Celts were described by classical writers such as Strabo, Livy, Pausanias, and Florus as fighting like &quot;wild beasts&quot;, and as hordes. Dionysius said that their &quot;manner of fighting, being in large measure that of wild beasts and frenzied, was an erratic procedure, quite lacking in military science. Thus, at one moment they would raise their swords aloft and smite after the manner of wild boars, throwing the whole weight of their bodies into the blow like hewers of wood or men digging with mattocks, and again they would deliver crosswise blows aimed at no target as if they intended to cut to pieces the entire bodies of their adversaries, protective armour and all&quot;. Such descriptions have been challenged by contemporary historians. Caesar himself describes the Gauls as forming phalanxes (likely similar to the medieval shieldwall) and testudos in battle, and using spears as their main weapon, as opposed to swords.

==== Germanic ====
Historical records of the Germanic tribes in Germania east of the Rhine and west of the Danube do not begin until quite late in the ancient period, so only the period after 100 BC can be examined. What is clear is that the Germanic idea of warfare was quite different from the pitched battles fought by Rome and Greece. Instead, the Germanic tribes focused on raids.

The purpose of these was generally not to gain territory, but rather to capture resources and secure prestige. These raids were conducted by irregular troops, often formed along family or village lines. Leaders of unusual personal magnetism could gather more soldiers for longer periods, but there was no systematic method of gathering and training men, so the death of a charismatic leader could mean the destruction of an army. Armies also often consisted of more than 50 percent noncombatants, as displaced people would travel with large groups of soldiers, the elderly, women, and children.

Though often defeated by the Romans, the Germanic tribes were remembered in Roman records as fierce combatants, whose main downfall was that they failed to unite successfully into one fighting force, under one command. After the three Roman legions were ambushed and destroyed by an alliance of Germanic tribes headed by Arminius at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in 9 AD, the Roman Empire made no further concentrated attempts at conquering Germania beyond the Rhine. Prolonged warfare against the Romans accustomed the Germanic tribes to improved tactics such as the use of reserves, military discipline and centralised command. Germanic tribes would eventually overwhelm and conquer the ancient world, giving rise to modern Europe and medieval warfare. For an analysis of Germanic tactics versus the Roman empire see tactical problems in facing the Gauls and the Germanic tribes

== Notable ancient wars ==
* Medo-Babylonian war against Assyrian Empire
* Ionian Revolt: a series of conflicts between the Ionia and the Persian Empire that began 499 BC and lasted until 493 BC. The revolt begins because of Athens&#x27;s offensive attack to the city of Sardis and massacring the Persian citizens by burning down the city. This revolt had a major role in starting the Greco-Persian wars.
* Greco-Persian Wars: a series of conflicts between the Greek City-States and the Persian Empire that began around 500 BC and lasted until 448 BC.
* Peloponnesian War: begun in 431 BC between the Athenian Empire and the Peloponnesian League which included Sparta and Corinth. The war was documented by Thucydides, an Athenian general, in his work &quot;The History of The Peloponnesian War&quot;. The war lasted 27 years, with a brief truce in the middle.
* Wars of Alexander the Great: Alexander III of Macedonia throughout his entire reign from 336 to 321 B.C embarked on a campaign of conquest of the Persian Empire. Starting from modern-day Western Turkey Alexander the Great conquered the entirety of Egypt, the Middle East, Iran and parts of India and Central Asia. Never losing a battle Alexander expanded the boundaries of the known world to the Greek World at the time. With an untimely death, his successors fought over the territories they had conquered. However, due to Alexander the Great Greek culture and technology spread into Asia for centuries to come.
* Kalinga War (265–264 BC) was a war fought between the Mauryan Empire under Ashoka and the state of Kalinga, a feudal republic located on the coast of the present-day Indian state of Odisha. Ashoka&#x27;s response to the Kalinga War is recorded in the Edicts of Ashoka. According to some of these (Rock Edict XIII and Minor Rock Edict I), the Kalinga War prompted Ashoka, already a non-engaged Buddhist, to devote the rest of his life to Ahimsa (non-violence) and to Dhamma-Vijaya (victory through Dhamma).
*Qin&#x27;s wars of unification: a series of military campaigns launched in the late 3rd century BC by the Qin state against the other six major states – Han, Zhao, Yan, Wei, Chu and Qi – within the territories that formed modern China. By the end of the wars in 221 BC, Qin had unified most of the states and occupied some lands south of the Yangtze River. The territories conquered by Qin served as the foundation of the Qin Empire.
* Punic Wars: a series of three wars fought between Rome and the city of Carthage (a Phoenician descendant). They are known as the &quot;Punic&quot; Wars because Rome&#x27;s name for Carthaginians was &quot;Punici&quot; (older &quot;Poeni&quot;, due to their Phoenician ancestry). They determined that the Romans would control the Mediterranean Sea and led to the eventual rise of the greater Roman Empire across Europe, Asia and Africa.
*# The First Punic War was primarily a naval war fought between 264 BC and 241 BC.
*# The Second Punic War is famous for Hannibal&#x27;s crossing of the Alps and was fought between 218 BC and 202 BC.
*# The Third Punic War resulted in the destruction of Carthage and was fought between 149 BC and 146 BC.
* Roman-Persian Wars: a series of conflicts between states of the Greco-Roman world and two successive Iranian empires: the Parthian and the Sassanid. Battles between the Parthian Empire and the Roman Republic began in 92 BC; wars began under the late Republic, and continued through the Roman and Sassanid empires. They were ended by the Arab Muslim invasions, which devastated the Sassanid and Byzantine East Roman empires shortly after the end of the last war between them.
*Han–Xiongnu War: This war, also known as the Sino-Xiongnu War, was a series of military battles fought between the Chinese Han empire and the Xiongnu confederated state located in modern day Mongolia from 133 BC to 89 AD. The final wars resulted in the final destruction of the Xiongnu as a political entity in Siberia. China would temporally enjoy peace on its northern frontier before new peoples such as the Xianbei took the role of the Xiongnu.
* Roman–Germanic Wars: &quot;Germanic Wars&quot; is a name given to a large series of military engagements between the Romans and various Germanic tribes between 113 BC and AD 596. The nature of these wars varied through time between Roman conquest, Germanic uprisings and later Germanic invasions in the Roman Empire that started in the late 2nd century. The series of conflicts which began in the 5th century, under the Western Roman Emperor Honorius, led (along with internal strife) to the ultimate downfall of the Western Roman Empire.

== Unit types ==

* Infantry
** Archery
** Slingman
** Peltast
** Hoplite
** Persian Immortal
** Phalanx
*** Macedonian phalanx
** Legion
*** Legionary
* Cavalry
** Cataphract
** Clibanarii
** Horse archer
** Chariot
** War elephant
* Artillery and siege engines
** Catapult
** Onager
** Ballista
** Scorpio
** Siege tower
** Battering ram
== See also ==
* Ancient Mediterranean piracy
* History of physical training and fitness
* Horses in warfare
* Women in war
* Siege warfare in ancient Rome

== References ==
==Sources==

== Literature ==
# Anglim, Simon, and Phyllis G. Jestice. &quot;Fighting Techniques of the Ancient World (3000 B.C. to 500 A.D.): Equipment, Combat Skills, and Tactics&quot;. Dunne Books: 2003. .
# Bradford, Alfred S. &quot;With Arrow, Sword, and Spear: A History of Warfare in the Ancient World.&quot; Praeger Publishing: 2001. .
# Connolly, Peter. &quot;Greece and Rome at War&quot;. Greenhill Books: 1998. .
# Gabriel, Richard A. &quot;The Great Armies of Antiquity&quot;. Praeger Publishing: 2002. 
# Gichon, Mordechai, and Chaim Herzog. &quot;Battles of the Bible&quot;. Greenhill Books: 2002. .
# Goldsworthy, Adrian. &quot;The Complete Roman Army&quot;. Thames &amp; Hudson: 2003. .
# Keegan, John. &quot;A History of Warfare&quot;. Vintage: 1993. .
# Kern, Paul Bentley. &quot;Ancient Siege Warfare&quot;. Indiana University Press: 1999. .
# Leblanc, Steven A. &quot;Prehistoric Warfare in the American Southwest&quot;. University of Utah Press: 1999. .
# Mayor, Adrienne. &quot;Greek Fire, Poison Arrows &amp; Scorpion Bombs: Biological and Chemical Warfare in the Ancient World&quot;. Overlook Press: 2003. .
# Peers, Chris J. &quot;Ancient Chinese Armies 1500–200 BC&quot;. Osprey Publishing: 1990. .
# Peers, Chris J., and Michael Perry. &quot;Imperial Chinese Armies : 200 BC–589 AD&quot;. Osprey Publishing: 1995. .
# Sabin, Philip. &quot;Lost Battles: Reconstructing The Great Clashes of the Ancient World&quot;. Hambledon Continuum: 2007. .
# Van Creveld, Martin. &quot;Technology and War: From 2000 B.C. to the Present&quot;. Free Press: 1991. .
# Warry, John Gibson, and John Warry. &quot;Warfare in the Classical World: An Illustrated Encyclopedia of Weapons, Warriors and Warfare in the Ancient Civilisations of Greece and Rome&quot;. University of Oklahoma Press: 1999.

== External links ==
* Evolution of Sling Weapons
* War in ancient Greece: a bibliography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2454921" start="0" end="15" title="Ancient warfare" label="Ancient warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="19" end="22" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="64" end="80" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="99" end="113" title="ancient period" label="ancient period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454605" start="138" end="149" title="Prehistoric warfare" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="251" end="261" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q48349" start="273" end="279" title="empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="335" end="346" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="348" end="354" title="State (polity)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="713" end="719" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="728" end="737" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="786" end="798" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="Fall of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="926" end="942" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Muslim conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="966" end="971" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1144" end="1156" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="1171" end="1176" title="Indian subcontinent" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="1226" end="1238" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566899" start="1278" end="1300" title="Muslim conquest in the Indian subcontinent" label="Muslim conquests there"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1326" end="1331" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="1390" end="1399" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q236205" start="1407" end="1422" title="Kamakura period" label="Kamakura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="1496" end="1500" title="bow and arrow" label="bows"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="1505" end="1510" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q24236349" start="1616" end="1623" title="Nataruk" label="Nataruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633078" start="1627" end="1634" title="Turkana County" label="Turkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1788" end="1793" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q655045" start="2546" end="2562" title="medieval warfare" label="medieval warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q523562" start="2623" end="2636" title="heavy cavalry" label="heavy cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="2641" end="2654" title="Medieval siege weaponry" label="siege engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="2667" end="2676" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="2702" end="2716" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2782" end="2790" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="2816" end="2823" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="2853" end="2868" title="chariot warfare" label="chariot warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="2874" end="2887" title="naval warfare" label="naval warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="2889" end="2900" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="2947" end="2965" title="ferrous metallurgy" label="ferrous metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="3136" end="3155" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3174" end="3189" title="List of largest empires#Ancient empires" label="hitherto unseen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="3237" end="3248" title="world power" label="world power"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="3281" end="3297" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="3316" end="3322" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="3327" end="3332" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="3534" end="3541" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3575" end="3586" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q473194" start="3624" end="3628" title="oxen" label="oxen"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="4431" end="4448" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074369" start="4690" end="4698" title="Chariots in ancient China" label="chariots"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="4732" end="4745" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="4836" end="4840" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q901114" start="4891" end="4903" title="shock attack" label="shock attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="5325" end="5344" title="Command and Control (Military)" label="command and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="6135" end="6148" title="feudal system" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="6185" end="6190" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="6198" end="6207" title="The Iliad" label="The Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="6336" end="6356" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Egyptian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q203729" start="6386" end="6402" title="Battle of Kadesh" label="Battle of Kadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="6590" end="6603" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="6666" end="6674" title="Cyclades" label="Cyclades"/>
<link wikidata="Q932622" start="7105" end="7117" title="Medinet Habu (temple)" label="Medinet Habu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130514" start="7124" end="7129" title="Luxor" label="Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528" start="7162" end="7172" title="Ramses III" label="Ramses III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="7864" end="7873" title="Ramses II" label="Ramses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="9908" end="9934" title="Herodotus of Halicarnassus" label="Herodotus of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="12203" end="12211" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="12971" end="12983" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="13096" end="13103" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q427565" start="13740" end="13754" title="Battle of Lade" label="Battle of Lade"/>
<link wikidata="Q743488" start="14373" end="14387" title="pitched battle" label="pitched battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179591" start="14866" end="14882" title="Battle of Cannae" label="Battle of Cannae"/>
<link wikidata="Q492883" start="15587" end="15593" title="atlatl" label="atlatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="15640" end="15643" title="bow (weapon)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q199771" start="15659" end="15664" title="Sling (weapon)" label="sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q649107" start="15666" end="15673" title="polearm" label="polearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q605140" start="15694" end="15698" title="falx" label="falx"/>
<link wikidata="Q308989" start="15703" end="15710" title="pilum" label="javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="15741" end="15746" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="15757" end="15762" title="Club (weapon)" label="clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q272990" start="15764" end="15768" title="mace (bludgeon)" label="mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="15771" end="15774" title="axe" label="axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32489" start="15781" end="15787" title="knife" label="knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="15789" end="15797" title="Catapult" label="Catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q622666" start="15800" end="15811" title="siege tower" label="siege tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q208129" start="15818" end="15831" title="battering ram" label="battering ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="15850" end="15855" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368453" start="19501" end="19506" title="Katar (dagger)" label="katar"/>
<link wikidata="Q634590" start="19679" end="19685" title="talwar" label="talwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257902" start="19689" end="19697" title="shamshir" label="shamshir"/>
<link wikidata="Q792857" start="20590" end="20602" title="Ayudha katti" label="Ayudha katti"/>
<link wikidata="Q799914" start="20871" end="20879" title="Bagh nakh" label="Baghnakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="22250" end="22267" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q721840" start="22452" end="22481" title="Protodynastic Period of Egypt" label="Protodynastic Period of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="22617" end="22624" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="24062" end="24075" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="24311" end="24315" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="24334" end="24343" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="24455" end="24460" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="25831" end="25837" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070186" start="25993" end="26005" title="sickle sword" label="sickle sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="26012" end="26018" title="armour" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="26055" end="26066" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="26598" end="26605" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="26611" end="26619" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="26635" end="26642" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="26649" end="26660" title="Babylonians" label="Babylonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="26975" end="26982" title="Phalanx formation" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423613" start="27515" end="27521" title="Medjay" label="Medjay"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="27707" end="27718" title="Elephantine" label="Elephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="28448" end="28452" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="28751" end="28757" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q309282" start="28766" end="28772" title="Avaris" label="Avaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528" start="28944" end="28956" title="Ramesses III" label="Ramesses III"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="29060" end="29075" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="29549" end="29563" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="29658" end="29671" title="war elephants" label="war elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q213165" start="29755" end="29772" title="Persian Immortals" label="Persian Immortals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739282" start="30379" end="30392" title="Kerma culture" label="Kerma culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107569" start="30509" end="30514" title="Kerma" label="Kerma"/>
<link wikidata="Q182780" start="30642" end="30649" title="daggers" label="daggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="30653" end="30658" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="30671" end="30677" title="archer" label="archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q241790" start="30713" end="30728" title="Kingdom of Kush" label="Kingdom of Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q743282" start="30868" end="30874" title="Napata" label="Napata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780" start="30910" end="30925" title="Meroitic period" label="Meroitic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="30994" end="31000" title="Archery" label="Bowmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="31124" end="31132" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="31142" end="31155" title="Siege engines" label="Siege engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q315695" start="31217" end="31221" title="Piye" label="Piye"/>
<link wikidata="Q732908" start="31241" end="31250" title="Ashmunein" label="Ashmunein"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="31305" end="31318" title="War Elephants" label="War Elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="31320" end="31328" title="chariots" label="chariots"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="31330" end="31335" title="armor" label="armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="31463" end="31475" title="Vedic civilization" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="31477" end="31480" title="floruit" label="fl."/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="31505" end="31510" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q513097" start="31636" end="31659" title="Battle of the Ten Kings" label="Battle of the Ten Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747742" start="31734" end="31743" title="Mandala 7" label="Mandala 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="31751" end="31758" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="31792" end="31797" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="31805" end="31813" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="31830" end="31841" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q715607" start="31961" end="31968" title="Valmiki" label="Valmiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604583" start="32007" end="32014" title="Ayodhya (Ramayana)" label="Ayodhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765007" start="32448" end="32459" title="Chakravyuha" label="Chakravyuha"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="32524" end="32536" title="war elephant" label="war elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="32608" end="32622" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="32683" end="32693" title="Darius III" label="Darius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q179670" start="32736" end="32755" title="Battle of Gaugamela" label="Battle of Gaugamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q213074" start="32808" end="32836" title="Battle of the Hydaspes River" label="Battle of the Hydaspes River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935" start="32854" end="32859" title="King Porus" label="Porus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478" start="32874" end="32880" title="Punjab, Pakistan" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q949268" start="33125" end="33137" title="Nanda Empire" label="Nanda Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="33154" end="33162" title="North India" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151572" start="33167" end="33174" title="East India" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q9045" start="33276" end="33284" title="Chanakya" label="Chanakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="33314" end="33331" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q59489983" start="33335" end="33357" title="Takshashila University" label="Takshashila University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="33373" end="33387" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q188541" start="33399" end="33418" title="Chandragupta Maurya" label="Chandragupta Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="33439" end="33452" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="33479" end="33491" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="33668" end="33677" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="33682" end="33695" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="33812" end="33818" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="33978" end="33989" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="33997" end="34010" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184176" start="34045" end="34063" title="Seleucus I Nicator" label="Seleucus I Nicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="34079" end="34094" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="34246" end="34257" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312548" start="34497" end="34508" title="Megasthenes" label="Megasthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="34534" end="34545" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="34632" end="34649" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic World"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="34668" end="34673" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="34678" end="34683" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="34974" end="34984" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="35030" end="35036" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="35095" end="35103" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="35110" end="35116" title="Cholas" label="Cholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929271" start="35231" end="35247" title="Vijayalaya Chola" label="Vijayalaya Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q41496" start="35283" end="35292" title="Thanjavur" label="Thanjavur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135564" start="35335" end="35346" title="Parantaka I" label="Parantaka I"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="35360" end="35367" title="Pandyan" label="Pandyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755094" start="35373" end="35396" title="Maravarman Rajasimha II" label="Maravarman Rajasimha II"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="35409" end="35418" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="35424" end="35435" title="Rashtrakuta" label="Rashtrakuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536697" start="35442" end="35453" title="Krishna III" label="Krishna III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285607" start="35497" end="35506" title="Rajaditya" label="Rajaditya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536701" start="35522" end="35534" title="Uttama Chola" label="Uttama Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997590" start="35818" end="35825" title="Sundara Chola" label="Sundara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128757" start="35828" end="35842" title="Rajaraja Chola" label="Rajaraja Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871379" start="35908" end="35920" title="Kandalur War" label="Kandalur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938014" start="35979" end="35988" title="Vizhinjam" label="Vizhinjam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="36072" end="36078" title="Gangas" label="Gangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10086" start="36082" end="36088" title="Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048166" start="36094" end="36102" title="Nolambas" label="Nolambas"/>
<link wikidata="Q429063" start="36106" end="36113" title="Bellary" label="Bellary"/>
<link wikidata="Q167166" start="36147" end="36152" title="Vengi" label="Vengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553185" start="36154" end="36159" title="Coorg" label="Coorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="36246" end="36252" title="Quilon" label="Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="36281" end="36288" title="Kalinga (historical region)" label="Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q211483" start="36314" end="36330" title="Rajendra Chola I" label="Rajendra Chola I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="36396" end="36402" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="36423" end="36430" title="Kalinga (historical region)" label="Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="36434" end="36440" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565269" start="36454" end="36478" title="South-East Asia campaign of Rajendra Chola I" label="a great naval expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="36502" end="36506" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="36508" end="36514" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="36520" end="36527" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q466581" start="36565" end="36573" title="Hoysalas" label="Hoysalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="36658" end="36671" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q324293" start="36764" end="36770" title="Anyang" label="Anyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="36870" end="36874" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="36994" end="37018" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q37151" start="37333" end="37340" title="Sun Tzu" label="Sun Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8251" start="37406" end="37420" title="The Art of War" label="The Art of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="37494" end="37507" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="37936" end="37957" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q39908" start="38291" end="38296" title="pants" label="pants"/>
<link wikidata="Q546116" start="39228" end="39236" title="naginata" label="naginata"/>
<link wikidata="Q633881" start="39788" end="39801" title="Yamato period" label="Yamato period"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428" start="39927" end="39933" title="Baekje" label="Baekje"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="39992" end="40006" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="40044" end="40055" title="Nara period" label="Nara period"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="40057" end="40063" title="Honshū" label="Honshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q640605" start="40104" end="40110" title="Yamato (people)" label="Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="40137" end="40149" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="40151" end="40158" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40284" end="40299" title="Hoplite#Equipment" label="hoplite panoply"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="40379" end="40395" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23586199" start="40463" end="40486" title="Military of Mycenaean Greece" label="military infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="40717" end="40725" title="Hoplites" label="Hoplites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143486" start="40792" end="40797" title="aspis" label="aspis"/>
<link wikidata="Q720600" start="40823" end="40831" title="peltasts" label="peltasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="40948" end="40954" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="41532" end="41549" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="41556" end="41562" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593509" start="41681" end="41695" title="grain trade" label="shipping grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="41719" end="41725" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="41954" end="41962" title="triremes" label="triremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="42098" end="42118" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="42123" end="42142" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q576065" start="42148" end="42159" title="Ancient Macedonians" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="42213" end="42221" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="42668" end="42675" title="hoplite" label="hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="42706" end="42713" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271113" start="42746" end="42753" title="sarissa" label="sarissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293203" start="42838" end="42842" title="Rank (formation)" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="43169" end="43178" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432315" start="43343" end="43358" title="Ancient Macedonian military" label="Macedonian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="43367" end="43374" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="43444" end="43453" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="43455" end="43462" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q249561" start="43509" end="43516" title="Paionia" label="Paeonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="43556" end="43563" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="43570" end="43576" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="43629" end="43635" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q217414" start="43649" end="43659" title="Amphipolis" label="Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="43695" end="43704" title="Athenians" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q639126" start="43743" end="43748" title="Pydna" label="Pydna"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="43812" end="43819" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="43839" end="43844" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="43882" end="43892" title="Gold mining" label="gold mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448901" start="43903" end="43917" title="Mount Pangaeus" label="Mount Pangaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436756" start="44052" end="44060" title="Crenides (Macedonia)" label="Crenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q212841" start="44074" end="44079" title="Drama, Greece" label="Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="44111" end="44120" title="Thracians" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q379652" start="44164" end="44172" title="Philippi" label="Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="44209" end="44215" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q193904" start="44245" end="44251" title="Nestus" label="Nestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="44314" end="44322" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q37726" start="44418" end="44422" title="army" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q194450" start="44454" end="44465" title="Thermopylae" label="Thermopylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="44480" end="44486" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="44587" end="44596" title="Athenians" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="44598" end="44604" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790451" start="44612" end="44620" title="Achaea (ancient region)" label="Achaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="44844" end="44850" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="44904" end="44909" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="44928" end="44937" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815679" start="44942" end="44951" title="Perinthus" label="Perinthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="45155" end="45162" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="45304" end="45312" title="Persian people" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q538498" start="45706" end="45716" title="Companion Cavalry" label="Companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="45896" end="45902" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="45956" end="45966" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="46059" end="46067" title="Roman Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="46147" end="46153" title="Gaius Marius" label="Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="46712" end="46721" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="47200" end="47215" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="47324" end="47340" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="47376" end="47384" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q808052" start="47423" end="47432" title="Bardyllis" label="Bardyllis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="47454" end="47461" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043335" start="47548" end="47558" title="Dardanians (Balkans)" label="Dardanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q720600" start="47693" end="47700" title="peltast" label="peltast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757641" start="47769" end="47777" title="javelins" label="javelins"/>
<link wikidata="Q382982" start="47960" end="47969" title="rhomphaia" label="rhomphaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605140" start="47974" end="47978" title="falx" label="falx"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="48143" end="48149" title="Dacians" label="Dacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="48180" end="48187" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="48192" end="48199" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="48280" end="48291" title="militarized" label="militarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="48362" end="48366" title="Monarch" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="48417" end="48431" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="48442" end="48448" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q723608" start="48534" end="48537" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Dacian Wars" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376043" start="48558" end="48572" title="Endemic warfare" label="Tribal warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="48615" end="48631" title="Celts" label="Celtic societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="48983" end="48989" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="48991" end="48995" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="48997" end="49006" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q316483" start="49012" end="49018" title="Florus" label="Florus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="49076" end="49085" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192386" start="49228" end="49244" title="military science" label="military science"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="49332" end="49342" title="Boar" label="wild boars"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="49922" end="49937" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="49941" end="49949" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="49962" end="49967" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="50199" end="50203" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673189" start="50405" end="50421" title="irregular military" label="irregular troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="50889" end="50895" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008856" start="51070" end="51077" title="Command (military formation)" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="51095" end="51107" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q68880" start="51181" end="51189" title="Arminius" label="Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="51197" end="51227" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51684" end="51745" title="Roman infantry tactics#Roman infantry versus Gallic and the Germanic tribes" label="tactical problems in facing the Gauls and the Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888538" start="51776" end="51819" title="Medo-Babylonian war against Assyrian Empire" label="Medo-Babylonian war against Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208261" start="51822" end="51835" title="Ionian Revolt" label="Ionian Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="51871" end="51876" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="51885" end="51899" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="52154" end="52172" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Greco-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="52208" end="52225" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek City-States"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="52301" end="52318" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="52348" end="52363" title="Athenian Empire" label="Athenian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208742" start="52372" end="52392" title="Peloponnesian League" label="Peloponnesian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="52419" end="52426" title="Corinth, Greece" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="52454" end="52464" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q551888" start="52610" end="52637" title="Wars of Alexander the Great" label="Wars of Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="53006" end="53017" title="Hellenistic period" label="Greek World"/>
<link wikidata="Q714557" start="53225" end="53236" title="Kalinga War" label="Kalinga War"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="53279" end="53293" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="53300" end="53306" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="53324" end="53331" title="Kalinga (historical kingdom)" label="Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="53342" end="53350" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="53391" end="53396" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="53407" end="53413" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="53476" end="53492" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="Edicts of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="53662" end="53668" title="Ahimsa" label="Ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="53722" end="53728" title="Dhamma" label="Dhamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986801" start="53732" end="53762" title="Qin&amp;#x27;s wars of unification" label="Qin&amp;#x27;s wars of unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="53838" end="53847" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276649" start="53866" end="53882" title="Seven Warring States" label="six major states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574130" start="53885" end="53888" title="Han (Warring States)" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q197430" start="53890" end="53894" title="Zhao (state)" label="Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055713" start="53896" end="53899" title="Yan (state)" label="Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q912052" start="53901" end="53904" title="Wei (state)" label="Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="53906" end="53909" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="53914" end="53916" title="Qi (state)" label="Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="54074" end="54087" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="54154" end="54164" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="54168" end="54178" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="54218" end="54222" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="54239" end="54247" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="54251" end="54260" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="54559" end="54571" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="54611" end="54626" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="54694" end="54710" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="54725" end="54733" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="54757" end="54761" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334" start="54811" end="54826" title="Third Punic War" label="Third Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q500409" start="54911" end="54929" title="Roman-Persian Wars" label="Roman-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="54975" end="54992" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman world"/>
<link wikidata="Q25763" start="55012" end="55027" title="Greater Iran" label="Iranian empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="55080" end="55095" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="55104" end="55118" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="55197" end="55202" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="55207" end="55222" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="55248" end="55269" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Arab Muslim invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="55305" end="55325" title="Byzantine empire" label="Byzantine East Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q744969" start="55387" end="55402" title="Han–Xiongnu War" label="Han–Xiongnu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="55510" end="55520" title="Han dynasty" label="Han empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="55529" end="55536" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="55665" end="55672" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="55798" end="55805" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="55827" end="55834" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516956" start="55838" end="55857" title="Germanic Wars" label="Roman–Germanic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="55955" end="55961" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="55974" end="55989" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="56272" end="56288" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Emperor Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="56355" end="56375" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="56398" end="56406" title="Infantry" label="Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="56410" end="56417" title="Archery" label="Archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q199771" start="56421" end="56429" title="Slingman" label="Slingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q720600" start="56433" end="56440" title="Peltast" label="Peltast"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="56444" end="56451" title="Hoplite" label="Hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q213165" start="56455" end="56471" title="Persian Immortals" label="Persian Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="56475" end="56482" title="Phalanx formation" label="Phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340305" start="56487" end="56505" title="Macedonian phalanx" label="Macedonian phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="56509" end="56515" title="Roman legion" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="56520" end="56529" title="Legionary" label="Legionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="56532" end="56539" title="Cavalry" label="Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q204766" start="56543" end="56553" title="Cataphract" label="Cataphract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100909" start="56557" end="56567" title="Clibanarii" label="Clibanarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074665" start="56571" end="56583" title="Horse archer" label="Horse archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="56587" end="56594" title="Chariot" label="Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="56598" end="56610" title="War elephant" label="War elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="56613" end="56622" title="Artillery" label="Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="56627" end="56640" title="siege engines" label="siege engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="56644" end="56652" title="Catapult" label="Catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q19779" start="56656" end="56662" title="Onager (siege weapon)" label="Onager"/>
<link wikidata="Q219433" start="56666" end="56674" title="Ballista" label="Ballista"/>
<link wikidata="Q19782" start="56678" end="56685" title="Scorpio (weapon)" label="Scorpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q622666" start="56689" end="56700" title="Siege tower" label="Siege tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q208129" start="56704" end="56717" title="Battering ram" label="Battering ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699682" start="56735" end="56763" title="Ancient Mediterranean piracy" label="Ancient Mediterranean piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870187" start="56766" end="56806" title="History of physical training and fitness" label="History of physical training and fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194462" start="56809" end="56826" title="Horses in warfare" label="Horses in warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q21020787" start="56829" end="56841" title="Women in war" label="Women in war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625424" start="56844" end="56873" title="Siege warfare in ancient Rome" label="Siege warfare in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q363722" start="57597" end="57609" title="Keegan, John" label="Keegan, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q11496123" start="57617" end="57637" title="A History of Warfare" label="A History of Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697821" start="58090" end="58107" title="Osprey Publishing" label="Osprey Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697821" start="58208" end="58225" title="Osprey Publishing" label="Osprey Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036513" start="58333" end="58352" title="Hambledon Continuum" label="Hambledon Continuum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962435" wikidata="Q914810" url="?curid=962435" title="Vehicle registration plates of Slovakia">
<text>Vehicles registered in Slovakia were generally assigned to one of the districts (&quot;okres&quot;) and from 1997 until 2022, the license plate coding () generally consisted of seven characters and takes the form XX-NNNLL, where XX was a two letter code corresponding to the district, NNN was a three digit number and LL were two additional letters (assigned alphabetically). 

From January 2023, a new state-wide numbering scheme was introduced, preserving the same layout, but replacing the initial two-letter district code with arbitrary letters of the alphabet (assigned alphabetically, starting with AA). Other changes include new font and a smaller coat of arms.
==Appearance==
There are three design varieties that are in valid use.

* Between 1 April 1997 and 30 April 2004, the plates contained the Coat of Arms of Slovakia in the top left corner and the country code SK in the bottom left. The two district identifiers were separated from the serials by a dash.

* On 1 May 2004, Slovakia joined the European Union. In order to harmonise the visual look of the plates with the rest of the EU, the Slovak Coat of Arms was replaced by the so-called euroband, a vertical blue bar with representing the Flag of the EU. The country code SK was inserted into the euroband. The number 0 and letter O have been differentiated as well, the number has a stroke through it (similar to the German font.)

* The latest type has been used since 1 June 2006. The Slovak Coat of Arms has returned to the plates replacing the dash while keeping the EU part intact.

* Starting from 2023, there is no longer an abbreviation of the district on the license plate. The composition of the registration numbers remains the same (2 letters - 3 digits - 2 letters), but registration numbers starts to be generated again starting at AA-001AA.

==Types==



* Regular plates are the most commonly used of all the types. They contain seven characters starting with the district code (see below) followed by a series of 3 numbers and 2 letters. The number series used are between 001 and 999. The letter series are between AA-XZ and ZA-ZZ. 24 letters are used (excluding Q, W and Slovak letters such as Š). Progression: 001AA-002AA...999AA, then 001AB...999AB. 999AZ is followed by 001BA through 999BB etc. Only Bratislava has reached 999ZZ as of February 2011.
Where limited space warrants it, two-line plates can be used on a vehicle. A block of combinations is set aside from the regular plate range as required.
* Trailer plates follow the format of the regular plates XX-NNNLL except in this case the first serial letter is always &quot;Y&quot;. The registrations thus starts at 001YA, continuing through 999YA and 001YB to 999YZ. Any build of trailer whether a mobile home or cargo trailer can use these plates. As of February 2011, Bratislava is nearing the end of its YZ series. Two-line plates also exist with a block of combinations set aside for them in each district.
* Motorcycle plates follow the same coding and use the same series as the regular plates. For example, DS-125AC can be both a regular plate and a motorcycle plate. The only difference is their size. Motorcycles use two different sizes both of which are smaller than the regular size.
* Personalized plates are optional in Slovakia for an extra fee. The format must include the two letter district code and 5 other characters in either XX-LLLLL, XX-LLLLN or LLLNN format. Unlike in any other type of plates, the use of Q and W is possible. Plates are not allowed to display any political, religious or offensive message. Smaller plates are available for motorcycles.
* Dealer plates follow the format XX-LLNNN or XX-L NNN and the first letter of the serial is &quot;M&quot;. So the registrations starts with M 001 and then ends M 999. Then two letters will be issued, starting from MA001 continuing through MA999, then MB001 and so on until MZ999. Letters and numbers on this plate will be colored red.
* Temporary plates follow the same format as mentioned above but the first serial letter is &quot;V&quot;. So registrations start with V 001 and then ends with V 999. Then two letters will be issued, starts from VA001 and ends with VZ999, continuing it with VB and so on until VZ999. These plates had yellow background. Also these plates had red stripe indicating expiration of these plates.
* Diplomatic plates have the format EE-NNNNN or ZZ-NNNNN. These plates have dark blue background and yellow fonts.
* Official plates have the format XX-L NNN or XX-NNN L, the serial letters after district code is &quot;X&quot;.
* Military plates have the format NN-NNNNN.
* Import plates have green fonts, the format C-NNNNN or CL-NNNNN and a maximum validity period of one year.
* Sports cars or sportbikes plates had blue fonts and serial letter is &quot;S&quot;.
* Electric cars were getting licence plates with classical numbering, but a green background on a request. In the new system since 2023 they will be getting plates starting with letters EL- and EV-, green letters on white background.

==Districts==

There are 79 districts in Slovakia. In 69 cases, the district is named after and the code derived from its principal city which is included in the district. Two cities, Bratislava (the capital) and Košice (KE), consist of 5 and 4 districts respectively. This fact is not reflected on the plates, only one code is used. Additionally, Košice-okolie (KS) comprises an area around Košice (the city itself excluded) while having its seat in the city proper.
Each district is assigned at least one code. Ten cities including eight seats of the region (&quot;kraj&quot;) are assigned more. Since 18 August 2010, Bratislava has been registering plates with its second code, BL. The Ministry of Interior of the Slovak Republic held a Facebook poll as the reaction to public dissatisfaction of Bratislava inhabitants with the previously intended BD code. As the combinations of the BL code are to be exhausted soon, another Facebook poll was organised in November 2018. Participants were asked to vote for the next code in three rounds (two semi-finals and one final). As much as 89% opted for the BT code over the BE. Bratislava is the only &quot;okres&quot; to do so and will remain in this position as since 2023 district codes were abolished.

==Former system==

The older Czechoslovak system (Slovak: &quot;ŠPZ, štátna poznávacia značka&quot;) XX NN-NN or XXY NN-NN was in place until 30 March 1997. All such registrations expired on 1 January 2005; vehicles that had not been re-registered under the new system are not allowed on public roads.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q149621" start="70" end="78" title="district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q770948" start="87" end="92" title="okres" label="okres"/>
<link wikidata="Q914810" start="213" end="221" title="Vehicle registration plates of Slovakia" label="XX-NNNLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q189590" start="808" end="832" title="Coat of Arms of Slovakia" label="Coat of Arms of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1010" end="1024" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q122482" start="1209" end="1223" title="Flag of Europe" label="Flag of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388048" start="1388" end="1399" title="FE-Schrift" label="German font"/>
<link wikidata="Q216146" start="2730" end="2737" title="Trailer (vehicle)" label="trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264478" start="5084" end="5105" title="Districts of Slovakia" label="districts in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="5269" end="5280" title="Košice" label="Košice (KE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q539979" start="5404" end="5422" title="Košice-okolie District" label="Košice-okolie (KS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057583" start="5609" end="5615" title="Regions of Slovakia" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q691899" start="5623" end="5627" title="kraj" label="kraj"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962436" wikidata="Q7979077" url="?curid=962436" title="Wedding chapel">
<text>A wedding chapel is a building or room, other than a legal court, where marriages are regularly performed. Usually wedding chapels are for-profit venues to host weddings in resort areas to encourage hotel room stays, catering and gambling by the guests. The buildings are generally religiously themed and imitate church architecture. In some cases, religious institutions have chapels that are used specifically for marriages or closed churches are converted into wedding chapels.

==Las Vegas==

Las Vegas, Nevada, particularly, is famous for its large number of wedding chapels because Nevada has no waiting period to file for marriage licenses. Some of the wedding chapels in Las Vegas feature an Elvis impersonator.

Couples who want Elvis Presley Weddings can choose either the Graceland Wedding Chapel or The Elvis Chapel.

==Requirements==
Wedding chapels across the world must perform their ceremonies under specific laws, depending on the region in which they are located. In the United States, for example, wedding chapels usually require: marriage licenses and identity documents. Requirements for minors to marry vary from state to state.

==See also==
*Las Vegas weddings

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7979077" start="2" end="16" title="Wedding chapel" label="wedding chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="59" end="64" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="313" end="332" title="church architecture" label="church architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="497" end="514" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645172" start="548" end="579" title="List of wedding chapels in Las Vegas" label="large number of wedding chapels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12809489" start="629" end="645" title="marriage license" label="marriage license"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301743" start="700" end="718" title="Elvis impersonator" label="Elvis impersonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="738" end="751" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="752" end="759" title="Wedding" label="Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591463" start="783" end="807" title="Graceland Wedding Chapel" label="Graceland Wedding Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="989" end="1002" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12809489" start="1050" end="1066" title="marriage license" label="marriage license"/>
<link wikidata="Q47988" start="1072" end="1089" title="identity document" label="identity document"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261126" start="1166" end="1184" title="Las Vegas weddings" label="Las Vegas weddings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962439" wikidata="Q7279591" url="?curid=962439" title="Racial separatism">
<text>Racial separatism may refer to:

* Racial segregation, separation of humans into racial groups in daily life
* Black separatism, a movement to create separate institutions for people of African descent in societies historically dominated by whites
* White separatism, a political movement that seeks separate economic and cultural development for white people

==See also==
* Separatist (disambiguation)
* Separate (disambiguation)
* Segregation (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7279591" start="0" end="17" title="Racial separatism" label="Racial separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="35" end="53" title="Racial segregation" label="Racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511034" start="111" end="127" title="Black separatism" label="Black separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="250" end="266" title="White separatism" label="White separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451837" start="376" end="403" title="Separatist (disambiguation)" label="Separatist (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28838172" start="406" end="431" title="Separate (disambiguation)" label="Separate (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q298813" start="434" end="462" title="Segregation (disambiguation)" label="Segregation (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962442" wikidata="Q539519" url="?curid=962442" title="J. G. Anschütz">
<text>J. G. Anschütz GmbH &amp; Co. KG is a sporting firearms manufacturer based in Ulm, Germany, that makes rimfire and centerfire rifles as well as air rifles and air pistols for target and competition shooting, as well as hunting. Anschütz rifles are used by many competitive shooters participating in the Summer Olympics 50 meter rifle events and is the maker of the standard biathlon rifle used at the Winter Olympics.
The ahg-Anschütz company (a &quot;twin&quot; company from J. G. Anschütz) is mostly dedicated to the international trade of shooting accessories like shooting jackets and boots.

J. G. Anschütz company is also the major shareholder of the Austrian target firearms manufacturer Steyr Sportwaffen GmbH.

==History==

Anschütz entered the target rifle market in the 1950s with the Model 54 action, releasing the SuperMatch by 1962. The combination of heavy receiver, short lock time and an excellent trigger almost immediately eliminated the Winchester Model 52 (known as the &quot;King of the .22s&quot; for the first half of the 20th century) from elite shooting and Olympic competition and positioned Anschütz as the premier brand for UIT/ISSF shooting in the second half of the 20th century.

The lighter-weight Model 64 receiver was released in the 1960s, aimed at sporter rifles. The 21st Century saw the release of early aluminium stocks, as well as the 2013 action which used a Match 54 bolt and trigger, but machined to a large rectangular footprint rather than cylindrical.

In 2015, the 54 action was updated to the 54.30, which shortened the bolt by 30mm. This was designed to compete with the short-bolt designs emerging from Bleiker and Grünig + Elmiger. However, features such as a 12-o&#x27;clock firing pin left it struggling to compete against newer designs such as the Grunig R3 and Walther KK500, which were outperformed the 54.30 in world class shooting - particularly in Prone events where decimal scoring was used.

At IWA 2023, Anschütz released the 22Max to compete at the top end of ISSF competition. The design represented a radical departure from previous bolt action rifles. Anschütz also announced a new product segment - the &quot;Anschütz Precision Rifle&quot; (APR). The APR segment launched with the 1761APR (rimfire) and 1782APR (centrefire), which used existing Anschütz barrelled actions modified for Precision Rifle Series style competition shooting. Anschütz partnered with MDT for the chassis.

== Models ==
=== Current models ===

;Biathlon rifles (.22 LR):
* 64 Biathlon (bolt action)
* Fortner 1727 Biathlon (straight pull) (discontinued)
* Fortner 1827 Biathlon (straight pull)
* Laserpower III training rifle

Both the 1727 and 1827 are produced by System Fortner under licence from Anschütz. The Fortner rifles are currently the most used biathlon rifles in Olympic competitions. The 1727 and 1827 share the same action, and the main upgrade with the 1827 model was a different stock and barrel. The straight pull mechanism uses 6 ball bearings to lock the bolt.

;Small bore match rifles (.22 LR):
* 22Max
* 54.30
* F27 (discontinued)
* 1903
* 1907
* 1913
* 2013

;Match air rifles (4.5mm):
* 9015

;Anschütz Precision Rifle (APR)
* 1761 APR (.22 LR)
* 1782 APR (6mm Creedmoor, 6.5 Creedmoor and .308Win)

;Straight pull hunting models:
* 1727 (.17 HMR and .22 LR)

;Bolt action hunting models:
* 65 MP (.22 LR)
* 1416 (.22 LR)
* 1441/42 (.22 LR)
* 1516 (.22 WMR)
* 1517 (.17 HMR)
* 1710 (.22 LR)
* 1712 (.22 LR)
* 1761 (.22 LR, .17 HMR, .22 WMR)
* 1771 (4.6x30, .17 Hornet, .204 Ruger, .222 Rem, .223 Rem, .300 BLK)

==References==

*Listing of Anschutz owners manuals

==External links==
*Anschütz North America website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q539519" start="0" end="32" title="J. G. Anschütz" label="J. G. Anschütz GmbH &amp;amp; Co. KG"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="38" end="46" title="shooting sport" label="sporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="47" end="54" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012" start="78" end="81" title="Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="83" end="90" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289462" start="103" end="110" title="rimfire ammunition" label="rimfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q190476" start="115" end="125" title="centerfire" label="centerfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="126" end="131" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193427" start="144" end="153" title="air rifle" label="air rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193427" start="159" end="169" title="air pistol" label="air pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="303" end="318" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578317" start="319" end="333" title="50 metre rifle prone" label="50 meter rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605393" start="374" end="388" title="biathlon rifle" label="biathlon rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="401" end="416" title="Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570138" start="695" end="717" title="Steyr Sportwaffen GmbH" label="Steyr Sportwaffen GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q59550741" start="888" end="897" title="lock time" label="lock time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023833" start="957" end="976" title="Winchester Model 52" label="Winchester Model 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q708793" start="1153" end="1161" title="International Shooting Sport Federation" label="UIT/ISSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231383" start="1654" end="1661" title="Bleiker" label="Bleiker"/>
<link wikidata="Q97670750" start="1666" end="1682" title="Grünig + Elmiger" label="Grünig + Elmiger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1817" end="1830" title="Walther KK500" label="Walther KK500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655084" start="1957" end="1965" title="IWA OutdoorClassics" label="IWA 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q870863" start="2529" end="2540" title="bolt action" label="bolt action"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605393" start="2800" end="2814" title="biathlon rifle" label="biathlon rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451695" start="2874" end="2880" title="Action (firearms)" label="action"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962444" wikidata="Q21491649" url="?curid=962444" title="Minnelli">
<text>Minnelli (also spelled Minelli) is an Italian surname. Notable people with the surname include:

*Minelli (born Luisa Ionela Luca, 1988), Romanian singer, songwriter and lyricist.
*Alessandro Minelli, multiple people
*Liza Minnelli (born 1946), American actress, dancer, and singer
*Ludwig Minelli (born 1932), Swiss lawyer
*Pablo Minelli (born 1969), Argentine swimmer
*Rubens Minelli (1928–2023), Brazilian former football player and manager
*Simone Minelli (born 1997), Italian football forward 
*Stefano Minelli (born 1994), Italian football goalkeeper 
*Vincente Minnelli (1903–1986), American film director</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56446973" start="38" end="53" title="Italian surname" label="Italian surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q26834254" start="98" end="105" title="Minelli (Romanian singer)" label="Minelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122474" start="181" end="199" title="Alessandro Minelli (disambiguation)" label="Alessandro Minelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="218" end="231" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q116588" start="283" end="297" title="Ludwig Minelli" label="Ludwig Minelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q87592932" start="325" end="338" title="Pablo Minelli" label="Pablo Minelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942146" start="371" end="385" title="Rubens Minelli" label="Rubens Minelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637742" start="445" end="459" title="Simone Minelli" label="Simone Minelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217743" start="500" end="515" title="Stefano Minelli" label="Stefano Minelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q51535" start="559" end="576" title="Vincente Minnelli" label="Vincente Minnelli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962446" wikidata="Q26834254" url="?curid=962446" title="Minelli (Romanian singer)">
<text>Luisa Ionela Luca (born 22 August 1988), known professionally as Minelli, is a Romanian singer and songwriter. Upon being part of the girl group Wassabi from 2006 to 2009, she rose to fame with her 2019 single &quot;Mariola&quot;, which topped the Romanian Airplay 100 chart. Subsequently, in 2021, &quot;Rampampam&quot; became a hit in multiple territories.

==Life and career==
Minelli was born as Luisa Ionela Luca on 22 August 1988, and began singing at the age of 11, when she formed a band in her hometown. In 2004, she moved to Bucharest, and between 2006 and 2009, she was a member of the band Wassabi. They attempted to represent Romania at the Eurovision Song Contest in 2007, submitting the songs &quot;Crazy&quot; with Morandi and &quot;Do the Tango with Me&quot; to that year&#x27;s national final. After Wassabi disbanded, Minelli focused on her solo career and began working as a singer and songwriter.

In 2019, Minelli released her first number-one single in Romania, &quot;Mariola&quot;, which topped the country&#x27;s Airplay 100 ranking. 2021&#x27;s &quot;Rampampam&quot; became a hit multiple regions such as Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), Lithuania and Poland. For the week ending 28 August 2021, &quot;Rampampam&quot; reached number 139 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Global Excl. U.S. As a songwriter, Minelli&#x27;s repertoire includes songs such as &quot;Inimi de ceară&quot; (2017) performed by Andra, &quot;Touch Me&quot; (2019) by Antonia and &quot;Flashbacks&quot; (2021) by Inna.

== Personal life ==
Minelli met Lucian Luca in 2007 at a recording studio, and the two later married. In 2010, they became parents when Sarah Maria, their first child, was born. In 2017, Minelli gave birth to her second child, a boy named Filip.

== Discography ==
===Extended plays===
===Singles===
====As lead artist====
====As featured artist====
====Uncredited vocals====
====Promotional singles====
====Guest appearances====
==Songwriting credits==
==See also==
* List of music released by Romanian artists that has charted in major music markets

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26834254" start="0" end="17" title="Minelli (Romanian singer)" label="Luisa Ionela Luca"/>
<link wikidata="Q26834254" start="65" end="72" title="Minelli (Romanian singer)" label="Minelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972738" start="145" end="152" title="Wassabi" label="Wassabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122764448" start="257" end="268" title="Romanian music charts" label="Airplay 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q107064258" start="305" end="314" title="Rampampam" label="Rampampam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="535" end="544" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972738" start="602" end="609" title="Wassabi" label="Wassabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="654" end="677" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q904842" start="731" end="738" title="Morandi (band)" label="Morandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122764448" start="1038" end="1049" title="Romanian music charts" label="Airplay 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q107064258" start="1077" end="1086" title="Rampampam" label="Rampampam"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1328" end="1337" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q99337381" start="1344" end="1361" title="Billboard Global 200" label="Global Excl. U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q6214240" start="1475" end="1480" title="Andra (singer)" label="Andra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512797" start="1513" end="1520" title="Antonia Iacobescu" label="Antonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105721505" start="1531" end="1541" title="Flashbacks (song)" label="Flashbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12349" start="1558" end="1562" title="Inna" label="Inna"/>
<link wikidata="Q126595086" start="2034" end="2116" title="List of music released by Romanian artists that has charted in major music markets" label="List of music released by Romanian artists that has charted in major music markets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962449" wikidata="Q139989" url="?curid=962449" title="Down (gridiron football)">
<text>A down in gridiron football is an attempt by the offensive team to run a play to advance the ball, while the defending team simultaneously attempts to halt their advance. The down is a distinguishing characteristic of the game compared to other codes of football, but is synonymous with the 6 &quot;tackle&quot; rule in rugby league.

The team in possession of the football has a limited number of downs (four in American football, three in Canadian football) to advance ten yards or more towards their opponent&#x27;s goal line (end zone). If they advance ten yards, they are awarded a first down, or another set of downs to advance a further ten yards. If they fail to advance that far after using all of their downs, possession of the ball is turned over to the other team. In most situations if a team reaches the final down, they will punt to their opponent, which forces them to begin their drive from further down the field; if they are in range, they might instead attempt to kick a field goal.

==Description==
A down begins with a snap or free kick (such as a kickoff or safety kick) and ends when the ball or the player in possession of it is declared down by an official, a team scores, or the ball or player in possession of it leaves the field of play.

The player with possession of the ball after he has been tackled or is otherwise unable to advance the ball further on account of the play having ended is &quot;down&quot; (e.g., &quot;He is down at the 34-yard line&quot;).

&quot;Down&quot; may also refer to the ball after it is made dead in one manner or another. The line of scrimmage for the next play will be determined by the position of the ball when it is down.

Each possession begins with first down. The line to gain is marked 10 yards downfield from the start of this possession, and the situation is described as &quot;1st and 10&quot; (if the goal line is less than 10 yards downfield, then the goal line is the line to gain and the situation is &quot;1st and goal&quot;). If the offensive team moves the ball past the line to gain, they make a new first down. If they fail to do this after a specified number of downs (four in American play and three in Canadian play), the team &quot;turns the ball over on downs&quot;, and possession of the ball reverts to the opposing team at the spot where the ball was downed at the end of the last down.

If a penalty against the defensive team moves the ball past the line to gain, the offensive team gets a new first down. Some defensive penalties give the offense an automatic first down regardless of the distance.

When the offensive team reaches the final down, the team faces a &quot;last down situation&quot; (&quot;third down situation&quot; in Canadian play and &quot;fourth down situation&quot; in American play), where the team must decide whether to use a running or passing play in an attempt to gain a first down (this is called &quot;going for it&quot;), or alternatively to kick the ball (either by punting or attempting a field goal). Though statistical analysis of games suggests playing more aggressively is the better option, kicking the ball is typically seen as the safer solution; scrimmaging may lead to a turnover on downs, potentially giving the ball to the other team with good field position.

Downing the player with possession of the ball is one way to end a play (other ways include the player with the ball going out of bounds, an incomplete pass, or a score). Usually a player is made down when he is tackled by the defense. In the NFL, if the offensive player is touching the ground with some part of his body other than his hands or feet, then he is down if any defensive player touches him. In the NCAA, an offensive player touching the ground in the same manner is down, regardless of whether a defensive player touches him.

If recovering the ball in one&#x27;s opponent&#x27;s end zone (following a kickoff in American football, and following any kick into the end zone, except for successful field goals, in Canadian football), a player may down the ball by dropping to one knee (in Canadian play, doing so scores a single for the opposing team). A player in possession of the ball will down the ball if he fumbles it out of bounds. If a quarterback is running with the ball during his initial possession following the snap, he may down the ball by doing a foot-first slide, protecting him from injury. In the NFL, the quarterback is the only player for whom falling down in this way automatically stops play.

==Terminology==
The situation at a down can be described succinctly in a short phrase of the form &quot;1st/2nd/3rd/4th and X&quot;. The first part describes which down the offense is on, and the &quot;X&quot; is a number of yards between the current line of scrimmage and the line where the offense would gain another set of downs. Thus, offenses will normally begin on &quot;1st and 10&quot;. If they gain 5 yards on the play, the subsequent situation would be described as &quot;2nd and 5&quot;.

If the distance to the target line is very small, the number of yards may be replaced by &quot;and inches&quot; (e.g. &quot;3rd and inches&quot;). Colloquially, when the target line is far from the line of scrimmage, the term &quot;and long&quot; may be used (e.g. &quot;3rd and long&quot;).

When the offense has a first down within 10 yards of the goal line, the goal line becomes the line to gain as they cannot make another first down (barring a defensive penalty) without actually scoring. In these situations the number of yards is replaced with &quot;and goal&quot;, e.g. &quot;1st and goal&quot;.

Other downs-related terminology is as follows:
* &quot;First down&quot;: The term &quot;first down&quot; can be used both as the first down in a series of downs, and for the statistical achievement of gaining the required ten yards to be awarded a new first down. When a team begins a new possession, (for example following a kickoff by their opponents) their first play in the ensuing series of downs will be &quot;first down&quot;. However, it would not be recorded as a first down for statistical purposes as the offense did nothing to achieve it. Statistically they are only credited with a first down if they gain the required ten yards to be awarded a new series of downs.
* &quot;Down by contact&quot;: When a player with possession of the ball is made to touch the ground (other than hands or feet) by a defensive player. For example, if the ball-carrier slips and falls, he can get up and continue, but if he was pushed by a defensive player, he is said to be down by contact and the play is dead. This term is only applicable to professional football; in college and high-school football, the play ends when the player with possession goes down for any reason. An exception to this rule in effect at all levels of the game is that a player who is &quot;already&quot; kneeling when he takes possession of the ball is &quot; not&quot; considered down. This exception is primarily intended to ensure that the kneeling holder of a place kick attempt will not be considered to be down.
* &quot;Turnover on downs&quot;: Transfer of possession to the other team due to failure to make a new first down on the final down.
* &quot;3rd/4th and game&quot;: Informal term referring to the late-game situation where the team with the ball is losing, and failure to convert that down will seal the outcome by being either the final play before the clock runs out, or a turnover would allow the winning team to run out the clock.
* &quot;Base downs&quot;: term in American football used to describe 1st and 2nd downs. The term is not applicable in Canadian football since there are only three downs.
* &quot;Possession downs&quot;: term in American football used to describe 3rd downs, and 4th downs used for a scrimmage play (i.e. not a punt or field goal attempt), because the offense&#x27;s continued possession of the ball directly depends on the result.
* &quot;Passing down&quot; or &quot;running down&quot;: terms used in anticipation of the type of play likely to be called. On a &quot;3rd and long&quot; in American football, for example, a pass play is often called, whereas on a 3rd down with only a few yards to the target, a running play is usually deployed. In Canadian football, the strategy employed for 2nd down is broadly similar to the strategy employed for 3rd down in American football, and 1st-and-long situations (arising as a result of penalties) may be considered passing downs similar to how 2nd-and-long situations may be considered passing downs in American football.

==Derivation==

In modern rugby union football, teams have unlimited possession of the ball to score a try. After a tackle, a ruck will form where the defense can contest for possession of the ball.

In modern rugby league football, each team has six tackles to score a try, after a tackle the offensive team will “play the ball” to restart play (a “6 again” can be awarded with infringements at the play the ball, restarting the tackle count) while the defensive team must retreat 10 metres. If they fail then possession changes over to the other team. The rule was established at four tackles in 1966 and was changed to six tackles at different times in various countries (mostly Australia, New Zealand, England and France where the sport is played professionally).

In American football, the concept of the act of having the ball down gave rise to &quot;down&quot; as the condition of the player so obligated, and the ball carrier could call for a &quot;down&quot; voluntarily. Although NCAA rules have effectively abolished this (as the ball carrier dropping to the ground immediately ends the play), other codes for North American football, such as the NFL, still allow (as one way for the ball to become dead) for the runner to cry &quot;down&quot;.

Eventually the rules officially applied the word to include all of the action from the time the ball was put into play (whether by snap or free kick) until it became dead. However, in some contexts the down begins when the ball is made ready for play by the officials.

The system of downs, in terms of a set number of plays to advance the ball a certain number of yards, was introduced by the Intercollegiate Football Association in 1882. (Then-player Walter Camp, as secretary of the rules committee, chronicled this change, but had not promoted it.) It allowed a team three downs to advance the ball five yards, or retreat with it ten yards, or else lose possession of the ball, a proposal meant to reduce sandbagging. Early in the 20th century, after the forward pass was added to the game, the required advance was doubled to ten yards, and later a fourth down was added to the series; the alternative of retreating a distance with the ball had meanwhile doubled its requirement to twenty yards and later been abolished. A system of three downs was introduced to Canadian football around 1900 in certain provincial rules, as the game had not yet been standardized nationwide.

==Two/three-and-out==
Three and out is a situation in American football where a team, after starting an offensive possession, executes three plays, fails to get a first down, and then punts.

The term comes from the standard practice that an offensive unit only has three &quot;real&quot; plays before they are expected to punt. While, in theory, a team is allowed a fourth running or passing play, using the fourth down to run or pass is a risky move under most circumstances. If they fail to gain a new first down on a fourth-down play, the opposing team takes possession at the spot where they left off, giving them better field position than if the ball had been punted further toward the opposing team&#x27;s end zone. Typically, a team will run or pass on fourth down only if they are trailing late in a close game, are near enough to the first down marker (usually a yard or less) and in the opposing team&#x27;s territory, or in a certain part of the field where a punt will probably end up being a touchback (which will result in a relatively limited net gain of yardage), but just beyond the distance where a field goal is likely to be successful (in the NFL, a missed field goal results in the opposition taking possession at the spot of the unsuccessful kick). The range at which American football coaches will typically attempt to convert fourth downs where they otherwise would not varies between the opponent&#x27;s 30- and 45-yard lines, depending on such factors as the kicker&#x27;s or punter&#x27;s perceived abilities and the required distance to gain.

Punting following a three-and-out is unlike a turnover on downs. Punting after a three-and-out allows a team the opportunity to set their opposition further back in field position. On a turnover on downs, there is no punt and the opposing team takes over possession of the ball at the spot of field where the final (third in the Canadian game, fourth in the American game) down ended.

In Canadian football, since there are three downs, the term &quot;two and out&quot; is used in this situation. In the Canadian game, single points can be scored on punts and missed field goals. As a result, Canadian football coaches will never &quot;go for it&quot; simply on account of the ball being on the edge of field goal range barring extraordinary circumstances (such as trailing by between four and eight points late in the game). Teams facing third and relatively long at the edge of field goal range will typically either punt (usually with the intent of putting the ball out of bounds near the opposing goal line instead of actually scoring a single point) or attempt a field goal.

==References==
==See also==
* 1st &amp; Ten, the graphics system used in NFL broadcast to superimpose the first down line on the field of play
* Fifth Down Game, several instances of incorrect counting of downs
* Glossary of American football</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q139989" start="2" end="6" title="Down (gridiron football)" label="down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546270" start="10" end="27" title="gridiron football" label="gridiron football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203108" start="73" end="77" title="play from scrimmage" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081491" start="254" end="262" title="football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="320" end="332" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q139989" start="587" end="597" title="Down (gridiron football)" label="first down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856086" start="746" end="757" title="Turnover on downs" label="turned over"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701352" start="840" end="844" title="Punt (gridiron football)" label="punt"/>
<link wikidata="Q24923" start="991" end="1001" title="field goal" label="field goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q139680" start="1041" end="1045" title="football snap" label="snap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740847" start="1070" end="1077" title="Kickoff (American football)" label="kickoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906" start="1081" end="1092" title="safety kick" label="safety kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245467" start="1554" end="1558" title="Dead ball (American football)" label="dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651587" start="1589" end="1606" title="line of scrimmage" label="line of scrimmage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746733" start="2384" end="2391" title="Penalty (gridiron football)" label="penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701352" start="2990" end="2997" title="Punt (gridiron football)" label="punting"/>
<link wikidata="Q24923" start="3014" end="3024" title="Field goal (football)" label="field goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q772180" start="3420" end="3433" title="out of bounds" label="out of bounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234374" start="3891" end="3899" title="end zone" label="end zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q775079" start="4131" end="4137" title="single (football)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721589" start="4222" end="4228" title="fumble" label="fumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="4253" end="4264" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q25040" start="5376" end="5385" title="goal line (American football)" label="goal line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5486" end="5493" title="American football#Penalties" label="penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856086" start="7131" end="7148" title="Turnover on downs" label="Turnover on downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="8650" end="8661" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670213" start="8750" end="8754" title="ruck (rugby union)" label="ruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="8834" end="8846" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8871" end="8882" title="Playing rugby league#Six tackle rule" label="six tackles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8939" end="8952" title="Playing rugby league#Play-the-ball" label="play the ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="9782" end="9785" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365766" start="10334" end="10345" title="Walter Camp" label="Walter Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806622" start="10590" end="10601" title="running out the clock" label="sandbagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433685" start="10640" end="10652" title="forward pass" label="forward pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="11117" end="11134" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298972" start="12070" end="12079" title="touchback" label="touchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856086" start="12683" end="12700" title="turnover on downs" label="turnover on downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q248534" start="13026" end="13043" title="Canadian football" label="Canadian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q775079" start="13156" end="13169" title="Single (Canadian football)" label="single points"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454991" start="13589" end="13619" title="Coffin corner (American football)" label="putting the ball out of bounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596072" start="13748" end="13761" title="1st &amp;amp; Ten (graphics system)" label="1st &amp;amp; Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447505" start="13863" end="13878" title="Fifth Down Game (disambiguation)" label="Fifth Down Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917853" start="13931" end="13960" title="Glossary of American football" label="Glossary of American football"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962452" wikidata="Q1265597" url="?curid=962452" title="Dune (video game)">
<text>Dune is a 1992 adventure strategy game based on the 1965 science-fiction novel of the same name by Frank Herbert. It was developed by Cryo Interactive and published by Virgin Interactive.

&quot;Dune&quot; blends adventure with economic and military strategy. Loosely following the story of the novel, the game casts the player as Paul Atreides, with the ultimate goal of driving the House Harkonnen from the planet Arrakis, while managing spice extraction, military, and, later, ecology through the native Fremen tribes. As the player progresses, his troops are equipped with weapons from &quot;crysknives&quot; to atomics, tap into Paul&#x27;s latent psychic powers, and get acquainted with such characters from the novel as Chani and Liet-Kynes.

Released for the Amiga and IBM PC compatibles, it was one of the first floppy games to be converted to CD format, which included footage of the David Lynch film, voice-acting for all speaking roles, and improved 3D-rendered traveling and location screens. This version, a mix of the Amiga graphics and the extras of the PC-CD version, was also released on the Sega CD / Mega CD console. The audio track, created by Stéphane Picq and Philip Ulrich, was released by Cryo (formerly Exxos) on the album &quot;&quot;.

It was followed the same year by &quot;Dune II&quot;, which ultimately set the standard for the genre of real-time strategy video games.

== Gameplay ==
The story is mostly based on the plot of the &quot;Dune&quot; novel: the player is Paul Atreides, son of Duke Leto Atreides and Lady Jessica. House Atreides was given an irresistible offer by the Emperor Shaddam IV – mine the spice from the desert planet Arrakis, formerly controlled by their ancient enemy: House Harkonnen. Duke Leto accepts the offer not only to gain the incredible wealth that comes from Spice trading, but also to utilize the native peoples of Arrakis - the fearsome tribal warriors known as the Fremen - against House Harkonnen.

The game, seen always through the eyes of Paul, is a mix between real-time strategy and an adventure game. While the basis of the game is the strategy component, dialog between characters and a linear plotline give the game more depth than most strategy games of the time. The player is also required to do some mini-quests involving talking to characters and traveling to locations, which adds a small adventure game element.

There must be a balance between military and spice mining power. While having a strong military force will provide fast response to the Harkonnen, if Spice is not mined fast enough to keep up with the Emperor&#x27;s demands, the game will be lost. However, if there is too much focus on spice mining, Harkonnen troops can ambush a sietch, capturing the soldiers inside and reducing available military strength. Since the game is as much resource managing as military conquest, balancing both is the key for successful completion.

&quot;Dune&quot; consists of two interwoven gameplay layers: an adventure layer reminiscent of dungeon crawler games, and a top-down strategy layer more reminiscent of 4X games. The player may switch between these two layers at will, to carry out completely different sets of activities required to win the game.

The adventure layer allows the player to move about short distances, whether inside structures (e.g. the Arrakeen palace, or a sietch) or to walk out into the desert. The strategy layer shows the entire planet Arrakis and allows surveying (and later controlling) Paul&#x27;s assets in the Spice-mining effort and the fight against the Harkonnen.

The game runs in real-time, measuring both the time of day (with corresponding changes to the in-game visuals) as well as the number of days elapsed since the beginning of the game. The flow of time is crucial and it passes at the same pace regardless of which layer is being viewed.

Gameplay evolves in a manner that responds to the evolution of the story itself. As the story progresses, more and more options become available, mirroring Paul&#x27;s gradual growth as a leader to the Fremen and a danger to House Harkonnen and the Emperor.

The game begins with Paul at the Arrakeen palace, his family&#x27;s new residence on Dune. The very early game involves moving around the palace to meet and have conversations with his family members and trusted advisors, introducing the player to the game&#x27;s setting.

Conversations in &quot;Dune&quot; are interactive to a limited degree, with the player able to occasionally select responses in order to advance the plot – but most dialogue options simply command the other character to divulge pertinent strategic information, or to carry out some relevant action in the game world. For example, Duncan Idaho can be asked to give a detailed report on the current status of the Atreides Spice-mining operation, or to send a shipment of Spice to the Emperor. A few characters can be commanded to join Paul in his travels.

Soon enough, Paul is sent out by his father Duke Leto to contact the local Fremen tribes and attempt to convince them to work for House Atreides, which has no military or spice-mining forces of its own. Travel to those Fremen must be done by Ornithopter, by selecting the destination or a general direction and flying there in a straight line. During flight, it is possible to spot certain points of interest from the air. Certain characters who are currently following Paul may increase the probability of spotting such locations. Every visited location (or one whose position had been reported by a character during dialogue with them) is shown on the &quot;select destination&quot; map. The travel sequence can be skipped, but the flight time is calculated and the in-game clock will be advanced accordingly once the destination is reached. Once a Fremen sietch is reached, Paul may converse with the local chieftain to attempt to convince the Fremen to join the Atreides. Though most chieftains will agree immediately, some require further convincing and Paul would need to perform some specific action or raise his reputation score before they will agree to work for him.

Once at least one tribe has been recruited, the strategy layer becomes unlocked. This layer allows Paul to direct his troops to move to any known location on the planet. It also provides a small interface to examine the availability of spice in each sector of the map (once Spice prospectors have been recruited as well). Finally, any Fremen tribe can be instructed to pick up spice-mining equipment (which increases their mining efficiency) if it is available at their current location, or even to search nearby for such equipment. Tribe movement between takes place in real-time. Tribes will automatically begin to mine Spice at their current location and will continue doing so until the Spice runs out. Spice is automatically moved to the Atreides&#x27; stores at Arrakeen, requiring no logistics for its transportation.

Once Spice begins to accumulate, the Emperor will begin to make demands for Spice shipments. These are received in a communications room at the palace and must be fulfilled within a certain period of time, otherwise the game will end with the Emperor invading Dune and destroying the Atreides. This adds a dimension of gameplay wherein the player must calculate how often they must return to Arrakeen (Atreides Palace), since each shipment requires manual confirmation. Duncan can be instructed to send more or less than the requested amount of Spice (assuming it is available), in order to preserve spice or delay the next request, respectively. Spice also serves as a currency that can be used to purchase additional mining (and later military) equipment from Smuggler camps, which will be marked on the map as the game progresses.

As the story develops, Paul will discover more and gather more and more Spice-mining tribes. Eventually, the Harkonnen will attack one of the and take one of the tribes prisoner, at which point Duke Leto will go on a retaliatory suicide mission and be killed. This scripted event pushes the game into the next stage: creating a military force to defend and ultimately take the fight into Harkonnen territory. To start, Paul must complete certain plot objectives by traveling to specific destinations and conversing with certain characters, primarily Stilgar. Once the requirements are fulfilled, Paul can instruct tribes to switch from Spice-mining activity to military training. Such a tribe can then be equipped with any available weaponry, instead of mining equipment, to increase its combat efficiency. Military tribes can also train to increase their prowess and morale, more-so if Gurney Halleck is told to remain at the sietch where the military forces are training. Once ready, military tribes can be sent to scout out Harkonnen fortresses and attack them. Attacking tribes must outnumber and out-equip the Harkonnen defenders of a fortress in order to win, otherwise they might be destroyed and / or taken captive. Morale also plays a strong part in a military tribe&#x27;s effectiveness and Paul himself can influence a battle&#x27;s outcome by traveling to the site of a battle and issuing generalized combat orders (cautious vs. aggressive). This is very risky to Paul himself and can result in him being killed in that battle. If a battle is won, Paul might be able to interrogate to fortress&#x27; previous commander for more information and possibly release any tribes held captive there. Over time, a captured fortress will be turned into a new sietch.

An alternative (or complementary) option to direct combat is to start a terraforming project on Dune, setting certain tribes to work on ecology. This option becomes available only after completing a plot thread involving Liet-Kynes. Ecology tribes can construct a wind trap (or use an existing one) at a sietch to begin accumulating water and then be equipped with plant bulbs which they will automatically plant wherever they go. The bulbs will grow into vegetation (seen growing on both the strategy and adventure layers) and will expand northwards over time from the location where they are planted. Vegetation rapidly destroys any spice still left in the soil in any region it expands into. As such, if it ever reaches a Harkonnen fortress, the Harkonnen will lose interest in that region and abandon it without a fight. This method is very time-consuming and will destroy any potential spice-mining prospects in the affected areas, but in conjunction with the military campaign can nevertheless pay off strategically. An important side-benefit to terraforming is that it increases the morale of all Fremen tribes, thereby increasing their efficiency at whatever they are currently doing.

Early on in the scripted storyline, Paul will begin to have visions of events occurring far from his current location. As time passes and more plot events occur, Paul&#x27;s telepathic ability will become more and more pronounced. At first, this ability will allow Paul to instantly know whenever a message has been received at the palace (including the all-important demands for Spice from the Emperor). Later on, Paul will be able to contact and command Fremen tribes a short distance from his position on the map. As the game progresses, the range of Paul&#x27;s telepathic ability will increase, until it eventually spans the entire planet. Furthermore, the Fremen will eventually teach Paul to ride sandworms (as an alternative to Ornithopter flight), which can be used to approach Harkonnen fortresses more safely and further increase the odds of victory in battle.

The ultimate goal of the game is to destroy all or most of the Harkonnen fortresses, coming within striking distance of the Harkonnen palace, Arrakeen, which is near the north pole of Dune. Then, a massive army must be collected in order to make the final assault and win the game.

== Development ==
=== Groundwork ===
Martin Alper, the founder of Mastertronic (later renamed Virgin Interactive), was fascinated by the novel &quot;Dune&quot; and had been trying to buy the interactive adaptation rights since 1988. He conducted a study to measure the viability of such an adaptation, estimating that there were between 3 and 4 million fans of the novel in the United States. He found that Dino De Laurentiis, the producer of David Lynch&#x27;s film &quot;Dune&quot;, held the adaptation rights. Following the release of the film, the production company had gone bankrupt. After the death of Frank Herbert, there were several legal trials to determine who then owned the rights. Martin Alper was finally able to buy the rights from Universal Pictures in the spring of 1990.

The first links between the future French company Cryo Interactive, born out of the ashes of ERE Informatique and Virgin Interactive were forged when Philippe Ulrich met Jean-Martial Lefranc, recently appointed director of Virgin Loisirs by Patrick Zelnik. Lefranc was an admirer of Ulrich&#x27;s team, especially for its recent release of Captain Blood, for which Ulrich was scenario designer. On 20 July 1990, he organized a meeting between Frank Herman, head of the group in London and Ulrich&#x27;s team. Herman promised them a meeting with Martin Alper, president of Virgin Games USA.

Rémi Herbulot met with Martin Alper in Los Angeles to pitch three video games, all with strong science fiction elements. In response, Alper proposed to Herbulot the idea of adapting the &quot;Dune&quot; novel to a video game format, as he held those rights. The rights agreement between the groups was finalized in August 1990, during a dinner at Fouquet&#x27;s, in the presence of Philippe Ulrich and Frank Herman.

=== Pre-production ===
A team of developers, mostly Frank Herbert fans, began to work on the project. The team worked for 6 months on paper and organized weekly meetings. Ulrich met the game&#x27;s producer, David Bishop, of whom he had heard conflicting reports in the past. Bishop expressed his desire to design the game himself. In the first few months of development, the documents that the developers sent to the United States did not convince Virgin. Communication was relayed through Bishop in London, who did not defend the project. The Americans at Virgin Games criticized the game for its &quot;French aesthetic&quot; and too-prominent user interface. They also were not convinced that the proposed mixture of adventure and strategy gameplay elements would succeed.

To give the development team a more defined framework, Philippe Ulrich created a new label within Virgin Interactive: &quot;Cryo Entertainment&quot;.

=== Trouble ===
On 19 September 1990, after a change in management, Virgin threatened to cancel the production. No contract had yet been signed; the developers feared all their work would be lost.

Frank Herman managed to salvage the project, but the American backers, including Martin Alper, pulled out. Alper entrusted the electronic adaptation rights of &quot;Dune&quot; to an American studio, Westwood Studios, at a meeting in Las Vegas.

The developers, working on the game practically in secret, ended up with a design document more than 100 pages long.

The game was inspired by the novel by Frank Herbert, but also by David Lynch&#x27;s film. Feyd-Rautha, for example, retained the likeness of Sting, but the majority of the characters were completely redesigned by Jean-Jacques Chaubin. Also adapted from the film is the &quot;weirding module&quot;, a weapon that does not exist in the novel. The graphics were created for VGA 256 color mode. In early 1991, the Gulf War seemed to echo the themes of &quot;Dune&quot; and Ulrich was inspired to integrate images recalling the night bombing of Baghdad into the game.

In April 1991, Sega bought Virgin&#x27;s European operations and Cryo lost Jean-Martial Lefranc, its intermediary with the publisher&#x27;s general management. Their new manager, Christian Brecheteau, discovered that Virgin Entertainment had financed Cryo in secret, but fortunately expressed interest in the project. An audit of the accounts of Sega France, which absorbed Virgin Loisirs, was carried out. Management now realized that the development of &quot;Dune&quot; in France was still being funded, while Sega had not obtained the &quot;Dune&quot; license.

Members of the Cryo team rushed to London to meet with Martin Alper to present their work samples and hopefully save the project. Alper and Bishop were excited by the early prototypes and they reversed their cancellation decision, despite still having another &quot;Dune&quot; project under development. They gave Cryo five weeks to present a prototype able to satisfy the American public.

The plot was modified from the novel and the developers chose to start the game with the arrival of Paul on Arrakis. A few weeks later, they sent a prototype to the United States. Alper was impressed not only by the game but also by the soundtrack, which he wanted to release on CD. In September 1991, he signed the game &quot;Dune&quot; and a second game, &quot;KGB&quot;, which Ulrich had proposed to him at the European Computer Trade Show in London in 1990. In October, the game was in pre-beta, with a demo version planned. On 27 September, Virgin Games USA signed an agreement with Sega for an adaptation of &quot;Dune&quot; for Mega-CD.

=== Aftermath ===
In January 1992, after this comeback, Ulrich, Herbulot and Lefranc spun off Cryo Interactive as an independent company. Cryo&#x27;s &quot;Dune&quot; arrived in stores before Westwood&#x27;s game, which was eventually renamed &quot;Dune II&quot;. The development of &quot;Dune&quot; cost 3 million francs, of which 800,000 was used by Cryo. With the signing of the distribution contract, Cryo was granted a budget of 600,000 francs.

Cryo planned a number of ports, to Atari ST, Amiga, CD32, Super NES and possibly the NES and Master System. Most never saw the light of day, although the game was successfully ported to the Amiga and Sega CD. Philippe Ulrich also planned a sequel to the game, which this time would place the player on the side of the Harkonnens.

&quot;Dune&quot; was one of the first floppy disk games to be ported to the new CD format. This was thanks to Ulrich&#x27;s willingness to exploit this new medium, despite initial opposition from David Bishop. The Sega Mega-CD version had graphics close to the Amiga version&#x27;s, but offered the extras of the DOS CD-ROM version: snippets from Lynch&#x27;s film, voice acting and new travelling animations.

&quot;Mega&quot; placed the game at No. 10 in their Top Mega CD Games of All Time.

== Audio ==

Dune: Spice Opera was released by Virgin Records in 1992. The tracks were composed by Stéphane Picq and Philippe Ulrich. Virgin Records was later sold to EMI, which then became the new holders of the copyright. Picq wished to have the rights in order to re-release the album, though they were not granted.

In 2023, Stéphane Picq announced a remaster and re-release of the game&#x27;s original soundtrack, in digital lossless .FLAC format, to be titled &quot;Dune Spice Opera 2024&quot;.

== Reception ==
&quot;Dune&quot; was commercially successful, with sales of 20,000 units in its first week alone. By 1997, it had sold 300,000 units. Cryo Interactive&#x27;s Philippe Ulrich later noted that the company had &quot;bet a lot on the explosion of the PC and the CD-ROM&quot; with &quot;Dune&quot;, and that the game&#x27;s hit status was heavily responsible for Cryo&#x27;s quick growth.

Maxwell Eden for &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot; wrote in September 1992 that the developer &quot;had succeeded in distilling the book&#x27;s complex plot into a game that involves the player in the outcome&quot;. It praised the graphics and animation, and concluded that the game was &quot;a light and interesting challenge&quot; easy enough for most players to finish. In April 1994 the magazine said of the CD version that &quot;many of the actors come off better on the PC screen than they fared in the real cinema, and the addition of digitized speech spices up many of the dull parts of the game&quot;. &quot;QuestBusters&quot; wrote: &quot;I really enjoyed this game, a high quality product with many surprisingly entertaining aspects&quot;. Because of the strategic aspects it recommended the game to those who enjoyed both strategy games and graphic adventures. &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot; gave the Sega CD version an 8 out of 10, describing it as &quot;involving&quot;, and praising the digitized graphics and flight sequences.

Jim Trunzo reviewed &quot;Dune&quot; in &quot;White Wolf&quot; #34 (Jan./Feb., 1993), rating it a 3 out of 5 and stated that &quot;&quot;Dune&quot;, from Virgin Games, should please fans of Frank Herbert&#x27;s classic; the game brings the book&#x27;s characters and places to life. However, for those who believe that &#x27;the game&#x27;s the thing,&#x27; you might end up feeling like someone who&#x27;s had the appetizer and is left waiting for the main course.&quot;

== Later games ==
In 1992 software company Westwood Studios produced a sequel to &quot;Dune&quot; also for Virgin Interactive, &quot;Dune II: The Building of a Dynasty&quot;. Westwood later produced two more games, a remake, &quot;Dune 2000&quot; in 1998 and its sequel &quot;&quot; in 2001. Cryo returned to the &quot;Dune&quot; universe in 2001 with &quot;Frank Herbert&#x27;s Dune&quot;, the financial failure of which bankrupted Cryo Interactive, causing the nearly finished &quot;Dune Generations&quot; to never be released.

== References ==

== External links ==

* &quot;Dune&quot; at MobyGames</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="15" end="24" title="Adventure game" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q472055" start="25" end="38" title="strategy video game" label="strategy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="79" end="95" title="Dune (novel)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="99" end="112" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q71930" start="134" end="150" title="Cryo Interactive" label="Cryo Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="168" end="186" title="Virgin Interactive" label="Virgin Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="331" end="344" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="384" end="399" title="House Harkonnen" label="House Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="416" end="423" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="440" end="445" title="Melange (fictional drug)" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="507" end="513" title="Fremen" label="Fremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="596" end="606" title="crysknife" label="crysknives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724142" start="727" end="732" title="Chani (character)" label="Chani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="737" end="747" title="Liet-Kynes" label="Liet-Kynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="767" end="772" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="777" end="794" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="894" end="905" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q114819" start="906" end="910" title="Dune (1984 film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="1110" end="1117" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360386" start="1165" end="1178" title="Stéphane Picq" label="Stéphane Picq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265597" start="1183" end="1196" title="Philip Ulrich" label="Philip Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q596631" start="1303" end="1310" title="Dune II" label="Dune II"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="1369" end="1387" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="1462" end="1484" title="Dune (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Dune&amp;quot; novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="1500" end="1513" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="1522" end="1540" title="Leto I Atreides" label="Duke Leto Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724114" start="1545" end="1557" title="Lady Jessica" label="Lady Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="1559" end="1573" title="House Atreides" label="House Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="1621" end="1631" title="Shaddam IV" label="Shaddam IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="1672" end="1679" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="1725" end="1740" title="House Harkonnen" label="House Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="1934" end="1940" title="Fremen" label="Fremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="2034" end="2052" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="2060" end="2074" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265717" start="3023" end="3036" title="dungeon crawl" label="dungeon crawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q603555" start="3096" end="3098" title="4X" label="4X"/>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="9643" end="9655" title="terraforming" label="terraforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146733" start="11958" end="11970" title="Martin Alper" label="Martin Alper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615297" start="11987" end="11999" title="Mastertronic" label="Mastertronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="12015" end="12033" title="Virgin Interactive" label="Virgin Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186952" start="12112" end="12123" title="interactive media" label="interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="12124" end="12134" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q296796" start="12328" end="12346" title="Dino De Laurentiis" label="Dino De Laurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="12364" end="12375" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q114819" start="12394" end="12398" title="Dune (1984 film)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="12670" end="12688" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q71930" start="12763" end="12779" title="Cryo Interactive" label="Cryo Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046067" start="12806" end="12822" title="ERE Informatique" label="ERE Informatique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380810" start="12863" end="12878" title="Philippe Ulrich" label="Philippe Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12883" end="12903" title="Jean-Martial Lefranc" label="Jean-Martial Lefranc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12936" end="12950" title="Virgin Loisirs" label="Virgin Loisirs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12954" end="12968" title="Patrick Zelnik" label="Patrick Zelnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q88828" start="13053" end="13066" title="Captain Blood (video game)" label="Captain Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="13285" end="13297" title="Virgin Games" label="Virgin Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13304" end="13317" title="Rémi Herbulot" label="Rémi Herbulot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079972" start="13651" end="13665" title="Fouquet&amp;#x27;s" label="Fouquet&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13706" end="13718" title="Frank Herman" label="Frank Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="14279" end="14291" title="Virgin Games" label="Virgin Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="14367" end="14381" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q267949" start="15046" end="15062" title="Westwood Studios" label="Westwood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="15080" end="15089" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297624" start="15167" end="15182" title="design document" label="design document"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468873" start="15300" end="15311" title="Feyd-Rautha" label="Feyd-Rautha"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="15351" end="15356" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17194" start="15581" end="15584" title="VGA" label="VGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="15620" end="15628" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="15750" end="15757" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="15789" end="15793" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191393" start="17093" end="17096" title="KGB (video game)" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376482" start="17144" end="17172" title="European Computer Trade Show" label="European Computer Trade Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="17365" end="17372" title="Mega-CD" label="Mega-CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q596631" start="17624" end="17631" title="Dune II" label="Dune II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="17690" end="17696" title="French franc" label="francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="17861" end="17869" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="17871" end="17876" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q695161" start="17878" end="17882" title="Amiga CD32" label="CD32"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="17884" end="17893" title="Super NES" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="17911" end="17914" title="NES" label="NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="17919" end="17932" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="18144" end="18154" title="House Harkonnen" label="Harkonnens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="18195" end="18206" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="18371" end="18383" title="Sega Mega-CD" label="Sega Mega-CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175394" start="18574" end="18578" title="Mega (magazine)" label="Mega"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="18699" end="18713" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360386" start="18751" end="18764" title="Stéphane Picq" label="Stéphane Picq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380810" start="18769" end="18784" title="Philippe Ulrich" label="Philippe Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="18819" end="18822" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360386" start="18981" end="18994" title="Stéphane Picq" label="Stéphane Picq"/>
<link wikidata="Q219848" start="19092" end="19096" title="FLAC" label="FLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="19578" end="19599" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="20434" end="20459" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815399" start="20652" end="20662" title="White Wolf (magazine)" label="White Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q267949" start="21122" end="21138" title="Westwood Studios" label="Westwood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="21186" end="21204" title="Virgin Interactive" label="Virgin Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q596631" start="21212" end="21246" title="Dune II" label="Dune II: The Building of a Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153468" start="21310" end="21319" title="Dune 2000" label="Dune 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031625" start="21437" end="21462" title="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune (video game)" label="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041291" start="21564" end="21580" title="Dune Generations" label="Dune Generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q612975" start="21672" end="21681" title="MobyGames" label="MobyGames"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962454" wikidata="Q7852436" url="?curid=962454" title="Tulyar (disambiguation)">
<text>Tulyar was a racehorse, winner of the 1952 Epsom Derby.

Tulyar can also refer to:

* An English Electric &#x27;Deltic&#x27; diesel locomotive, no. 55015
*A diesel locomotive on the Swanley New Barn Railway</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7852437" start="0" end="6" title="Tulyar" label="Tulyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q796898" start="106" end="124" title="British Rail Class 55" label="&amp;#x27;Deltic&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="182" end="206" title="Swanley New Barn Railway#Diesel_engines" label="Swanley New Barn Railway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962456" wikidata="Q27001" url="?curid=962456" title="Martin, Slovakia">
<text>Martin (; until 1951 &quot;Turčiansky Svätý Martin&quot;, , German: &quot;Turz-Sankt Martin&quot;, Latin: &quot;Sanctus Martinus / Martinopolis&quot;) is a city in northern Slovakia, situated on the Turiec river, between the Malá Fatra and Veľká Fatra mountains, near the city of Žilina. The population numbers approximately 54,000, which makes it the ninth-largest city in Slovakia. It is the center of the Turiec region and the District of Martin.

==History==
From the second half of the 10th century until 1918, it was part of the Kingdom of Hungary. The first recorded reference to Martin in written sources is dated to 1284 under the name of &quot;Vila Sancti Martini&quot;.

In the turbulent 15th century, Martin suffered from many disasters, for example from the attack of the Hussites in 1433, when the town was burned down. Just ten years later, it was destroyed again by an earthquake and Martin started to be slowly degraded from royal to the privileged town and under direct influence of the Révay family.

Since the 18th century, Martin became centre of the Turóc county.

The town became the foremost Slovak cultural center in the 19th century. Several cultural institutions (including Slovak Matica and Slovak National Museum) were founded there. Most political activities leading to the Slovak national emancipation in the 19th and early 20th centuries were organized in or from Martin. The town was also industrialized at this time. The first printing works were established in 1869, the furniture factory &quot;Tatra nábytok&quot; in 1890, and so on.

The town lost some of its importance after Pressburg (today&#x27;s Bratislava) became the capital of Slovakia in 1919. Today, it is the seat of the Slovak National Library and Slovak Matica.

National Council of the Slovak Republic declared the city of Martin the center of national culture of the Slovaks on August 24, 1994.

The city of Martin won the United Nations Public Service Award in 2011 in the category: Preventing and Combating Corruption in the Public Service.

==Geography==
Martin lies at an altitude of above sea level and covers an area of . It is located in northern Slovakia, in the Turiec Basin, just south of the confluence of the Turiec river with Váh. Mountain ranges in the proximity of the city are Malá Fatra (Lesser Fatra) and Vel’ká Fatra (Greater Fatra); more to the south are the Žiar and Kremnica Mountains. The nearest major cities are Žilina, away to the north-west, Banská Bystrica, away to the south-east and capital Bratislava, to the south-west (by road).
Martin has 10 boroughs: &quot;Jahodníky&quot;, &quot;Ľadoveň&quot;, &quot;Stred&quot;, &quot;Sever&quot;, &quot;Košúty&quot;, &quot;Podháj&quot;, &quot;Stráne&quot;, &quot;Priekopa&quot;, &quot;Tomčany&quot; and &quot;Záturčie&quot;.

===Climate===
Martin lies in the north temperate zone and has a continental climate with four distinct seasons. It is characterized by a significant variation between hot summers and cold, snowy winters. Average annual temperature is around and average annual rainfall is ; most of the rainfall is in June and in the first half of July. Snow cover lasts from 60 to 80 days per year.

==Demographics==
Martin has a population of 55,000 (as of December 31, 2016). Since the end of the 1990s when the population reached the top (more than 60,000) every year a slight decrease has been observed. According to the 2001 census, 94.9% of inhabitants were Slovaks, 1.6% Czechs, 0.5% Romani, and 0.2% Hungarians. The religious makeup was 44.1% Roman Catholics, 31.2% people with no religious affiliation, and 17.2% Lutherans.

According to the 2011 census, 81.7% of inhabitants were Slovaks, 1.0% Czechs, 0.09% Roma, and 0.2% Hungarians and 16.2% did not specify nationality. The religious makeup was 34.3% Roman Catholics, 28.3% people with no religious affiliation, 21.1% did not specify religion and 13.2% Lutherans.

==Sights==


The oldest building is a Romanesque church dedicated to Saint Martin of Tours (13th century). The Slovak National Museum placed its ethnographic collection in Martin. An open-air museum in the suburbs, the Museum of the Slovak Village (&quot;Jahodnícke háje&quot;), exhibits the traditional rural architecture and folk traditions of the region of Turiec. The Slovak National Cemetery is the official Slovak hall of fame, inspired by the Panthéon in Paris.
The Slovak Chamber Theatre in Martin was established in 1944 as the second professional theatre company in Slovakia. The theatre building is a landmark of the city center.

Martin is surrounded by Malá Fatra and Veľká Fatra mountains, which in winter offer excellent conditions for skiing.

There is a historic mansion in the town of Záturčie in Martin district.

==Economy==
Martin is home to a Volkswagen Group-owned automotive industry production plant, under the Volkswagen Slovakia, a.s. subsidiary. Opened in 2000, it employs approximately 800 people. The city was hit hard in 2008 by the recession, as Volkswagen was forced to lay off over 200 workers. Other major industrial companies include ŽOS Vrútky (rail vehicles industry) or Prefa Sučany (concrete prefabricates).

The Danish shoe company ECCO is located near the Kosuty II borough in an industrial park. This park also hosts other companies such as MAR SK, GGB or Zinkpower.

The university hospital employs approximately two thousand personnel: doctors, nurses and other staff. The printing company Neografia has clients in more than 15 European countries, where Neografia exports the decisive part of its production of books. Due to the economic crisis the unemployment rate rose to 10%, but was still below the national average rate. In March 2018, the unemployment rate was under 4%. Many inhabitants work in nearby town Žilina, that is an important industrial center and major city of region.

==Education==
Martin is home to the Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, which is one of three medical schools in Slovakia. Among its international students are up to 500 Norwegian and 100 Icelandic medical students.

The city&#x27;s system of primary education consists of nine public schools, two private primary schools (BellAmos School), and two religious primary schools, enrolling in total 5,027 pupils. There is a plan to build a five-story high school near the main square. When completed, it will be the largest educational building in Slovakia apart from universities. The school will be named after Andrej Hlinka, a former Slovak politician.

Secondary education is represented by two gymnasia with 828 students, three specialized high schools with 1,050 students (Business Academy Martin), and three vocational schools with 2,501 students (data ).

==Sport==

The division, the Handball 1st league.

==Transport==
Martin lies on the crossroad that interconnect the main road (as well main railway) from Bratislava to Košice with Banská Bystrica. It is connected directly to Žilina, Turčianske Teplice and Ružomberok.

Public transport is not only in Martin itself, but it also extends to the surrounding town of Vrútky and to three villages (Bystrička, Lipovec, Turčianske Kľačany).

Martin is also served by Martin Airport, a small, general aviation airport used for gliding.

==Twin towns — sister cities==

Martin is twinned with:

* Bački Petrovac, Serbia
* Békéscsaba, Hungary
* Fargo, United States
* Gotha, Germany
* Hoogeveen, Netherlands
* Jičín, Czech Republic
* Kalisz, Poland
* Balashikha, Russia
==Notable people==
*Janko Alexy (1894–1970), painter
*Miloš Alexander Bazovský (1899–1968), painter
*Peter Bartoš (born 1973), ice hockey player, silver medal at the WCH 2000. 5× Slovak Extraliga Champion
*Martin Benka (1888–1971), painter
*Barbora Bobuľová (born 1974), actress
*Tomáš Brcko (born 1988), hockey player
*Zdeno Cíger (born 1969), ice hockey player, 3× bronze medal at the WCH 1989, 1990, 2003
*Oľga Feldeková (born 1943), writer
*Laura Frličková (born 2007), track and field athlete
*Oto Haščák (born 1964), ice hockey player, 2× bronze medal at the WCH 1989, 1990. 1× Czech Extraliga Champion
*Stanislav Jančárik, or Estanislao Jancarik (in Spanish), architect who designed many buildings in Buenos Aires
*Janko Jesenský, writer
*Jaroslav Katriňák, endurance motorcycle racer, 9th overall place at 2007 Dakar Rally
*Dušan Kaprálik (1948-2023), actor
*Jana Kirschner (born 1978), pop singer
*Lucia Klocová, athlete, who specialises in the 800 metres
*Andrej Kmeť, scientist
*Ľuboš Kostelný, actor
*Zora Mintalová - Zubercová, ethnographer, historian and museologist
*Anton Neuwirth, presidential candidate, ambassador
*Martin Obuch, professional ice hockey player
*Richard Pánik, ice hockey player, several seasons in NHL, AHL Calder Cup Champion
*Lukáš Plank, pathologist
*Miloslav Schmidt, organizer of fire brigades
*Róbert Švehla, ice hockey player, bronze medal at the WCH 1992, 2003
*Radovan Somík, ice hockey player, world champion at the WCH 2002
*Peter Smrek, ice hockey player, world champion at the WCH 2002
*Pavol Steiner (1908–1969), Olympic water polo player, swimmer, and cardiac surgeon
*Ján Tabaček (born 1980), ice hockey player, 2× Czech Extraliga Champion, 1x NLA Champion, 5× Slovakian Extraliga Champion
*Andrea Turčanová (born 1966), politician
*Petra Vajdová (born 1985), actress, Best Actress award at 2016 DOSKY Awards
*Ladislav Záborský, painter

==References==

==External links==

* Official municipal website of Martin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="0" end="6" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="60" end="66" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="99" end="104" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="173" end="181" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757909" start="199" end="211" title="Turiec (Váh)" label="Turiec river"/>
<link wikidata="Q523671" start="225" end="235" title="Lesser Fatra" label="Malá Fatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q778954" start="240" end="251" title="Greater Fatra" label="Veľká Fatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="280" end="286" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034315" start="408" end="421" title="Turiec" label="Turiec region"/>
<link wikidata="Q756665" start="430" end="448" title="Martin District" label="District of Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="535" end="553" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="785" end="793" title="Hussites" label="Hussites"/>
<link wikidata="Q835222" start="1005" end="1017" title="Révay family" label="Révay family"/>
<link wikidata="Q922904" start="1072" end="1084" title="Turóc county" label="Turóc county"/>
<link wikidata="Q763567" start="1201" end="1214" title="Slovak Matica" label="Slovak Matica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093925" start="1219" end="1241" title="Slovak National Museum" label="Slovak National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="1638" end="1648" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q620899" start="1719" end="1742" title="Slovak National Library" label="Slovak National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q763567" start="1747" end="1760" title="Matica slovenská" label="Slovak Matica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139204" start="1763" end="1802" title="National Council of the Slovak Republic" label="National Council of the Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888502" start="1925" end="1960" title="United Nations Public Service Awards" label="United Nations Public Service Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="2090" end="2105" title="above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503995" start="2173" end="2185" title="Turiec Basin" label="Turiec Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757909" start="2223" end="2235" title="Turiec (Váh)" label="Turiec river"/>
<link wikidata="Q202598" start="2241" end="2244" title="Váh" label="Váh"/>
<link wikidata="Q523671" start="2295" end="2320" title="Malá Fatra" label="Malá Fatra (Lesser Fatra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q778954" start="2325" end="2353" title="Veľká Fatra" label="Vel’ká Fatra (Greater Fatra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628720" start="2381" end="2385" title="Žiar (mountain range)" label="Žiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437075" start="2390" end="2408" title="Kremnica Mountains" label="Kremnica Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="2439" end="2445" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="2471" end="2486" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Banská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="2523" end="2533" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="2832" end="2852" title="Temperate" label="north temperate zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="2863" end="2882" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3413" end="3419" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="3447" end="3454" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="3461" end="3467" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="3474" end="3480" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="3491" end="3501" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3534" end="3549" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3605" end="3614" title="Lutherans" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3639" end="3645" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="3949" end="3959" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q133704" start="3980" end="4001" title="Saint Martin of Tours" label="Saint Martin of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541539" start="4022" end="4044" title="Slovak National Museum in Martin" label="Slovak National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631840" start="4130" end="4158" title="Museum of the Slovak Village" label="Museum of the Slovak Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034315" start="4271" end="4277" title="Turiec" label="Turiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968397" start="4283" end="4307" title="National Cemetery in Martin" label="Slovak National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q188856" start="4361" end="4369" title="Panthéon (Paris)" label="Panthéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4373" end="4378" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q523671" start="4577" end="4587" title="Malá Fatra" label="Malá Fatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q778954" start="4592" end="4603" title="Veľká Fatra" label="Veľká Fatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751761" start="4691" end="4698" title="Mansion in Záturčie" label="mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="4776" end="4792" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="4799" end="4818" title="automotive industry" label="automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603632" start="4830" end="4835" title="list of Volkswagen Group factories" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="4975" end="4984" title="Great Recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280255" start="5184" end="5188" title="ECCO" label="ECCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="5771" end="5777" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187024" start="5881" end="5910" title="Jessenius Faculty of Medicine" label="Jessenius Faculty of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883088" start="6163" end="6178" title="BellAmos School" label="BellAmos School"/>
<link wikidata="Q467797" start="6449" end="6462" title="Andrej Hlinka" label="Andrej Hlinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074657" start="6615" end="6638" title="Business Academy Martin" label="Business Academy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="6854" end="6864" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="6868" end="6874" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="6880" end="6895" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Banská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="6925" end="6931" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q135647" start="6933" end="6951" title="Turčianske Teplice" label="Turčianske Teplice"/>
<link wikidata="Q27541" start="6956" end="6966" title="Ružomberok" label="Ružomberok"/>
<link wikidata="Q837456" start="7063" end="7069" title="Vrútky" label="Vrútky"/>
<link wikidata="Q782433" start="7093" end="7102" title="Bystrička" label="Bystrička"/>
<link wikidata="Q933889" start="7104" end="7111" title="Lipovec, Martin" label="Lipovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186107" start="7113" end="7131" title="Turčianske Kľačany" label="Turčianske Kľačany"/>
<link wikidata="Q651544" start="7160" end="7174" title="Martin Airport (Slovakia)" label="Martin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="7185" end="7201" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="7219" end="7226" title="gliding" label="gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7271" end="7278" title="Town twinning" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q248251" start="7288" end="7302" title="Bački Petrovac" label="Bački Petrovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q178878" start="7313" end="7323" title="Békéscsaba" label="Békéscsaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="7335" end="7340" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986" start="7358" end="7363" title="Gotha (town)" label="Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q208012" start="7375" end="7384" title="Hoogeveen" label="Hoogeveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q656603" start="7400" end="7405" title="Jičín" label="Jičín"/>
<link wikidata="Q52842" start="7424" end="7430" title="Kalisz" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q104557" start="7441" end="7451" title="Balashikha" label="Balashikha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682808" start="7480" end="7491" title="Janko Alexy" label="Janko Alexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702071" start="7514" end="7538" title="Miloš Alexander Bazovský" label="Miloš Alexander Bazovský"/>
<link wikidata="Q613098" start="7561" end="7573" title="Peter Bartoš" label="Peter Bartoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903455" start="7666" end="7678" title="Martin Benka" label="Martin Benka"/>
<link wikidata="Q435132" start="7701" end="7717" title="Barbora Bobuľová" label="Barbora Bobuľová"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820559" start="7740" end="7751" title="Tomáš Brcko" label="Tomáš Brcko"/>
<link wikidata="Q168955" start="7780" end="7791" title="Zdeno Cíger" label="Zdeno Cíger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13538015" start="7869" end="7883" title="Oľga Feldeková" label="Oľga Feldeková"/>
<link wikidata="Q127688444" start="7905" end="7920" title="Laura Frličková" label="Laura Frličková"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084408" start="7959" end="7969" title="Oto Haščák" label="Oto Haščák"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8070" end="8088" title="Stanislav Jančárik" label="Stanislav Jančárik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="8168" end="8180" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q662143" start="8182" end="8196" title="Janko Jesenský" label="Janko Jesenský"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775667" start="8206" end="8223" title="Jaroslav Katriňák" label="Jaroslav Katriňák"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407282" start="8292" end="8306" title="Dušan Kaprálik" label="Dušan Kaprálik"/>
<link wikidata="Q575764" start="8327" end="8341" title="Jana Kirschner" label="Jana Kirschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q468428" start="8367" end="8380" title="Lucia Klocová" label="Lucia Klocová"/>
<link wikidata="Q765336" start="8426" end="8437" title="Andrej Kmeť" label="Andrej Kmeť"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080321" start="8450" end="8464" title="Ľuboš Kostelný" label="Ľuboš Kostelný"/>
<link wikidata="Q13381893" start="8473" end="8499" title="Zora Mintalová - Zubercová" label="Zora Mintalová - Zubercová"/>
<link wikidata="Q9156381" start="8542" end="8556" title="Anton Neuwirth" label="Anton Neuwirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295577" start="8594" end="8606" title="Martin Obuch" label="Martin Obuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119483" start="8640" end="8653" title="Richard Pánik" label="Richard Pánik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="8693" end="8696" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="8698" end="8701" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702700" start="8723" end="8734" title="Lukáš Plank" label="Lukáš Plank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847670" start="8749" end="8765" title="Miloslav Schmidt" label="Miloslav Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q980521" start="8795" end="8808" title="Róbert Švehla" label="Róbert Švehla"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="8810" end="8820" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q167117" start="8865" end="8878" title="Radovan Somík" label="Radovan Somík"/>
<link wikidata="Q948681" start="8931" end="8942" title="Peter Smrek" label="Peter Smrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156026" start="8995" end="9008" title="Pavol Steiner" label="Pavol Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q450808" start="9079" end="9090" title="Ján Tabaček" label="Ján Tabaček"/>
<link wikidata="Q688866" start="9155" end="9158" title="National League A" label="NLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516301" start="9202" end="9218" title="Andrea Turčanová" label="Andrea Turčanová"/>
<link wikidata="Q19719220" start="9244" end="9257" title="Petra Vajdová" label="Petra Vajdová"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9321" end="9338" title=":sk:Ladislav Záborský" label="Ladislav Záborský"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962465" wikidata="Q1329324" url="?curid=962465" title="Elif">
<text>Elif may refer to the following:

==People==
*Elif (name)
*Elif, stage name of German singer Elif Demirezer

==Other==
* Elif, Gaziantep, a town in the Araban District of Gaziantep Province, Turkey
* &quot;Elif&quot; (TV series), a Turkish TV series
* In computing, used as part of a Structured If (short for else if)
* First letter of the alphabet:
** A
** Aleph
** Alpha</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1329324" start="0" end="4" title="Elif" label="Elif"/>
<link wikidata="Q104876466" start="46" end="57" title="Elif (name)" label="Elif (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15807807" start="93" end="107" title="Elif Demirezer" label="Elif Demirezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360798" start="121" end="136" title="Elif, Gaziantep" label="Elif, Gaziantep"/>
<link wikidata="Q19611103" start="200" end="228" title="Elif (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Elif&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="284" end="297" title="Control_flow#Structured_If" label="Structured If"/>
<link wikidata="Q817862" start="309" end="316" title="Else if" label="else if"/>
<link wikidata="Q9659" start="353" end="354" title="A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="358" end="363" title="Aleph" label="Aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9887" start="367" end="372" title="Alpha" label="Alpha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962466" wikidata="Q5256601" url="?curid=962466" title="Denbies Wine Estate">
<text>Denbies Wine Estate, near Dorking, Surrey, has the largest vineyard in England, with under vines, representing more than 10 per cent of the plantings in the whole of the United Kingdom. It has a visitors&#x27; centre that attracts around 300,000 visits a year.

== History ==

The estate takes its name from John Denby, who owned the farmhouse in the 16th century. In the mid-18th century Denby&#x27;s farm buildings were converted into a gentleman&#x27;s residence by Jonathan Tyers, proprietor of Vauxhall Gardens near London. Tyers&#x27; garden at Denbies was in startling contrast to the frivolities of Vauxhall, being adorned with &quot;memento mori&quot; (&quot;reminders of death&quot;). The property passed through other hands, and in the 1850s it was rebuilt, much greater, by pre-eminent early Victorian master builder Thomas Cubitt. He was visited at Denbies by Prince Albert, who planted a commemorative tree which survived until the Great Storm of 1990. The house remained in that family except in World War II when it was requisitioned by the military. In the 1950s Cubitt&#x27;s great-grandson decided to demolish the house as he lacked the funds to restore and maintain it. He converted the laundry and gardener&#x27;s house into a smaller Regency-style house. The heartland of the estate, earlier parcels having been sold, was purchased by Biwater in the 1980s with development later by local businessman Adrian White.

== Wine production ==

Denbies is situated on the North Downs, which are a range of chalk hills the topsoil of which consists of fertile loam interspersed with flints. From 1986 to 1989 White had the south-facing slopes planted with vines, which cover of the estate, the remainder of which is woodland and pasture. The average yield is 300,000 litres of wine per year.

Around 65 per cent of Denbies&#x27; wine is sold at the visitors&#x27; centre, and the remainder through supermarkets, wholesalers and via mail order.

In 2010 Denbies Chalk Ridge Rosé won the IWC international Gold award, beating more than 360 competitors from 21 countries. The IWC wine challenge is the world&#x27;s biggest and most influential wine competition.

== Facilities ==
=== Visitors&#x27; centre ===

The visitors&#x27; centre occupies a double courtyard building in the local vernacular style. It features a working winery which visitors walk through while listening to commentary and having questions answered by an expert tour guide, wine cellars, 360° cinema, art gallery, lecture room, two restaurants and a shop. In the summer there are also tours of the vineyards.

=== Lego House ===
In August–September 2009, Denbies was the location chosen for the construction of James May&#x27;s Lego House, built as part of the &quot;James May&#x27;s Toy Stories&quot; BBC television series. The house was taken down less than a week after completion, as no planning permission had been obtained and a buyer for it could not be found.

=== Denbies Guest House ===
The estate runs Denbies Guest House in one its farmhouses and a kitchen garden centre. It offers venues and catering for corporate functions and weddings.

=== Surrey Performing Arts Library ===
The Surrey Performing Arts Library on the estate brings together major collections of materials covering music, dance, theatre and cinema. Material is available on loan.

===Mole Valley parkrun===
Denbies Wine Estate agreed to allow a parkrun (weekly 5 kilometre runs) at the Vineyard. The inaugural event was in March 2018, won by Ollie Garrod of Epsom and Ewell Harriers running club. 

The course is very difficult owing to two long, steep hills in the first half of the course. The second half is nearly all steep downhill. 

Around 150 events have taken place. It was postponed for 16 months due to the COVID-19 pandemic between March 2020 and July 2021. The Wine Estate also regularly hosts other running events including the Surrey Cross Country Championships.

== References ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==

*Denbies Wine Estate official site
*The first Denbies house at Lost Heritage - a memorial to the lost houses of England
*Cubitt&#x27;s Denbies at Lost Heritage
*Surrey Performing Arts Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5256601" start="0" end="19" title="Denbies Wine Estate" label="Denbies Wine Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q540333" start="26" end="33" title="Dorking" label="Dorking"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="35" end="41" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="59" end="67" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004457" start="469" end="483" title="Jonathan Tyers" label="Jonathan Tyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q977947" start="499" end="515" title="Vauxhall Gardens" label="Vauxhall Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="804" end="813" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q860469" start="829" end="842" title="Thomas Cubitt" label="Thomas Cubitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="873" end="886" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380763" start="946" end="965" title="Great Storm of 1990" label="Great Storm of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889055" start="1011" end="1023" title="Home front during World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931689" start="1256" end="1269" title="Regency architecture" label="Regency-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919275" start="1357" end="1364" title="Biwater" label="Biwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687577" start="1422" end="1434" title="Adrian White (businessman)" label="Adrian White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="1487" end="1498" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="1521" end="1526" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q314504" start="2695" end="2704" title="James May" label="James May"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2712" end="2722" title="James May&amp;#x27;s Toy Stories#James May&amp;#x27;s Lego House (Episode 5)" label="Lego House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806671" start="2751" end="2779" title="James May&amp;#x27;s Toy Stories" label="James May&amp;#x27;s Toy Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571373" start="2875" end="2894" title="planning permission" label="planning permission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138632" start="3411" end="3418" title="parkrun" label="parkrun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962474" wikidata="Q241767" url="?curid=962474" title="Plasencia">
<text>Plasencia () is a municipality of Spain belonging to the province of Cáceres, Extremadura. , it has a population of 41,047.

Plasencia is located in the Western-Central Iberian Peninsula, to the south of the Sistema Central. Housing primarily lies on the right bank of the . Plasencia is part of the so-called Ruta de la Plata, a north-south commercial path across Western Spain.

The founding is generally dated to the late 12th century, with Plasencia achieving its basic development during the late Middle Ages.

==History==

===Antiquity and the Middle Ages===
Although Plasencia was not founded until 1186, pieces of pottery found in &quot;Boquique’s Cave&quot; provide evidence that this territory was inhabited long before. Pascual Madoz&#x27;s dictionary details that this ancient territory, either called &quot;Ambroz&quot; or &quot;Ambracia&quot;, was originally given the name &quot;Ambrosia&quot; before becoming Plasencia.

In the same year that the city was founded, Alfonso VIII of Castile gave the city its independence and the Diocese of Plasencia was created. The original motto of the city, &quot;&quot;, means &quot;to please God and man&quot;. Ten years after its birth, Plasencia was taken over by the Almohad Caliphate, a Moroccan Berber-Muslim dynasty that dominated the Iberian peninsula throughout much of the 12th century. King Alfonso VIII and his forces recaptured the city within the same day.
At the end of the 13th century, the Charter of Plasencia was created, allowing the Christian, Muslim and Jewish people to live peacefully together within the city. At the end of the 14th century a Jewish community of around 50 families lived in Plasencia&#x27;s Mota neighbourhood, around the synagogue.
The 13th century witnessed different degrees of tolerance. After a few decades of allowing the development of Jewish life, rights were limited. Jewish citizens were also subjected to additional taxes, especially concerning contributions to the royal treasury. The Jewish cemetery still exists.

The &quot;regimiento&quot; system of local government was established in the city by Alfonso XI of Castile on 11 January 1346.

The 15th century was a vital period in Plasencia’s history, because it was at this time that a jurisdiction of lordship was established. In 1442, King John II of Castile gifted the city to the House of Zúñiga and its right to vote in the &quot;Cortes&quot; of Castile was lost. In 1446, the first university in Extremadura was installed in Plasencia, according to the wish of the Bishop. As a result, everyone from the surrounding areas who could afford to study in the university moved to Plasencia.

In the second half of the 15th century, Plasencia got caught up in some warlike affairs. Henry IV of Castile was deposed from the throne in favour of the infant Alfonso after the count of Plasencia stole the sword of this king’s wooden statue, signifying that without the sword, he had no power. 

Later in the 15th century Joanna &quot;la Beltraneja&quot; and Afonso V of Portugal were married, making the former queen consort of Portugal, also becoming a claimant to the Crown of Castile.

In 1488, the duke died and his grandson, Álvaro de Zúñiga y Pérez de Guzmán, succeeded him. The nobility took advantage of this situation and rebelled against the House of Zúñiga, trying to recover the power that they had over Plasencia before it was gifted away. The Catholic Monarchs, Ferdinand and Isabella, stood by them and made the revolt a success. Ferdinand swore to defend and protect the freedom and charters of Plasencia until his death.

===Modern age===

Plasencia had a certain importance in the American conquest too. Doctors recommended this place to King Ferdinand as the healthiest place in his kingdom and the place where he should establish his residence. The monarch moved here in 1515, and died in Madrigalejo during his travel to Guadalupe.

In 1573, the Bishop of Plasencia, Pedro Ponce de León, donated a significant part of his own library to the monastery of El Escorial, and a decade later, another bishop had a library formed, containing more than 3,880 works in more than 10,000 volumes.

When the original 18 provinces of Castile arose in 1502, they were established according to their votes in the &quot;Cortes&quot;. There were no cities in Extremadura with the right of vote, because most of them were property of Salamanca. Due to this, the inhabitants of Plasencia decided to buy the right which they previously held, and asked other important cities such as Alcántara, Badajoz, Cáceres, Mérida and Trujillo to help them. This was the moment in which the province of Extremadura was formed.

===Contemporary Age===

During the Peninsular War, Plasencia became a strategic location for French troops. In June 1808, uprisings occurred which ended up with the murder and lynching of &quot;afrancesados&quot;. Some time later, the inhabitants of Plasencia established a local military junta to defend their own interests; however, the city was overtaken and villages, such as Malpartida, were burnt down. French soldiers took control of Plasencia 12 times by forcible means and apart from the high number of buildings that were destroyed, the inhabitants too were also tortured and killed.

Once the Old Regime was abolished, Extremadura was divided into two different provinces: Cáceres and Badajoz. Plasencia argued with Cáceres about which of them should be the capital of the province, arguing that it had a higher number of population, it was more affluent and it had the bishop&#x27;s palace. Despite these advantages, other traits were considered more important and Cáceres was chosen as the capital of the province.

The Restoration was a revolutionary era for Plasencia because the city witnessed many reforms that affected its economy and society. For the first time the city had a drinking water network, public lighting, and an improved sewer system. Furthermore, the agrarian economy evolved into an industrial one thanks to the railway station which was founded in the city. A curiosity of this period, the painter Joaquín Sorolla immortalized the city in his painting &quot;&quot; in 1917, in which you can see the landscape of the city from the river Jerte.

During the Spanish Civil War, the military uprising of 1936 led by Francisco Franco rapidly swept Plasencia. The Lieutenant Colonel José Puente took control of the city easily, and as a result, the Republican prisoners were forced to build one of the city’s most famous parks, The Pines Park.

The final chapter of the 20th century was an extraordinary period for Plasencia and its development; the number of inhabitants has tripled in the last 60 years, and during this period of time many public works have been constructed including the hospital Virgen del Puerto, the reservoir of Plasencia, the Municipal Sport Centre and many useful roads. In addition, several university degrees are offered at the present university campus.

==Main sights==

* The double line of walls, with six gates and 68 towers, dating to 1197. The Keep (or &quot;&quot;) was demolished in 1941.
* Remains of a 16C aqueduct, locally called &quot;Arcos de San Antón&quot;.
* &quot;Las Catedrales&quot;, a complex of two cathedrals. In 1189, by request of Alfonso VIII, Plasencia was declared head of dioceses by Pope Clement III and work on a Romanesque Cathedral started shortly after, concluding sometime in the 18th century, by which time fashions had changed and Gothic elements had been added in the forms of pointed arches to the Nave and a rose window to the main South Entrance, while the cloister, on the East side bordering the city walls, was entirely Gothic. In the 15th century the Dioceses decided to build a grand Gothic Cathedral in the same site, demolishing the old cathedral as the new one was being built. Work started in 1498 and by the 16th century, standard Renaissance elements had been added such as the East Entrance and the elaborate Choir Seating, while the local style of the period, Plateresque, is present in the West (main) and the Presbytery Entrances. Work continued until the 18th century, when, with only the Sanctuary and the Transept of the New Cathedral finished, the project was abandoned leaving behind a somewhat odd result, as most of the Nave of the Old Cathedral, its cloister and its unique Octagonal Tower housing the &quot; Chapel is still attached to the New Cathedral, while the new choir, that was supposed to stand along the New Nave, was positioned across the transept. In the Main Chapel, there is an altarpiece by Gregorio Fernández (17th century), and the choir by Rodrigo Alemán.
* The Museum, near the Cathedral, is home to artworks by Jusepe de Ribera and Luis de Morales.
* Renaissance Town Hall, in the &quot;
* &quot; (16th–18th centuries)
* &quot; (16th century) with a two-order court
* Church of &quot;San Martín&quot; (13th century). It has a nave and two aisles, and a retablo by Luis de Morales (1570).
* Church and convent of &quot;Santo Domingo&quot; (St. Dominic, mid-15th century)
* Church of &quot;San Esteban&quot; (15th century), with an apse in Gothic style. The high altar is transitional Plateresque-Baroque style.
* Sanctuary of &quot;&quot;, some 5 kilometers from the city, begun in the 15th century but finished three centuries later.
*Nature resorts include the Monfragüe National Park.
* Canchos de Ramiro y Ladronera Protected Area.

==Transportation==
Plasencia had three city bus routes

==Climate==
==Culture==
The specialities of the local cuisine include &quot;migas&quot; (breadcrumbs with Spanish sausage and bacon), casseroles, stews and tench, an exceptional freshwater game fish.

Festivals include:

* June fair, at the beginning of the month
* &quot;Martes Mayor&quot;, the first Tuesday of August
* Procession and Festivities of la &quot;&quot;, first Sunday after Easter Sunday
* Fair of the Cherry-tree in flower El Jerte Valley

== Transport ==
==See also==
* Roman Catholic Diocese of Plasencia
* List of municipalities in Cáceres

== People ==
== References ==
;Citations

;Bibliography

==External links==

* Official website
* Ver Extremadura 
* Photos
* Plasencia is the subject of the Revealing Cooperation and Conflict Project trying to create a virtual 3D model and database describing the city in the time between 1390-1420 CE.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q241767" start="0" end="9" title="Plasencia" label="Plasencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="34" end="39" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81977" start="57" end="76" title="province of Cáceres" label="province of Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="78" end="89" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="169" end="186" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q53715" start="208" end="223" title="Sistema Central" label="Sistema Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754499" start="310" end="326" title="Ruta de la Plata" label="Ruta de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427046" start="731" end="744" title="Pascual Madoz" label="Pascual Madoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131409" start="894" end="902" title="Ambrosia" label="Ambrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q295268" start="981" end="1004" title="Alfonso VIII of Castile" label="Alfonso VIII of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="1224" end="1241" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820446" start="1507" end="1516" title="History of Roman Catholicism in Spain" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="1518" end="1524" title="Al-Andalus" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q178111" start="1529" end="1535" title="History of the Jews in Spain" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q58232187" start="2033" end="2043" title="regimiento" label="regimiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="2108" end="2129" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q297278" start="2302" end="2320" title="John II of Castile" label="John II of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q634281" start="2344" end="2359" title="House of Zúñiga" label="House of Zúñiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="2389" end="2418" title="Cortes of Castile" label="&amp;quot;Cortes&amp;quot; of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q310918" start="2742" end="2761" title="Henry IV of Castile" label="Henry IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5781894" start="2832" end="2850" title="count of Plasencia" label="count of Plasencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236882" start="2977" end="3009" title="Joanna la Beltraneja" label="Joanna &amp;quot;la Beltraneja&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="3014" end="3034" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="3413" end="3430" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="3432" end="3441" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="3446" end="3454" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643765" start="3865" end="3876" title="Madrigalejo" label="Madrigalejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q695504" start="3898" end="3907" title="Guadalupe, Cáceres" label="Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q874320" start="3923" end="3942" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Plasencia" label="Bishop of Plasencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q917829" start="3944" end="3963" title="Pedro Ponce de León" label="Pedro Ponce de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="4031" end="4042" title="El Escorial" label="El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="4393" end="4402" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q389205" start="4540" end="4549" title="Alcántara" label="Alcántara"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679" start="4551" end="4558" title="Badajoz" label="Badajoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678" start="4560" end="4567" title="Cáceres, Spain" label="Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="4569" end="4575" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q324489" start="4580" end="4588" title="Trujillo, Cáceres" label="Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="4708" end="4722" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="4766" end="4772" title="First French Empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q383670" start="4867" end="4879" title="afrancesado" label="afrancesados"/>
<link wikidata="Q81977" start="5357" end="5364" title="province of Cáceres" label="Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q81803" start="5369" end="5376" title="Province of Badajoz" label="Badajoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q351746" start="6106" end="6121" title="Joaquín Sorolla" label="Joaquín Sorolla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6238" end="6249" title="river Jerte" label="river Jerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="6263" end="6280" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="6319" end="6335" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456351" start="6450" end="6460" title="Republican faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q18870689" start="7146" end="7154" title="aqueduct (bridge)" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q171001" start="7342" end="7358" title="Pope Clement III" label="Pope Clement III"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="7373" end="7383" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="7497" end="7503" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="7566" end="7570" title="Nave" label="Nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q174520" start="7577" end="7588" title="rose window" label="rose window"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="7911" end="7922" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q577852" start="8043" end="8054" title="Plateresque" label="Plateresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q29553" start="8175" end="8184" title="Sanctuary" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="8193" end="8201" title="Transept" label="Transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q195921" start="8599" end="8617" title="Gregorio Fernández" label="Gregorio Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8651" end="8665" title="Rodrigo Alemán" label="Rodrigo Alemán"/>
<link wikidata="Q297838" start="8724" end="8740" title="Jusepe de Ribera" label="Jusepe de Ribera"/>
<link wikidata="Q703250" start="8745" end="8760" title="Luis de Morales" label="Luis de Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q703250" start="8977" end="8992" title="Luis de Morales" label="Luis de Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="9151" end="9163" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968939" start="9375" end="9384" title="Monfragüe" label="Monfragüe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9402" end="9431" title="Canchos de Ramiro y Ladronera" label="Canchos de Ramiro y Ladronera"/>
<link wikidata="Q874320" start="9991" end="10026" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Plasencia" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Plasencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93174" start="10029" end="10062" title="List of municipalities in Cáceres" label="List of municipalities in Cáceres"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962477" wikidata="Q7569267" url="?curid=962477" title="Southdown">
<text>Southdown may refer to:

* Southdown (sheep), a breed of sheep
* Southdown, Cornwall, England
* Southdown, a suburb of Harpenden, Hertfordshire, England
* Southdown, New Zealand, a suburb of Auckland
* Southdown Motor Services, a former bus company based in Sussex, England
* Southdown Power Station, a power station in Auckland
* Southdown, a cement company acquired by Cemex

==See also==
* South Downs, England
* South Down (disambiguation)
* Down south (disambiguation)
* HMS &quot;Southdown&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7569267" start="0" end="9" title="Southdown" label="Southdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492296" start="27" end="44" title="Southdown (sheep)" label="Southdown (sheep)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569268" start="65" end="84" title="Southdown, Cornwall" label="Southdown, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19785" start="119" end="128" title="Harpenden" label="Harpenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569269" start="155" end="177" title="Southdown, New Zealand" label="Southdown, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569271" start="202" end="226" title="Southdown Motor Services" label="Southdown Motor Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002141" start="276" end="299" title="Southdown Power Station" label="Southdown Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053348" start="371" end="376" title="Cemex" label="Cemex"/>
<link wikidata="Q584108" start="393" end="404" title="South Downs" label="South Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567070" start="416" end="443" title="South Down (disambiguation)" label="South Down (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302992" start="446" end="473" title="Down south (disambiguation)" label="Down south (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55063351" start="476" end="501" title="HMS Southdown" label="HMS &amp;quot;Southdown&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962481" wikidata="Q1330935" url="?curid=962481" title="Twin Quasar">
<text>The Twin Quasar (also known as Twin QSO, Double Quasar, SBS 0957+561, TXS 0957+561, Q0957+561 or QSO 0957+561 A/B), was discovered in 1979 and was the first identified gravitationally lensed double quasar, not to be confused with the first detection of light deflection in 1919. It is a quasar that appears as two images, a result from gravitational lensing.

==Quasar==
The Twin Quasar is a single quasar whose appearance is distorted by the gravity of another galaxy much closer to Earth along the same line of sight. This gravitational lensing effect is a result of the warping of space-time by the nearby galaxy, as described by general relativity. The single quasar thus appears as two separate images, separated by 6 arcseconds. Both images have an apparent magnitude of 17, with the A component having 16.7 and the B component having 16.5. There is a 417 ± 3-day time lag between the two images.

The Twin Quasar lies at redshift &quot;z&quot; = 1.41 (8.7 billion ly), while the lensing galaxy lies at redshift &quot;z&quot; = 0.355 (3.7 billion ly). The lensing galaxy with apparent dimension of 0.42×0.22 arcminutes lies almost in line with the B image, lying 1 arcsecond off. The quasar lies 10 arcminutes north of NGC 3079, in the constellation Ursa Major. The astronomical data services SIMBAD and NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED) list several other names for this system.

==Lens==
The lensing galaxy, YGKOW G1 (sometimes called &quot;G1&quot; or &quot;Q0957+561 G1&quot;), is a giant elliptical (type cD) lying within a cluster of galaxies that also contributed to the lensing.

==History==
The quasars QSO 0957+561A/B were discovered in early 1979 by an Anglo-American team around Dennis Walsh, Robert Carswell and Ray Weyman, with the aid of the 2.1 m Telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona, United States. The team noticed that the two quasars were unusually close to each other, and that their redshift and visible light spectrum were very similar to each other. They published their suggestion of &quot;the possibility that they are two images of the same object formed by a gravitational lens&quot;.

The Twin Quasar was one of the first directly observable effects of gravitational lensing, which was described in 1936 by Albert Einstein as a consequence of his 1916 general theory of relativity, though in that 1936 paper he also predicted &quot;Of course, there is no hope of observing this phenomenon directly.&quot;

Critics identified a difference in appearance between the two quasars in radio frequency images. In mid-1979, a team led by David Roberts at the Very Large Array (VLA) near Socorro, New Mexico, discovered a relativistic jet emerging from quasar A with no corresponding equivalent in quasar B. Furthermore, the distance between the two images, 6 arcseconds, was too great to have been produced by the gravitational effect of the galaxy G1, a galaxy identified near quasar B.

In 1980, Peter J. Young and collaborators discovered that galaxy G1 is part of a galaxy cluster which increases the gravitational deflection and can explain the observed distance between the images.
Finally, a team led by Marc V. Gorenstein observed essentially identical relativistic jets on very small scales from both A and B in 1983 using Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). 
Subsequent, more detailed VLBI observations demonstrated the expected (parity reversed) magnification of the image B jet with respect to image A jet. The difference between the large-scale radio images is attributed to the special geometry needed for gravitational lensing, which is satisfied by the quasar but not by all of the extended jet emission seen by the VLA near image A.

Slight spectral differences between quasar A and quasar B can be explained by different densities of the intergalactic medium in the light paths, resulting in differing extinction.

30 years of observation made it clear that image A of the quasar reaches earth about 14 months earlier than the corresponding image B, resulting in a difference of path length of 1.1 ly.

==Possible planet==
In 1996, a team at Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics led by Rudy E. Schild discovered an anomalous fluctuation in one image&#x27;s light curve, which they speculated was caused by a planet approximately three Earth masses in size within the lensing galaxy. This conjecture cannot be proven because the chance alignment that led to its discovery will never happen again. If it could be confirmed, however, it would make it the most distant known planet, 4 billion ly away.
==Candidate magnetospheric eternally collapsing object==
In 2006, R. E. Schild suggested that the accreting object at the heart of Q0957+561 is not a supermassive black hole, as is generally believed for all quasars, but a magnetospheric eternally collapsing object. Schild&#x27;s team at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics asserted that &quot;this quasar appears to be dynamically dominated by a magnetic field internally anchored to its central, rotating supermassive compact object&quot; (R. E. Schild).

==See also==
* Cloverleaf quasar
* Cosmic string
* Gravitational lens
* Hypothetical astronomical object

==References==
==External links==
* Q0957+561: Die historisch erste Linse mit QuasarThe University of Cologne.
* Q0957+561CCD image based on 45-min total exposureMarch 2007.
* Q0957+561 A,B.
* Simbad</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1330935" start="4" end="15" title="Twin Quasar" label="Twin Quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330935" start="31" end="39" title="Twin Quasar" label="Twin QSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330935" start="41" end="54" title="Twin Quasar" label="Double Quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330935" start="56" end="68" title="Twin Quasar" label="SBS 0957+561"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330935" start="70" end="82" title="Twin Quasar" label="TXS 0957+561"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330935" start="84" end="93" title="Twin Quasar" label="Q0957+561"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330935" start="97" end="113" title="Twin Quasar" label="QSO 0957+561 A/B"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="168" end="190" title="gravitational lens" label="gravitationally lensed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="234" end="269" title="Gravitational Lens#History" label="first detection of light deflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="287" end="293" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="525" end="546" title="gravitational lensing" label="gravitational lensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="584" end="594" title="space-time" label="space-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="633" end="651" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="755" end="773" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="928" end="936" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="971" end="973" title="light year" label="ly"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="1053" end="1055" title="light year" label="ly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="1114" end="1124" title="arcminutes" label="arcminutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="1171" end="1180" title="arcsecond" label="arcsecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q644518" start="1225" end="1233" title="NGC 3079" label="NGC 3079"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="1242" end="1255" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="1256" end="1266" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q654724" start="1299" end="1305" title="SIMBAD" label="SIMBAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q488563" start="1310" end="1342" title="NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database" label="NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="1504" end="1514" title="Elliptical galaxy" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q308492" start="1516" end="1523" title="Type-cD galaxy" label="type cD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023210" start="1702" end="1714" title="Dennis Walsh" label="Dennis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q592248" start="1787" end="1817" title="Kitt Peak National Observatory" label="Kitt Peak National Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="1934" end="1942" title="redshifts" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="2116" end="2134" title="gravitational lens" label="gravitational lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="2265" end="2280" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="2310" end="2338" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="2537" end="2552" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="2609" end="2625" title="Very Large Array" label="Very Large Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q284657" start="2671" end="2687" title="relativistic jet" label="relativistic jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="2809" end="2819" title="arcseconds" label="arcseconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q115181212" start="2948" end="2962" title="Peter J. Young" label="Peter J. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q204107" start="3020" end="3034" title="galaxy cluster" label="galaxy cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148351" start="3282" end="3315" title="Very Long Baseline Interferometry" label="Very Long Baseline Interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="3876" end="3886" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="4072" end="4074" title="light-years" label="ly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133697" start="4116" end="4159" title="Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics" label="Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377452" start="4167" end="4181" title="Rudy E. Schild" label="Rudy E. Schild"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="4289" end="4295" title="extrasolar planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037483" start="4533" end="4558" title="List of extrasolar planet extremes" label="most distant known planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377452" start="4645" end="4657" title="R. E. Schild" label="R. E. Schild"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="4729" end="4752" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772242" start="4802" end="4844" title="magnetospheric eternally collapsing object" label="magnetospheric eternally collapsing object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133697" start="4872" end="4915" title="Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics" label="Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377452" start="5084" end="5096" title="R. E. Schild" label="R. E. Schild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245196" start="5115" end="5132" title="Cloverleaf quasar" label="Cloverleaf quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431196" start="5135" end="5148" title="Cosmic string" label="Cosmic string"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="5151" end="5169" title="Gravitational lens" label="Gravitational lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q845521" start="5172" end="5204" title="Hypothetical astronomical object" label="Hypothetical astronomical object"/>
<link wikidata="Q54096" start="5290" end="5315" title="University of Cologne" label="The University of Cologne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962484" wikidata="Q7781296" url="?curid=962484" title="Then">
<text>Then may refer to:

* Then language, spoken in Guizhou province of China
* &quot;Then&quot;, a song on the 1970 album &quot;Time and a Word&quot; by English rock band Yes
* &quot;Then&quot; (Canadian series), a 1999 compilation album released in Canada
* &quot;Then&quot; (Misako Odani album), a 2002 album by Japanese singer Misako Odani
* &quot;&quot;, a 1997 compilation album by rock band They Might Be Giants
* &quot;Then&quot; (Anne-Marie song), 2017
* &quot;Then&quot; (The Charlatans song), 1990
* &quot;Then&quot; (Brad Paisley song), 2009
* Part of the &quot;if-then-else&quot; conditional construct in computer programming

==See also==

*Than (disambiguation)
*Thoen (name)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7781296" start="0" end="4" title="Then" label="Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442330" start="22" end="35" title="Then language" label="Then language"/>
<link wikidata="Q643764" start="124" end="139" title="Time and a Word" label="Time and a Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875099" start="255" end="292" title="Then (Misako Odani album)" label="&amp;quot;Then&amp;quot; (Misako Odani album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50130676" start="416" end="450" title="Then (Anne-Marie song)" label="&amp;quot;Then&amp;quot; (Anne-Marie song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781306" start="459" end="497" title="Then (The Charlatans song)" label="&amp;quot;Then&amp;quot; (The Charlatans song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781303" start="506" end="542" title="Then (Brad Paisley song)" label="&amp;quot;Then&amp;quot; (Brad Paisley song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q817862" start="588" end="599" title="conditional (programming)" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q225263" start="650" end="671" title="Than (disambiguation)" label="Than (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111912238" start="673" end="685" title="Thoen (name)" label="Thoen (name)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962486" wikidata="Q4666908" url="?curid=962486" title="Aberdeen College">
<text>Aberdeen College was one of the largest further education colleges in Scotland. It was formed from the amalgamation of the former Aberdeen Technical College, Aberdeen College of Commerce and Clinterty Agricultural College.

In November 2013, Aberdeen College merged with Banff &amp; Buchan College to form North East Scotland College. The new regional college will serve an extensive geographical area with its main centres in Aberdeen and Fraserburgh.

==References==
==See also==
* List of further and higher education colleges in Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4666908" start="0" end="16" title="Aberdeen College" label="Aberdeen College"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="70" end="78" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130" end="156" title="Aberdeen Technical College" label="Aberdeen Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="158" end="186" title="Aberdeen College of Commerce" label="Aberdeen College of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134017" start="191" end="221" title="Clinterty Agricultural College" label="Clinterty Agricultural College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196484" start="271" end="297" title="Banff and Buchan College" label="Banff &amp;amp; Buchan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016287" start="306" end="333" title="North East Scotland College" label="North East Scotland College"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="427" end="435" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q138873" start="440" end="451" title="Fraserburgh" label="Fraserburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621430" start="484" end="541" title="List of further and higher education colleges in Scotland" label="List of further and higher education colleges in Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962487" wikidata="Q403632" url="?curid=962487" title="Why">
<text>Why may refer to:

* Causality, a consequential relationship between two events
* Reason (argument), a premise in support of an argument, for what reason or purpose
* Grounding (metaphysics), a topic in metaphysics regarding how things exist in virtue of more fundamental things.
* Why?, one of the Five Ws used in journalism
==Music==
===Artists===
* Why? (American band), a hip hop/indie rock band formed in Oakland, California, in 2004
** Yoni Wolf, formerly known by the stage name Why?
* Why (Canadian band), a rock band formed in Winnipeg, Manitoba, in 1993
* Why?, a 1990s UK folk band, two members of which formed Quench in 2001

===Albums===
* &quot;Why&quot; (Baby V.O.X album) or the title song, 2000
* &quot;Why?&quot; (Ginger Baker album) or the title song, 2014
* &quot;Why&quot; (Prudence Liew album) or the title song, 1987
* &quot;Why?&quot; (They Might Be Giants album), 2015
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Jacob Whitesides, 2016
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Moahni Moahna, 1996
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by the MonaLisa Twins, 2022

===EPs===
* &quot;Why&quot; (Discharge EP) or the title song, 1981
* &quot;Why&quot; (Taeyeon EP) or the title song (see below), 2016
* &quot;Why..&quot;, 2023 EP by BoyNextDoor

===Songs===
* &quot;Why&quot; (3T song) featuring Michael Jackson, 1996
* &quot;Why&quot; (Andy Gibb song), 1978
* &quot;Why&quot; (Annie Lennox song), 1992; covered by DJ Sammy (2005)
* &quot;Why?&quot; (Bronski Beat song), 1984
* &quot;Why&quot; (The Byrds song), 1966
* &quot;Why&quot; (Carly Simon song), 1982
* &quot;Why&quot; (D Mob song) with Cathy Dennis, 1994
* &quot;Why?&quot; (Earth, Wind &amp; Fire song), 2015
* &quot;Why&quot; (Frankie Avalon song), 1959; covered by Anthony Newley (1960) and Donny Osmond (1972)
* &quot;Why&quot; (Gabrielle song), 2007
* &quot;Why&quot; (Glamma Kid song), 1999
* &quot;Why&quot; (Gen Hoshino song), 2023
* &quot;Why&quot; (Jadakiss song), 2004
* &quot;Why&quot; (Jason Aldean song), 2005
* &quot;Why&quot; (Jieqiong song), 2018
* &quot;Why&quot; (Lionel Richie song), 2006
* &quot;Why?&quot; (Marika Gombitová song), 1979
* &quot;Why&quot; (Mary J. Blige song) featuring Rick Ross, 2012
* &quot;Why&quot; (Miliyah Kato song), 2009
* &quot;Why?&quot; (Mis-Teeq song), 2001
* &quot;Why&quot; (NF song), 2018
* &quot;Why&quot; (Rascal Flatts song), 2009
* &quot;Why&quot; (Sabrina Carpenter song), 2017
* &quot;Why&quot; (Sonique song), 2005
* &quot;Why?&quot; (Stray Kids song), 2024
* &quot;Why&quot; (Taeyeon song), 2016
* &quot;Why&quot; (Tony Sheridan song) with the Beatles, 1964
* &quot;Why&quot; (Yoko Ono song), 1970
* &quot;Why? (Keep Your Head Down)&quot;, by TVXQ, 2011
* &quot;Why (Must We Fall in Love)&quot;, by Diana Ross &amp; the Supremes and the Temptations, 1970
* &quot;Why, Why&quot;, by Carl Smith, 1957
* &quot;Why&quot;, by 4Minute from &quot;Best of 4Minute&quot;, 2012
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Air Supply from &quot;Mumbo Jumbo&quot;, 2010
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Aminé from &quot;OnePointFive&quot;, 2018
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Anastacia from &quot;Evolution&quot;, 2017
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Antique from &quot;Die for You&quot;, 2001
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Average White Band from &quot;Cut the Cake&quot;, 1975
* &quot;Why&quot; by Avril Lavigne, a B-side of the single &quot;Complicated&quot;, 2002
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Ayaka from the single &quot;Clap &amp; Love&quot;/&quot;Why&quot; and the theme song of the PSP game &quot;Crisis Core: Final Fantasy VII&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Bazzi from &quot;Cosmic&quot;, 2018
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Basshunter from &quot;Bass Generation&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Busted from &quot;A Present for Everyone&quot;, 2003
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Crossfade from &quot;Falling Away&quot;, 2006
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Des&#x27;ree from &quot;Dream Soldier&quot;, 2003
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Dominic Fike from &quot;What Could Possibly Go Wrong&quot;, 2020
* &quot;Why! ...&quot;, by Enigma from &quot;Le Roi Est Mort, Vive Le Roi!&quot;, 1996
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Fleetwood Mac from &quot;Mystery to Me&quot;, 1973
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Frankie Valli from &quot;Closeup&quot;, 1975
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Geir Rönning, representing Finland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Godsmack from &quot;Awake&quot;, 2000
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Gotthard from &quot;Silver&quot;, 2017
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Helloween from &quot;Master of the Rings&quot;, 1994
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Irene Cara from &quot;Anyone Can See&quot;, 1982
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Jamie Walters from &quot;Jamie Walters&quot;, 1994
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Jocelyn Enriquez from &quot;All My Life&quot;, 2003
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Joe Satriani from &quot;The Extremist&quot;, 1992
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Lily Allen a B-side of the single &quot;Not Fair&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Limp Bizkit from &quot;Greatest Hitz&quot;, 2005
* &quot;Why&quot;, by the Linda Lindas from &quot;Growing Up&quot;, 2022
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Lonnie Mack from &quot;The Wham of that Memphis Man&quot;, 1963
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Mario from &quot;Go!&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Melanie Chisholm from &quot;Northern Star&quot;, 1999
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Natalie Imbruglia from &quot;Left of the Middle&quot;, 1997
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Ne-Yo from &quot;Non-Fiction&quot;, 2015
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Reset, 1997
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Rooney, 2016
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Roy Woods from &quot;Waking at Dawn&quot;, 2016
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Secondhand Serenade from &quot;A Twist In My Story&quot;, 2008
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Shawn Mendes from &quot;Shawn Mendes&quot;, 2018
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by the Specials, a B-side of the single &quot;Ghost Town&quot;, 1981
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Stabbing Westward from &quot;Wither Blister Burn &amp; Peel&quot;, 1996
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Swift from &quot;Thoughts Are Thought&quot;, 1999
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Tracy Chapman from &quot;Tracy Chapman&quot;, 1988
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Uriah Heep, a B-side of the single &quot;The Wizard&quot;, 1972
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Vanilla Ninja from &quot;Vanilla Ninja&quot;, 2003
* &quot;Why&quot;, by Wide Mouth Mason from &quot;Where I Started&quot;, 1999
* &quot;Why?&quot;, by Z-Ro from &quot;The Life of Joseph W. McVey&quot;, 2004
* &quot;Why&quot;, written by Buddy Feyne, notably performed by Nat King Cole, 1954
* &quot;Why&quot;, from the musical &quot;Tick, tick... BOOM!&quot;, 2001
* &quot;Why&quot;, from the television series &quot;Fraggle Rock&quot;
* &quot;Why? (The King of Love Is Dead)&quot;, by Nina Simone from &quot;&#x27;Nuff Said!&quot;, 1968
* &quot;Why (What&#x27;s Goin&#x27; On?)&quot;, by the Roots from &quot;The Tipping Point&quot;, 2004
* &quot;Why Why&quot;, by Doja Cat from &quot;Planet Her&quot;, 2021

==Other media==
* &quot;Why&quot; (board game), a game based on the television series &quot;Alfred Hitchcock Presents&quot;
* &quot;Why?&quot; (film), a 1987 Czech film
* &quot;Why?&quot; (1971 film), a 1971 short starring O. J. Simpson and Tim Buckley
* &quot;Why?&quot; (book), a children&#x27;s book by Tomie dePaola
* &quot;Why?&quot;, an episode of the TV series &quot;As Time Goes By&quot;
* &quot;Why? with Hannibal Buress&quot;, a Comedy Central television series

==Places==
* Why, Arizona, an unincorporated community in the United States
* Why, Lakes, South Sudan
==Surname==
* Alby Why (1899–1969), Australian rugby league footballer
* Jack Why (1903–1944), Australian rugby league footballer

==Transport==
* Whyteleafe railway station, Surrey, National Rail station code

==Other uses==
* Why? Group, New York-based anarchist circle in the 1940s and 1950s
* Why the lucky stiff, or simply why or _why, a computer programmer and artist
* World Hunger Year (WHY), a charity organization
* Why?, a satirical wiki and subproject of Uncyclopedia

==See also==
* Wai (disambiguation)
* Why Why Why (disambiguation)
* Wye (disambiguation)
* Y (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q403632" start="0" end="3" title="Why" label="Why"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="21" end="30" title="Causality" label="Causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710397" start="82" end="99" title="Reason (argument)" label="Reason (argument)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203393" start="167" end="190" title="Grounding (metaphysics)" label="Grounding (metaphysics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q368722" start="299" end="306" title="Five Ws" label="Five Ws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123936" start="352" end="372" title="Why? (American band)" label="Why? (American band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685552" start="442" end="451" title="Yoni Wolf" label="Yoni Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151660" start="493" end="512" title="Why (Canadian band)" label="Why (Canadian band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271227" start="622" end="628" title="Quench (band)" label="Quench"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567874" start="653" end="687" title="Why (Baby V.O.X album)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Baby V.O.X album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016619" start="714" end="751" title="Why? (Ginger Baker album)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (Ginger Baker album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997709" start="778" end="815" title="Why (Prudence Liew album)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Prudence Liew album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22682196" start="842" end="887" title="Why? (They Might Be Giants album)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (They Might Be Giants album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23760749" start="917" end="933" title="Jacob Whitesides" label="Jacob Whitesides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886355" start="962" end="975" title="Moahni Moahna" label="Moahni Moahna"/>
<link wikidata="Q72658412" start="1009" end="1023" title="MonaLisa Twins" label="MonaLisa Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q762333" start="1043" end="1073" title="Why (Discharge EP)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Discharge EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24834059" start="1100" end="1128" title="Why (Taeyeon EP)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Taeyeon EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122381279" start="1173" end="1178" title="Why.." label="Why.."/>
<link wikidata="Q2193458" start="1224" end="1249" title="Why (3T song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (3T song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997700" start="1284" end="1316" title="Why (Andy Gibb song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Andy Gibb song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169388" start="1325" end="1360" title="Why (Annie Lennox song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Annie Lennox song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997698" start="1397" end="1433" title="Why? (Bronski Beat song)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (Bronski Beat song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997714" start="1442" end="1474" title="Why (The Byrds song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (The Byrds song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997703" start="1483" end="1517" title="Why (Carly Simon song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Carly Simon song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997704" start="1526" end="1554" title="Why (D Mob song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (D Mob song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856020" start="1581" end="1627" title="Why? (Earth, Wind &amp;amp; Fire song)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (Earth, Wind &amp;amp; Fire song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435517" start="1636" end="1673" title="Why (Frankie Avalon song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Frankie Avalon song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630894" start="1740" end="1772" title="Why (Gabrielle song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Gabrielle song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080123" start="1781" end="1814" title="Why (Glamma Kid song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Glamma Kid song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126183966" start="1823" end="1857" title="Why (Gen Hoshino song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Gen Hoshino song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605801" start="1866" end="1897" title="Why (Jadakiss song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Jadakiss song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16170898" start="1906" end="1941" title="Why (Jason Aldean song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Jason Aldean song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815476" start="1950" end="1981" title="Why (Jieqiong song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Jieqiong song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997711" start="1990" end="2026" title="Why (Lionel Richie song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Lionel Richie song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944066" start="2035" end="2075" title="Why? (Marika Gombitová song)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (Marika Gombitová song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065581" start="2084" end="2120" title="Why (Mary J. Blige song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Mary J. Blige song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567875" start="2149" end="2184" title="Why (Miliyah Kato song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Miliyah Kato song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743883" start="2193" end="2225" title="Why? (Mis-Teeq song)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (Mis-Teeq song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124397469" start="2234" end="2259" title="Why (NF song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (NF song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997712" start="2268" end="2304" title="Why (Rascal Flatts song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Rascal Flatts song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33357865" start="2313" end="2353" title="Why (Sabrina Carpenter song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Sabrina Carpenter song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997713" start="2362" end="2392" title="Why (Sonique song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Sonique song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125727535" start="2401" end="2435" title="Why? (Stray Kids song)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (Stray Kids song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28114180" start="2444" end="2474" title="Why (Taeyeon song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Taeyeon song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q971391" start="2483" end="2519" title="Why (Tony Sheridan song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Tony Sheridan song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108044573" start="2545" end="2576" title="Why (Yoko Ono song)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (Yoko Ono song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q492613" start="2591" end="2617" title="Why? (Keep Your Head Down)" label="Why? (Keep Your Head Down)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247864" start="2647" end="2673" title="Why (Must We Fall in Love)" label="Why (Must We Fall in Love)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104881920" start="2748" end="2756" title="Why, Why" label="Why, Why"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896875" start="2825" end="2840" title="Best of 4Minute" label="Best of 4Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935364" start="2897" end="2908" title="Mumbo Jumbo (album)" label="Mumbo Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56209117" start="2961" end="2973" title="OnePointFive" label="OnePointFive"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069917" start="3029" end="3038" title="Evolution (Anastacia album)" label="Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274484" start="3092" end="3103" title="Die for You (album)" label="Die for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196674" start="3168" end="3180" title="Cut the Cake (album)" label="Cut the Cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q543362" start="3258" end="3269" title="Complicated (Avril Lavigne song)" label="Complicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125846" start="3326" end="3369" title="Clap &amp;amp; Love/Why" label="&amp;quot;Clap &amp;amp; Love&amp;quot;/&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q55114359" start="3494" end="3500" title="Cosmic (album)" label="Cosmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q791231" start="3557" end="3572" title="Bass Generation" label="Bass Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529949" start="3625" end="3647" title="A Present for Everyone" label="A Present for Everyone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064778" start="3703" end="3715" title="Falling Away (album)" label="Falling Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715206" start="3775" end="3788" title="Dream Soldier" label="Dream Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q97366953" start="3847" end="3875" title="What Could Possibly Go Wrong (album)" label="What Could Possibly Go Wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q911267" start="3933" end="3962" title="Le Roi Est Mort, Vive Le Roi!" label="Le Roi Est Mort, Vive Le Roi!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302677" start="4022" end="4035" title="Mystery to Me" label="Mystery to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090492" start="4095" end="4102" title="Closeup (Frankie Valli album)" label="Closeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450483" start="4165" end="4208" title="Finland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="Finland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q432171" start="4251" end="4256" title="Awake (Godsmack album)" label="Awake"/>
<link wikidata="Q28438142" start="4311" end="4317" title="Silver (Gotthard album)" label="Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419272" start="4374" end="4393" title="Master of the Rings" label="Master of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778264" start="4450" end="4464" title="Anyone Can See" label="Anyone Can See"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806813" start="4524" end="4537" title="Jamie Walters (album)" label="Jamie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207121" start="4600" end="4611" title="All My Life (Jocelyn Enriquez album)" label="All My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755659" start="4670" end="4683" title="The Extremist" label="The Extremist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277180" start="4758" end="4766" title="Not Fair" label="Not Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630646" start="4824" end="4837" title="Greatest Hitz (Limp Bizkit album)" label="Greatest Hitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q125306346" start="4900" end="4910" title="Growing Up (The Linda Lindas album)" label="Growing Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774365" start="4969" end="4997" title="The Wham of that Memphis Man" label="The Wham of that Memphis Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765988" start="5049" end="5052" title="Go! (Mario album)" label="Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q339105" start="5115" end="5128" title="Northern Star (Melanie C album)" label="Northern Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520380" start="5192" end="5210" title="Left of the Middle" label="Left of the Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702440" start="5262" end="5273" title="Non-Fiction (Ne-Yo album)" label="Non-Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q666462" start="5309" end="5314" title="Reset (Canadian band)" label="Reset"/>
<link wikidata="Q935905" start="5343" end="5349" title="Rooney (band)" label="Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349341" start="5399" end="5413" title="Waking at Dawn" label="Waking at Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602819" start="5480" end="5499" title="A Twist In My Story" label="A Twist In My Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q52232614" start="5558" end="5570" title="Shawn Mendes (album)" label="Shawn Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15123297" start="5649" end="5659" title="Ghost Town (Specials song)" label="Ghost Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028142" start="5723" end="5753" title="Wither Blister Burn &amp;amp; Peel" label="Wither Blister Burn &amp;amp; Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797006" start="5805" end="5825" title="Thoughts Are Thought" label="Thoughts Are Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q129804" start="5886" end="5899" title="Tracy Chapman (album)" label="Tracy Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651949" start="5975" end="5985" title="The Wizard (Uriah Heep song)" label="The Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510091" start="6046" end="6059" title="Vanilla Ninja (album)" label="Vanilla Ninja"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993282" start="6122" end="6137" title="Where I Started" label="Where I Started"/>
<link wikidata="Q282793" start="6189" end="6216" title="The Life of Joseph W. McVey" label="The Life of Joseph W. McVey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984853" start="6259" end="6270" title="Buddy Feyne" label="Buddy Feyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425565" start="6355" end="6374" title="Tick, tick... BOOM!" label="Tick, tick... BOOM!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6439" end="6451" title="Fraggle Rock#Song list" label="Fraggle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765772" start="6531" end="6547" title="&amp;#x27;Nuff Said! (Nina Simone album)" label="&amp;#x27;Nuff Said!"/>
<link wikidata="Q932201" start="6632" end="6649" title="The Tipping Point (The Roots album)" label="The Tipping Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q106474259" start="6708" end="6718" title="Planet Her" label="Planet Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997716" start="6750" end="6778" title="Why (board game)" label="&amp;quot;Why&amp;quot; (board game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487894" start="6858" end="6881" title="Why? (film)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6903" end="6931" title="Why? (1971 film)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (1971 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6955" end="6968" title="O. J. Simpson#Filmography" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6987" end="7010" title="Why? (book)" label="&amp;quot;Why?&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7038" end="7051" title="Tomie dePaola#Books by dePaola" label="Tomie dePaola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7106" end="7121" title="List of As Time Goes By episodes#Series two (1993)" label="As Time Goes By"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647905" start="7136" end="7161" title="Why? with Hannibal Buress" label="Why? with Hannibal Buress"/>
<link wikidata="Q28662" start="7218" end="7230" title="Why, Arizona" label="Why, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q491096" start="7283" end="7293" title="Why, Lakes" label="Why, Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712887" start="7321" end="7329" title="Alby Why" label="Alby Why"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115782" start="7380" end="7388" title="Jack Why" label="Jack Why"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790454" start="7454" end="7480" title="Whyteleafe railway station" label="Whyteleafe railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q74494407" start="7535" end="7545" title="Why? Group" label="Why? Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050798" start="7604" end="7623" title="Why the lucky stiff" label="Why the lucky stiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035837" start="7683" end="7700" title="World Hunger Year" label="World Hunger Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q17460" start="7774" end="7786" title="Uncyclopedia" label="Uncyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862215" start="7803" end="7823" title="Wai (disambiguation)" label="Wai (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28842540" start="7826" end="7854" title="Why Why Why (disambiguation)" label="Why Why Why (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q405545" start="7857" end="7877" title="Wye (disambiguation)" label="Wye (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27869" start="7880" end="7898" title="Y (disambiguation)" label="Y (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962490" wikidata="Q148595" url="?curid=962490" title="Sand lizard">
<text>The sand lizard (Lacerta agilis) is a lacertid lizard. There are several subspecies, including &quot;L. a. agilis&quot;, &quot;L. a. argus&quot;, and &quot;L. a. exigua.&quot;

The sand lizard is distributed across most of Europe from the southern coast of Britain and across the continent to Lake Baikal in Russia. It does not occur in European Turkey. Its distribution is often patchy. In the northern extremes of the sand lizard&#x27;s distribution, it survives by inhabiting seaside heathlands, where the ground temperature is elevated by the sun. The sand lizard uses warm sand to thermoregulate itself and to incubate its eggs.

Males are known for their bright coloration and aggressive, possessive behaviors when seasonally competing for females. In contrast to other squamates, the sand lizard&#x27;s mating season is very short. Males choose mates selectively, whereas females mate more indiscriminately. Females usually only lay a single clutch of eggs per year.

Sand lizards spend most of their time basking, foraging, or under vegetation. They prefer to live in diverse habitats. They are largely solitary outside of mating season. Male sand lizards typically have larger territories than females, and they will compete with other males when territory overlaps. Females neighbour each other more amicably, occasionally sharing habitats. 

Sand lizards may live up to ten years. Due to their longevity, they are sometimes prone to inbreeding.

==Description==
The sand lizard is a sexually dimorphic legged lizard. In northwest Europe, both sexes are characterised by lateral and dorsal strips of ocellated (eye-shaped) markings, which appear as dark patches with pale centres. Colouration varies across their European and Russian range. Males have finer markings than females, and their flanks turn bright green during the spring mating season, fading again in the late summer. Male adults may reach a total body length of 19.3 cm, where female adults may reach 18.5 cm.

In the two main western subspecies (&quot;L. a. agilis&quot; and &quot;L. a. argus&quot;), the dorsal stripe is thin and interrupted, or not present at all. &quot;L. a. argus&quot; also includes a plain red or brown-backed phase without any dorsal markings. In these two subspecies, only the flanks of the males turn green in the mating season, but in the eastern subspecies (predominantly &quot;L. a. exigua&quot;), males can be wholly green, even outside the breeding season.

Sand lizards can self-amputate their tails as a defence mechanism. This ability is called autotomy.

In males, the bright green genital coloration has been shown to be brighter depending on body mass and fighting ability. Males with brighter colors were more likely to initiate aggressive behaviors and win fights, which generally leads to them having a higher mating success. Females are more of a grey to brown color and can be seen with large bulging bellies full of eggs, from May to August.

Sand lizards can live for over ten years, with their average lifespan lasting between 5–6 years.

== Habitat and distribution ==
The sand lizard can be found in a variety of habitats. They prefer dry habitats such as outcrops, fields, hills, beaches, heathland, sand dunes, and rock gardens. While in continental Europe the sand lizard has a wide variety of habitat, in colder places like Great Britain they depend on sand to incubate their eggs and such are restricted to coastal habitats.

Male sand lizards have home ranges with an extremely high amount of overlap; however, female sand lizards have much smaller home ranges (generally less than 100 meters squared) that neighbor each other, or they will even share burrows or basking areas with each other. They highly prefer and are much more active in areas with a wide variety of structural characteristics. This can create different temperature micro areas that they are able to move between depending on their needs.

==Behavior==
=== General activity ===
Sand lizards spend extended periods of the day after emerging on long basking sessions. They occasionally take breaks to forage for resources. They also spend a considerable amount of time simply doing normal activity in areas under concealed vegetation. Under poor weather conditions, sand lizards emerge from resting locations later and bask less often throughout the day. Sand lizards most frequently bask on logs. This is most likely due to its absorption and slow release of heat radiation as well as providing a vantage point to spot potential predators and prey. They very rarely share basking sites with other lizards. Male sand lizards especially avoid sharing basking sites with each other, and are only found occasionally sharing with females. They avoid basking on open sand or soil and prefer to use vegetation if they bask on the ground. They thermoregulate themselves by moving between areas of high and low insolation.

=== Mate selection ===
In general, female mate choice in organisms is more selective than male mate choice. This is due to the fact that females generally have to invest more time and resources into offspring than males, who are under less selective pressures due to their low parental investment.

Generally females will simply reject male attempts at mating outside of their receptive mating period, doing so through a unique head bobbing behavior. However, during their period of receptivity, females have been known to not discriminate against different males and do not reject them besides when they are outside of this period.

Male sand lizards have been shown to highly prefer larger females when selecting mates, but they are still willing to mate with smaller females if the opportunity presents itself. It was observed that some males that were too small for the large females they attempted to court had troubles gripping females with their jaws during copulation due to their small size. This may be one constricting factor in their choice of mate.

==Reproduction==
Generally, males reach sexual maturity at a smaller size compared with females. Vitellogenesis happens when females are 45 days for the whole population. Both sexes tend to lose body fat during mating period, since their main energy resources come from body fat and from the liver and proximal at the tail. After a few weeks from the hibernation, male adults become extremely aggressive towards each other, trying to mate as many females as they can.

The female sand lizard lays eggs in loose sand in a sunny location, leaving them to be incubated by the warmth of the ground.

Female sand lizards usually only lay a single clutch each year and clutch sizes that range between six and 15 eggs in a single one. However, there is a lot of variation in the time of year when females end up laying their eggs. But generally a single female sand lizard has a relatively consistent egg laying timing from year-to-year, with the first ones to do so generally being larger, more physically fit females. These early clutches ended up producing offspring that were larger, more successful, and had higher survival rates. Generally offspring from earlier clutches were higher quality offspring.

When female sand lizards produce larger clutch sizes, the size of each individual offspring in it has been observed to decrease. On the opposite side, smaller clutch sizes had fewer, but larger, offspring. When food resources were increased so it was not a limiting factor, clutch size increased significantly, so it is likely that sand lizards produce clutch sizes with different offspring sizes based on resource availability. The other factor that contributes is the physical constraints of the space available to lay their clutches in.

=== Reproductive success with age ===
Sand lizards have demonstrated that as their age increases, so does their reproductive success. However, a study showed that this relationship is most likely due to the increase in body size as sand lizards mature rather than increased experience they acquire as they live longer. This may be because female sand lizards that are larger are simply able to produce more clutches with the increased space in their bodies.

==Inbreeding avoidance==
When a female sand lizard mates with two or more males, sperm competition within the female&#x27;s reproductive tract may occur. Active selection of sperm by females appears to occur in a manner that enhances female fitness. On the basis of this selective process, the sperm of males that are more distantly related to the female are preferentially used for fertilization, rather than the sperm of close relatives. This preference may enhance the fitness of progeny by reducing inbreeding depression. Multiple inseminations of multiple fully fertile males can result in multiple paternity of the offspring. Mating order and time between copulations has been found to have no effect on the reproductive success of the first or last male to mate.

Natural malformed offspring have been observed in sand lizards most likely due to close kin inbreeding defects. Because of their relatively long lifespan and male polygynous mating, there is a decent chance of inbreeding occurring during their lifespan. Inbreeding has been seen to cause malformations in sand lizards with studies in laboratory settings mirroring the deformations seen naturally in the wild.

== Predators and competitors ==

Sand lizards are preyed upon by a variety of predators including mustelids, foxes, badgers, birds of prey, and snakes. In addition to wild predators, domestic species, such as pheasants, chickens, and cats.

Sand lizard locomotor performance, agility, and speed is related to their ability to avoid predators (as well as foraging efficiency). Like many lizards, sand lizards are able to separate their tail from the rest of their body in order to escape predators. Sand lizards with autotomy were able to run faster and as a result were better at avoiding predators that were chasing them. These tails do not regrow past 80% the original length after autotomy.

Sand lizards are a frequent carrier of common ticks which are a great risk to the health of the lizards, especially males during breeding seasons when they have great mobility. Males with larger home territory ranges were also subject to carrying even greater loads of parasites. Trematodes, metacercariae, cestode larva, nematodes, nematode larvae and acarines are all examples of parasites that inhabit the alimentary tract of this lizard.

=== Competitive behaviour ===
Male sand lizards are polygynous and compete with each other for female mates through incredibly aggressive manners. Sand lizard copulation is a process that lasts 2–4 minutes and after it is completed, the males will guard the individual female for hours or up to several days to protect them. After this time period, they will continue their search for new mates.

When male sand lizards compete over females, they perform ritualistic displays that often escalate into aggressive behaviors and actual combat. Males raise themselves up on all four limbs and turn over to intimidate their opponents, one may back down at this stage but if not, the two can begin fighting actual combat. They mainly attack through biting each other and aim at the heads or other vulnerable spots. Occasionally, even extremely deep cuts into jaw muscles and tissues were observed. Generally, equally sized males will have longer fights than two males with differing sizes; however, males fighting intruders in their own areas of residence did not win significantly more than intruders.

If male sand lizards engage in a fight with another multiple times, they will consider them a rival. However, subsequent aggressive interactions beyond the first one tend to be much shorter on average than the first encounter between the two. This is most likely because they are able to individually recognize others and the result of the fight between two rivals will most likely be similar to the first, so they are able to predict the outcome and end their battle early.

Sand lizard mating seasons are very short, lasting only 17 days of the entire year. Generally males are only able to mate with an absolute maximum of six different females during this time period and because a single mating guarding session can take up to 18% of the entire mating season.

Because of this, a several day time commitment means the investment male sand lizards put into mating is incredibly high and as a result males can begin to develop selective preferences for certain females. Because female sand lizards are often found close together in groups, males have more choices and opportunities to choose a mate depending on their individual characteristics.

== Conservation status ==
This lizard is regarded as threatened and is strictly protected under UK law – as it is throughout most of Europe. This is in contrast to &quot;L. a. exigua&quot;, whose Russian name translates as the &quot;common lizard&quot;.
The UK Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust coordinates conservation action for the sand lizard, including a successful captive-breeding and reintroduction programme.

The sand lizard is facing multiple threats throughout its range, including habitat destruction, habitat degradation, habitat fragmentation, lack of habitat management, climate change and inappropriate habitat management. Although the sand lizard is under strict protection in the UK, there are still actions needed to be taken, including habitat protection, habitat management, species protection, species management, distribution surveys, population and conservation status monitoring, scientific research, and public awareness.

Efforts in the UK have been made to protect and conserve their habitats because the sand lizard is one of only six reptile species found in Britain. Lizard populations were analyzed and their habitats were studied and specific recommendations were made for maintaining the quality of the environments so sand lizards can continue to inhabit those regions.

In Sweden, the sand lizard is also considered threatened and is managed by a national protection plan. Populations are highly fragmented. This is thought to have led to an increase in inbreeding and low genetic diversity; as of 2017, the Swedish sand lizard populations decreasing by around 20-40% in the previous approximately 20 years. Swedish sand lizards are generally found around the coast where sparsely vegetative habitats are more common. However, there are also populations as far north as Värmlands and Dalarna; despite the species&#x27; name sand, does not always appear to be a requirement for populations.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Hesketh Golf Links, a Site of Special Scientific Interest (UK protected land), a UK habitat where sand lizards exist
* List of reptiles of Great Britain
* List of reptiles of Italy

==References==
==External links==

*List of European Protected Species</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148595" start="4" end="15" title="Sand lizard" label="sand lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q27532" start="38" end="46" title="Lacertidae" label="lacertid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="47" end="53" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="73" end="83" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="223" end="229" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="257" end="264" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="293" end="304" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="308" end="314" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="346" end="352" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="487" end="492" title="heath" label="heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="547" end="550" title="sun" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="586" end="600" title="Thermoregulation" label="thermoregulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="615" end="623" title="Egg incubation" label="incubate"/>
<link wikidata="Q122422" start="776" end="785" title="Squamata" label="squamates"/>
<link wikidata="Q38978" start="1444" end="1454" title="inbreeding" label="inbreeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="1494" end="1512" title="Sexual dimorphism" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q465891" start="2555" end="2563" title="autotomy" label="autotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="3213" end="3218" title="heath" label="heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4079052" start="4381" end="4385" title="Sunning (behaviour)" label="bask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209263" start="4955" end="4966" title="mate choice" label="mate choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="6473" end="6476" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481109" start="8682" end="8703" title="inbreeding depression" label="inbreeding depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="9458" end="9467" title="Mustelidae" label="mustelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="9469" end="9472" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="9476" end="9482" title="badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="9485" end="9498" title="Bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="9504" end="9509" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="9569" end="9577" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="9580" end="9587" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="9594" end="9597" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="12942" end="12949" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748175" start="13007" end="13047" title="Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust" label="Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="13247" end="13266" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q913302" start="13289" end="13310" title="habitat fragmentation" label="habitat fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38978" start="14244" end="14254" title="inbreeding" label="inbreeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q106789" start="14560" end="14569" title="Värmland County" label="Värmlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q103732" start="14574" end="14581" title="Dalarna County" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5745697" start="14708" end="14726" title="Hesketh Golf Links" label="Hesketh Golf Links"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="14730" end="14765" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436246" start="14827" end="14860" title="List of reptiles of Great Britain" label="List of reptiles of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933815" start="14863" end="14888" title="List of reptiles of Italy" label="List of reptiles of Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962495" wikidata="Q415857" url="?curid=962495" title="CPK">
<text>CPK may refer to:

==Businesses and organizations==
*California Pizza Kitchen, a restaurant chain
*Chesapeake Utilities (New York Stock Exchange symbol CPK)
*Communist Party of Kampuchea, commonly known as the Khmer Rouge
*Communist Party of Korea, a former political party in Korea
*Communist Party of Kenya, a Kenyan political party

==Science and technology==
*Process capability index (Cpk), a measure of process capability
*CPK coloring, a way to color atoms when visualizing molecular models
*Creatine phosphokinase, an enzyme found in humans, or alternatively a blood test for it

==Transport==
*Carpenders Park railway station, England (National Rail station code CPK)
*Central Communication Port (Polish: &quot;Centralny Port Komunikacyjny&quot;), a planned airport in Poland

==Other uses==
*&quot;C.P.K.&quot; (Unwritten Law song)
*Cabbage Patch Kids, a line of children&#x27;s dolls</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q415857" start="0" end="3" title="CPK" label="CPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109854" start="53" end="77" title="California Pizza Kitchen" label="California Pizza Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092882" start="99" end="119" title="Chesapeake Utilities" label="Chesapeake Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8711543" start="158" end="186" title="Communist Party of Kampuchea" label="Communist Party of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q495459" start="223" end="247" title="Communist Party of Korea" label="Communist Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980930" start="284" end="308" title="Communist Party of Kenya" label="Communist Party of Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192625" start="364" end="388" title="Process capability index" label="Process capability index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086160" start="429" end="441" title="CPK coloring" label="CPK coloring"/>
<link wikidata="Q409458" start="499" end="521" title="Creatine phosphokinase" label="Creatine phosphokinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045650" start="603" end="634" title="Carpenders Park railway station" label="Carpenders Park railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q48840381" start="678" end="704" title="Central Communication Port" label="Central Communication Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929809" start="802" end="841" title="C.P.K. (Unwritten Law song)" label="&amp;quot;C.P.K.&amp;quot; (Unwritten Law song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394642" start="843" end="861" title="Cabbage Patch Kids" label="Cabbage Patch Kids"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962498" wikidata="Q7864059" url="?curid=962498" title="UCL Business">
<text>UCL Business Ltd is the technology-transfer company of University College London in London, England. Its head office is on Tottenham Court Road in the London Borough of Camden.

==History==

UCL&#x27;s first technology-transfer company was named in the Pandora papers for the widespread use of offshore companies and use of third party ownership and payments to avoid UCL and government oversight. UCL Ventures merged with the technology-transfer company of the Royal Free Hospital, Freemedic plc (founded in 1993) to form UCL Biomedica PLC.

The former UCL Business had been established to force academics through the use of NDA&#x27;s to sign over any IP to UCL, thereby aiding the development of commercially valuable technologies arising from UCL, whilst UCL BioMedica had been established to commercialise opportunities arising from UCL&#x27;s biomedical research strengths, as well as to conduct clinical trials. The integration of the two technology transfer activities created a single organisation focused on delivering the complete commercialisation process from patent registration and support for the creation of new businesses, through to licensing and sales of technologies to industry partners.

UCLB provided advice and a grant support to Siavash Haroun Mahdavi in helping him to establish the robotics company Complex Matters.

In January 2011, BioVex, a cancer vaccines company spun-out of UCL in 1999, was sold to Amgen for $1 billion.

==Operations==

===Spin-out companies===

UCLB has equity stake in all of its companies, the majority being spin-outs arising from technologies developed across the full range of faculties within UCL, including biomedical, biotechnology, engineering, mathematics, physical sciences and build environment companies. These include Ark Therapeutics Ltd, Arrow Therapeutics Ltd, Biovex Ltd, Canbex, Domainex Ltd, Evexar Medical Ltd, Genex Biosystems, Intercytex, Medic-to-Medic, Pentraxin Therapeutics, PolyMASC Pharmaceuticals PLC, Proaxon, Spirogen Ltd, Stanmore Implants Worldwide Ltd, Advanced Design Technology, AS Built Solutions, Bloomsbury DSP, Endomagnetics, EuroTempest, Ixico, Quantemol, Senceive, Space Syntax, Zinwave.

==External links==
* UCL Business

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7864059" start="0" end="16" title="UCL Business" label="UCL Business Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061910" start="24" end="43" title="Technology transfer" label="technology-transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="84" end="90" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647486" start="123" end="143" title="Tottenham Court Road" label="Tottenham Court Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="151" end="175" title="London Borough of Camden" label="London Borough of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374196" start="462" end="481" title="Royal Free Hospital" label="Royal Free Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q470517" start="1433" end="1438" title="Amgen" label="Amgen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962501" wikidata="Q356677" url="?curid=962501" title="Floating car data">
<text>Floating car data (FCD) in traffic engineering and management is typically timestamped geo-localization and speed data directly collected by moving vehicles, in contrast to traditional traffic data collected at a fixed location by a stationary device or observer. In a physical interpretation context, FCD provides a Lagrangian description of the vehicle movements whereas stationary devices provide an Eulerian description. The participating vehicle acts itself consequently as a moving sensor using an onboard GPS receiver or cellular phone. The most common and widespread use of FCD is to determine the traffic speed on the road network. Based on these data, traffic congestion can be identified, travel times can be calculated, and traffic reports can be rapidly generated. In contrast to stationary devices such as traffic cameras, number plate recognition systems, and induction loops embedded in the roadway, no additional hardware on the road network is necessary.

==Floating cellular data==
Floating cellular data is one of the methods to collect floating car data. This method uses cellular network data (CDMA, GSM, UMTS, GPRS). No special devices/hardware are necessary: every switched-on mobile phone becomes a traffic probe and is as such an anonymous source of information. The location of the mobile phone is determined using (1) triangulation or (2) the hand-over data stored by the network operator. As GSM localisation is less accurate than GPS based systems, many phones must be tracked and complex algorithms used to extract high-quality data. For example, care must be taken not to misinterpret cellular phones on a high speed railway track near the road as incredibly fast journeys along the road. However, the more congestion, the more cars, the more phones and thus more probes. In metropolitan areas where traffic data are most needed the distance between cell sites is lower and thus precision increases. Advantages over GPS-based or conventional methods such as cameras or street embedded sensors include: No infrastructure or hardware in cars or along the road. It is much less expensive, offers more coverage of more streets, it is faster to set up (no work zones) and needs less maintenance. In 2007, GDOT demonstrated in Atlanta that such system can emulate very well road sensors data for section speeds. A 2007 study by GMU investigated the relationship between vehicle free flow speed and geometric variables on urban street segments using FCD.

==Vehicle re-identification==
Vehicle re-identification methods require sets of detectors mounted along the road. In this technique, a unique serial number for a device in the vehicle is detected at one location and then detected again (re-identified) further down the road. Travel times and speed are calculated by comparing the time at which a specific device is detected by pairs of sensors. This can be done using the MAC addresses from Bluetooth devices, or using the radio-frequency identification (RFID) serial numbers from Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) transponders (also called &quot;toll tags&quot;).

The ETC transponders, which are uniquely identifiable, may be read not only at toll collection points (e.g. toll bridges) but also at many non-toll locations. This is used as a method to collect traffic flow data (which is anonymized) for the San Francisco Bay Area&#x27;s 5-1-1 service.

In New York City&#x27;s Midtown in Motion program, its adaptive traffic control system also use RFID readers to track movement of E-ZPass tags as a means of monitoring traffic flow. The data is fed through the government-dedicated broadband wireless infrastructure to the traffic management center to be used in adaptive traffic control of the traffic lights.

==Global Positioning System==
A small number of cars (typically fleet vehicles such as courier services and taxi drivers) are equipped with a box that contains a GPS receiver. The data are then communicated with the service provider using the regular on-board radio unit or via cellular network data (more expensive).

It is possible that FCD could be used as a surveillance method, although the companies deploying FCD systems give assurances that all data are anonymized in their systems, or kept sufficiently secure to prevent abuses.

== See also ==
* Traffic count

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356677" start="0" end="17" title="Floating car data" label="Floating car data"/>
<link wikidata="Q356677" start="19" end="22" title="Floating car data" label="FCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640676" start="27" end="46" title="Traffic engineering (transportation)" label="traffic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132995" start="51" end="61" title="Road traffic control" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="317" end="327" title="Continuum mechanics#Lagrangian description" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="403" end="411" title="Continuum mechanics#Eulerian description" label="Eulerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486497" start="512" end="524" title="GPS receiver" label="GPS receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q746984" start="606" end="619" title="traffic speed" label="traffic speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q358078" start="627" end="639" title="road network" label="road network"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="662" end="680" title="traffic congestion" label="traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q338292" start="736" end="750" title="traffic report" label="traffic report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832485" start="820" end="834" title="traffic camera" label="traffic camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q518031" start="837" end="861" title="number plate recognition" label="number plate recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163913" start="875" end="889" title="induction loop" label="induction loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="1093" end="1109" title="cellular network" label="cellular network"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="1116" end="1120" title="CDMA" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="1122" end="1125" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="1127" end="1131" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79708" start="1133" end="1137" title="GPRS" label="GPRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188056" start="1346" end="1359" title="triangulation" label="triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486969" start="1421" end="1437" title="GSM localisation" label="GSM localisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="1638" end="1656" title="high speed railway" label="high speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332343" start="1882" end="1891" title="cell site" label="cell site"/>
<link wikidata="Q944993" start="2232" end="2236" title="GDOT" label="GDOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="2354" end="2357" title="George Mason University" label="GMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q20484" start="2903" end="2914" title="MAC address" label="MAC address"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="2922" end="2931" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="2954" end="2984" title="radio-frequency identification" label="radio-frequency identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191337" start="3012" end="3038" title="Electronic Toll Collection" label="Electronic Toll Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="3175" end="3179" title="toll road" label="toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q746984" start="3291" end="3303" title="traffic flow" label="traffic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="3339" end="3361" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639561" start="3369" end="3374" title="5-1-1" label="5-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3388" end="3401" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q800074" start="3515" end="3522" title="E-ZPass" label="E-ZPass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432007" start="3810" end="3823" title="fleet vehicle" label="fleet vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486497" start="3908" end="3920" title="GPS receiver" label="GPS receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="4108" end="4120" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q361151" start="4302" end="4315" title="Traffic count" label="Traffic count"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962502" wikidata="Q244115" url="?curid=962502" title="55 Days at Peking">
<text>55 Days at Peking is a 1963 American epic historical war film dramatizing the siege of the foreign legations&#x27; compounds in Beijing (then still Peking, in English) during the Boxer Uprising, which took place in China in the summer of 1900. It was produced by Samuel Bronston for Allied Artists, with a screenplay by Philip Yordan and Bernard Gordon, and with uncredited contributions from Robert Hamer, Julian Halevy, and Ben Barzman. Noel Gerson wrote a screenplay novelization in 1963 under the pseudonym &quot;Samuel Edwards&quot;.

The film was directed primarily by Nicholas Ray, although Guy Green and Andrew Marton assumed leadership in the latter stages of filming after Ray had fallen ill. Both men were uncredited. It stars Charlton Heston, Ava Gardner, and David Niven, with supporting roles by Flora Robson, John Ireland, Leo Genn, Robert Helpmann, Harry Andrews, and Kurt Kasznar. It also contains the first known screen appearance of future martial arts film star Yuen Siu Tien. Japanese film director Juzo Itami, credited in the film as &quot;&quot;Ichizo Itami&quot;, appears as Col. Goro Shiba.

&quot;55 Days at Peking&quot; was released by Allied Artists on May 29, 1963 and received mixed reviews, mainly for its historical inaccuracies and lack of character development. However, the film was praised for its acting, direction, music, action sequences, and production design. In addition to its mixed critical reviews, the film grossed only $10 million at the box office against a budget of $10 million. Despite this, the film was nominated for two Academy Awards. It was director Ray&#x27;s last film until &quot;Lightning Over Water&quot; (1980).

==Plot==

The film is set during the Battle of Peking (1900) (modern day Beijing).

Starvation, widespread in China, is affecting more than 100 million peasants by the summer of 1900. Approximately a thousand foreigners from various western industrialized countries have exploited their positions inside Beijing&#x27;s legations, seeking control of the weakened nation. The Boxers oppose the westerners and the Christian religion and are planning to drive them out.

The turmoil in China worsens as the Boxer secret societies gain tacit approval from the Dowager Empress Cixi. With 13 of China&#x27;s 18 provinces forced into territorial concessions by those colonial powers, frustration over foreign encroachment boils over when the Empress encourages the Boxers to attack all foreigners in Beijing and the rest of China. When the Empress condones the assassination of the German ambassador and &quot;suggests&quot; that the foreigners leave, a violent siege of Beijing&#x27;s foreign legations district erupts. Beijing&#x27;s foreign embassies are gripped by terror, as the Boxers, supported by Imperial troops, set about killing Christians in an anti-western nationalistic fever.

The head of the US military garrison is US Marine Major Matt Lewis, loosely based on the real Major John Twiggs Myers, an experienced China hand who knows local conditions well. A love interest blossoms between him and Baroness Natasha Ivanova, a Russian aristocrat who, it is revealed, had an affair with a Chinese General, causing her Russian husband to commit suicide. The Russian Imperial Minister, who is Natasha&#x27;s brother-in-law, has revoked her visa in an attempt to recover a valuable necklace. Although the Baroness tries leaving Beijing as the siege begins, she is forced by events to return to Major Lewis and volunteers in the hospital, which is battered by the siege and is running out of supplies. To help the defenders, the Baroness exchanges her very valuable jeweled necklace for medical supplies and food, but she is wounded in the process and later dies.

Lewis leads the small contingent of 400 multinational soldiers and US Marines defending the compound. As the siege worsens, Maj. Lewis forms an alliance with the senior officer at the British Embassy, Sir Arthur Robertson, pending the arrival of a British-led relief force. After hearing that the force has been repulsed by Chinese forces, Maj. Lewis and Sir Arthur succeed in their mission to blow up a sizable Chinese arsenal.

As the foreign defenders conserve food and water, while trying to save hungry children, the Empress continues plotting with the Boxers by supplying aid from her Chinese troops. Eventually, a foreign relief force from the Eight-Nation Alliance arrives and defeats the Boxers. The troops reach Beijing on the 55th day and, following the Battle of Peking (Beijing), lift the siege of the foreign legations. Foreshadowing the demise of the Qing dynasty, rulers of China for the previous two and a half centuries, the Dowager Empress Cixi, alone in her throne room, having gambled her empire and lost, declares repeatedly to herself, &quot;The dynasty is finished&quot;.

When the soldiers of the Eight-Nation Alliance have taken control of the city, after routing the Boxers and the remnants of the Imperial Army, Maj. Lewis assembles his men, having received new orders from his superiors to leave Beijing. He stops and circles back to retrieve Teresa, the young, half-Chinese daughter of one of his Marine comrades who was killed during the 55-day siege. Aboard his horse, she and Maj. Lewis leave the city behind, followed by his column of marching Marines.

==Cast==

* Charlton Heston as Maj. Matt Lewis (based upon John Twiggs Myers)
* Ava Gardner as Baroness Natalie Ivanoff
* David Niven as Sir Arthur Robertson (based upon Sir Claude MacDonald)
* Flora Robson as Empress Dowager Tzu Hsi
* John Ireland as Sgt. Harry
* Leo Genn as Gen. Jung-Lu
* Harry Andrews as Father de Bearn
* Robert Helpmann as Prince Tuan
* Juzo Itami as Col. Goro Shiba
* Kurt Kasznar as Baron Sergei Ivanoff (based upon Mikhail Nikolayevich von Giers)
* Philippe Leroy as Julliard
* Paul Lukas as Dr. Steinfeldt
* Lynne Sue Moon as Teresa
* Elizabeth Sellars as Lady Sarah Robertson
* Massimo Serato as Menotti Garibaldi
* Jacques Sernas as Maj. Bobrinski
* Jerome Thor as Capt. Andy Marshall
* Geoffrey Bayldon as Smythe
* Joseph Furst as Capt. Hanselman
* Walter Gotell as Capt. Hoffman
* Alfredo Mayo as Spanish Minister (dubbed by Robert Rietti, based upon )
* Martin Miller as Hugo Bergmann
* José Nieto as Italian Minister (based upon Giuseppe Salvago Raggi)
* Eric Pohlmann as Baron von Meck (based upon Clemens von Ketteler)
* Aram Stephan as Gaumaire The French minister (based upon Stephen Pichon)
* Robert Urquhart as Capt. Hanley 
* Burt Kwouk as Old Man (voice)
=== Uncredited roles ===

* Fernando Sancho as Belgian Minister (based upon Maurice Joostens)
* Nicholas Ray as U.S. Minister (based upon Edwin H. Conger)
* Félix Dafauce as Dutch Minister (based upon Fridolin Marinus Knobel)
* Carlos Casaravilla as Japanese Minister (based upon Nishi Tokujirō)
* R.S.M. Ronald Brittain as Sgt. Britten
* Alfred Lynch as Gerald
* Michael Chow as Chiang
* George Wang as Kaige, Boxer Chief
* Lucille Soong as Concubine
* Yuen Siu Tien as Court Boxer
* John Moulder-Brown as Tommy
* Milton Reid as Boxer
* as Austrian minister (based upon )
==Production==
===Development===
On September 8, 1959, producer Jerry Wald announced he would be producing a film on the Boxer Rebellion tentatively titled &quot;The Hell Raisers&quot; for 20th Century Fox. He had hoped to star David Niven as a British officer and Stephen Boyd as a United States Marine commander while Hope Lange and France Nuyen were sought for supporting female roles. A few weeks later, on September 24, it was reported that Wald had signed Niven, Boyd, and Nuyen for their respective roles.

Meanwhile, producer Samuel Bronston had enjoyed commercial success from making historical spectacles in Spain, particularly &quot;King of Kings&quot; (1961), directed by Nicholas Ray, and &quot;El Cid&quot; (1961), directed by Anthony Mann starring Charlton Heston. In Paris, screenwriters Philip Yordan and Bernard Gordon were brainstorming ideas for potential historical epics. During one story conference, Gordon suggested the Boxer Rebellion having recalled reading a theatrical play while working in the Story Department for Paramount Pictures during the 1940s. Yordan dismissed the idea, but later on having returned from a cruise in London, his wife located a book with a chapter titled &quot;Fifty-five Days at Peking&quot; inside a bookstore and showed it to him. Fascinated with the title alone, Yordan pitched the idea to Gordon, who noted that he had earlier pitched the Boxer Rebellion. In an interview with the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, Bronston stated he was attracted to the Boxer Rebellion because it showed &quot;the unity of peoples, no matter what their beliefs, in the face of danger. This incident is what the UN symbolizes but has not yet achieved.&quot;

In September 1961, Bronston announced he was planning a trilogy of historical epics in Spain, among them was &quot;55 Days at Peking&quot; and &quot;The Fall of the Roman Empire&quot; (1964). For &quot;55 Days at Peking&quot;, Alec Guinness was being sought for a lead role while a British director was to be selected. Filming was slated to begin in spring 1962. That same month, Wald told &quot;The New York Times&quot; that he was unhappy with Bronston&#x27;s plans as his project had long been in development, with a final script draft being written by Barre Lyndon; Wald had also wanted Guinness to star in his project. Furthermore, he stated that he had filed an infringement complaint with the Motion Picture Association of America because he had approached Yordan to write a script in 1956. In April 1962, Wald instead sold the project to NBC as a television film, but Wald&#x27;s death three months later prevented its continuation.

===Casting===
In September 1961, Heston was initially slated to star in &quot;The Fall of the Roman Empire&quot;, but he expressed reluctance after reading the screenplay. In November 1961, Heston was presented with a treatment for &quot;55 Days at Peking&quot;, and by this stage, Ray was chosen to direct the film. &quot;It might be an interesting period for a film,&quot; wrote Heston. &quot;I&#x27;d like to work for Nick, too.&quot; However, Heston was still reluctant. In December 1961, following the Madrid premiere of &quot;El Cid&quot;, during a flight back to Los Angeles, Yordan and Ray again pitched the idea to Heston, and this time he agreed to star in the film. Heston wrote in his journal, &quot;I feel uneasy, but I&#x27;m now convinced I must go basically on what confidence I have in a director&#x27;s talent.&quot; Subsequently, &quot;Fall of the Roman Empire&quot; was placed on hold as its already completed sets were later demolished and replaced with the Forbidden City sets for &quot;55 Days at Peking&quot;.

In March 1962, Bronston told columnist Hedda Hopper that he had hoped Katharine Hepburn would portray Empress Dowager Tzu Hsi. Also, Bronston wanted Ava Gardner for the female lead, although Heston did not want to work with Gardner and instead pushed for Jeanne Moreau. Meanwhile, the role had been offered to Melina Mercouri who refused it because she wanted more rewrites of the screenplay. On June 11, it was reported that Gardner and Hepburn had joined the cast. In the lobby of the Grand Hotel in Rome, Bronston offered David Niven a role in the film for a salary of $300,000, to which he accepted without reading the script, and on June 12, Niven&#x27;s casting was announced. By late June 1962, Hepburn had dropped out of the cast, and Bronston announced that Flora Robson had replaced her to portray the Chinese empress, while Robert Helpmann would play Prince Tuan.

===Writing===
In 1977, Ray recalled, &quot;The pressure was tremendous. On a $6 million production, I had no production manager, and a 21-year-old assistant director. No script. I had two artists in my office, one Chinese and one Spanish. I&#x27;d describe the scene to them, they&#x27;d draw it and then I&#x27;d give it to the so-called writers and say, &quot;Write a scene around this?&quot; Prior to filming, Gordon and Ray had worked on a draft in which the former struggled writing as he contracted &quot;colds and the flu and constantly ran a low-grade fever.&quot; After four weeks of work, they presented pages of their draft to Yordan, who ordered them to &quot;go back to square one and write the kind of clumsy, impersonal, fat historical opus&quot; that the international distributors wanted.&quot; With filming nearly approaching, Yordan suggested hiring Arnaud d&#x27;Usseau to assist Gordon with writing some scenes, particularly those with Gardner. Gordon later recalled that d&#x27;Usseau worked meticulously slowly and &quot;simply couldn&#x27;t find his way into our script.&quot; After a few weeks, d&#x27;Usseau left the project with none of his work being used. Shortly after this, blacklisted screenwriter Julian Halevy accepted Gordon&#x27;s offer to rewrite some scenes, among of which were new scenes for the Empress Dowager.

By May 1962, Gordon delivered a 140-page shooting script, but most of the scenes were merely summarized or sketched in. That same month, Heston received the script, but disapprovingly jotted in his journal that &quot;[t]he love story is very arbitrary, I think; the dialogue primitive.&quot; Filming would proceed without a finished script and on-set rewrites were frequent. It had been suggested that a native British screenwriter should revise the dialogue for Niven&#x27;s character for which Robert Hamer had been hired for the task. Ultimately, his services were later turned away as Hamer had sunken into alcoholism. Yordan then recruited Jon Manchip White to help rework the script, but it did not pan out. Four weeks later into production, Niven threatened to walk off set unless the script was rewritten. Yordan ordered Gordon to write &quot;a &quot;Hamlet&quot; scene for him, and he&#x27;ll shut up.&quot; Gordon then wrote four to five pages of monologue for Niven&#x27;s character to self-reflect on his actions. The new scenes were sent to Niven, prompting him to return and finish filming.

===Filming===
Principal photography began on July 2, 1962. The film was shot on location in Las Matas. Three thousand extras were required, including 1,500 Chinese. There were estimated to be 300 adult Chinese people in Spain so the rest were imported from all over Europe, particularly London, Rome, Marseilles, and Lisbon.

As production continued, Gardner became difficult during the shoot, often turning up late, disliking the script, and drinking heavily. One day, she walked off set claiming an extra had taken a photograph of her. Ultimately, the idea to write Gardner out of the film came from screenwriter Ben Barzman, who had rewritten &quot;El Cid&quot;. According to Heston, Yordan had written a death scene in which the Baroness dies of shrapnel wounds. By the time the scene was shot, Gardner struggled to remember her lines. Heston then suggested giving her lines to Paul Lukas, who was playing a physician.

On September 11, 1962, Ray was hospitalized after suffering a heart attack. At this point, production had fallen six weeks behind schedule with Gardner&#x27;s role being nearly complete, but significant scenes for Heston and Niven had yet to be shot. To replace him, Heston suggested Guy Green, who had previously directed him in &quot;Diamond Head&quot; (1963), to finish the remaining scenes between him and Gardner. Green subsequently left the production, and by October 1962, directorial duties were transferred to Andrew Marton, who was directing the second unit. Marton reflected, &quot;When I came onboard, I thought the picture was very shallow, just action, action, action and there was no meaning. I wrote a new beginning and a new ending and submitted them to management—who consisted of Bronston and Michael Wasynski ... Anyway, they said &#x27;NO!&#x27; with a capital N, capital O. And I was very unhappy.&quot; Regardless, Marton invited director John Ford onto the set, who had advised him to shoot the sequences with no hesitation. Heston finished his scenes on October 20, 1962, for which he wrote in his journal, &quot;What I have learned from this, I hope permanently, is never start a film without a good finished script.&quot; Principal photography ended on November 15, 1962.

==Release==
In May 1962, it was reported that Allied Artists, who had earlier distributed &quot;El Cid&quot;, had signed to distribute &quot;55 Days in Peking&quot; in the United States. Bronston had raised the money by first pre-selling the film to distributors on the basis of the topic, and the involvement of Heston and Ray.

On May 28, 1963, the film received a gala invitational premiere at the Beverly Theater.

===Home media===
Universal Studios Home Entertainment released the film on DVD February 28, 2001. A UK Blu-ray from Anchor Bay Entertainment was released in April 2014.

==Reception==
===Critical response===
Bosley Crowther of &quot;The New York Times&quot; described the film as: Gene Arneel of &quot;Variety&quot; praised the production design and Jack Hildeyard&#x27;s cinematography, but also felt the script &quot;plays interestingly but somehow lacks appropriate power. The characterizations don&#x27;t have the intensity of the struggle.&quot; Philip K. Scheuer, reviewing for the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, wrote that &quot;For sheer color magnificence—photographed by Jack Hildeyard in Super Technirama 70—it is as breathtaking as &quot;El Cid&quot;. Only this time, instead of medieval Spain, it is the China of 1900, complete with Forbidden City and surrounding legations. It should hold and fascinate spectators for its two-and-a-half hours of sheer, pell-mell movie making, even though characters are stereotypes whose melodramatics are as dated as the period itself.&quot;

&quot;Time&quot; magazine felt &quot;Pictorially, the film is magnificent, and some of the handsomest scenes—an orange sun rising over the peaks of the Forbidden City, midnight pyrotechnics as the Imperial arsenal blows up, the gates of the great Tartar Wall being stormed by Boxers in scarlet turbans—are almost as good as the evocative paintings by Water-colorist Dong Kingman, which open and close the picture. It was doubtless ghastly to wait 55 days at Peking until international reinforcements arrived, and the moviegoer who experiences the whole siege in two hours and 30 minutes comes out feeling lucky.&quot; Awarding the film four complete stars, Dorothy Masters of the &quot;New York Daily News&quot; wrote: &quot;A powerful drama of global interest, the film has integrity, a component frequently lost in the razzle-dazzle dangled by so many multi-million-dollar colossals.&quot;

At the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 58% based on 7 reviews, with an average rating of 5.43/10.

===Box office===
&quot;55 Days at Peking&quot; was a commercial disaster in the United States. Produced on a then-enormous budget of $10 million, the film&#x27;s domestic gross was $10 million, earning only $5 million in theatrical rentals. It was the 20th highest-grossing film of 1963. The figures quoted ignore foreign box office receipts where the film was much more successful than in the United States.

===Academy Award nominations===
Music from this film was responsible for two nominations at the 1964 Academy Awards. Dimitri Tiomkin and Paul Francis Webster were nominated for Best Original Song for &quot;So Little Time&quot;, and Tiomkin was nominated for Best Music Score – Substantially Original.

==Legacy==
&quot;55 Days at Peking&quot; contains the first known occurrence of the phrase &quot;Let China sleep. For when she wakes, the world will tremble&quot;, which is often mistakenly attributed to Napoleon Bonaparte. While appearing in the film in a script by Bernard Gordon, the phrase did not appear in the subsequent books versions by Noel Gerson (written under the pseudonym &quot;Samuel Edwards&quot;).

==Comic book adaptation==
* Gold Key: &quot;55 Days at Peking&quot; (September 1963)
* René Bratonne also made a French newspaper comic adaptation of this film, assisted by Pierre Leguen and Claude Pascal; they who worked under the pseudonym &quot;Jack de Brown&quot;.

==See also==

* List of American films of 1963
* List of historical drama films of Asia
* Examples of yellowface
==References==
;Citations
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="37" end="41" title="Epic film" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="42" end="52" title="historical drama" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="53" end="61" title="war film" label="war film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337436" start="78" end="135" title="Siege of the International Legations" label="siege of the foreign legations&amp;#x27; compounds in Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="179" end="193" title="Boxer Uprising" label="Boxer Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q706968" start="263" end="278" title="Samuel Bronston" label="Samuel Bronston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756484" start="283" end="297" title="Allied Artists Picture Corporation" label="Allied Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q327165" start="320" end="333" title="Philip Yordan" label="Philip Yordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893181" start="338" end="352" title="Bernard Gordon (writer)" label="Bernard Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q518366" start="393" end="405" title="Robert Hamer" label="Robert Hamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q816429" start="426" end="437" title="Ben Barzman" label="Ben Barzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012072" start="439" end="450" title="Noel Gerson" label="Noel Gerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421000" start="470" end="482" title="novelization" label="novelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q240677" start="575" end="587" title="Nicholas Ray" label="Nicholas Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q707321" start="598" end="607" title="Guy Green (filmmaker)" label="Guy Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q506183" start="612" end="625" title="Andrew Marton" label="Andrew Marton"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="738" end="753" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="755" end="766" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q181917" start="772" end="783" title="David Niven" label="David Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q264004" start="810" end="822" title="Flora Robson" label="Flora Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q395494" start="824" end="836" title="John Ireland" label="John Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q946210" start="838" end="846" title="Leo Genn" label="Leo Genn"/>
<link wikidata="Q931528" start="848" end="863" title="Robert Helpmann" label="Robert Helpmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340574" start="865" end="878" title="Harry Andrews" label="Harry Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q113997" start="884" end="896" title="Kurt Kasznar" label="Kurt Kasznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033891" start="959" end="976" title="martial arts film" label="martial arts film"/>
<link wikidata="Q947267" start="982" end="995" title="Yuen Siu Tien" label="Yuen Siu Tien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325171" start="1020" end="1030" title="Juzo Itami" label="Juzo Itami"/>
<link wikidata="Q712550" start="1099" end="1114" title="Shiba Goro" label="Col. Goro Shiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1574" end="1588" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624365" start="1639" end="1659" title="Lightning Over Water" label="Lightning Over Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087313" start="1712" end="1735" title="Battle of Peking (1900)" label="Battle of Peking (1900)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335146" start="2049" end="2055" title="Yìhéquán" label="Boxers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="2230" end="2250" title="Dowager Empress Cixi" label="Dowager Empress Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376651" start="2301" end="2349" title="Concessions in China" label="territorial concessions by those colonial powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663651" start="2661" end="2679" title="Beijing Legation Quarter" label="legations district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505775" start="2772" end="2780" title="Military of the Qing dynasty" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q19606413" start="2824" end="2836" title="Anti-Western sentiment" label="anti-western"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="2899" end="2908" title="US Marine" label="US Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261477" start="2959" end="2976" title="John Twiggs Myers" label="John Twiggs Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099717" start="2993" end="3003" title="China hand" label="China hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q971558" start="3106" end="3124" title="Russian aristocracy" label="Russian aristocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459167" start="3987" end="4011" title="Seymour Expedition" label="British-led relief force"/>
<link wikidata="Q320404" start="4390" end="4411" title="Eight-Nation Alliance" label="Eight-Nation Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087313" start="4504" end="4520" title="Battle of Peking (1900)" label="Battle of Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4605" end="4617" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="5339" end="5354" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261477" start="5386" end="5403" title="John Twiggs Myers" label="John Twiggs Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="5407" end="5418" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q181917" start="5449" end="5460" title="David Niven" label="David Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096957" start="5501" end="5517" title="Claude MacDonald" label="Claude MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q264004" start="5521" end="5533" title="Flora Robson" label="Flora Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="5537" end="5560" title="Empress Dowager Tzu Hsi" label="Empress Dowager Tzu Hsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q395494" start="5563" end="5575" title="John Ireland" label="John Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q946210" start="5592" end="5600" title="Leo Genn" label="Leo Genn"/>
<link wikidata="Q705554" start="5609" end="5616" title="Jung-Lu" label="Jung-Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340574" start="5619" end="5632" title="Harry Andrews" label="Harry Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q931528" start="5654" end="5669" title="Robert Helpmann" label="Robert Helpmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112861" start="5673" end="5684" title="Prince Tuan" label="Prince Tuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325171" start="5687" end="5697" title="Juzo Itami" label="Juzo Itami"/>
<link wikidata="Q712550" start="5701" end="5716" title="Shiba Goro" label="Col. Goro Shiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q113997" start="5719" end="5731" title="Kurt Kasznar" label="Kurt Kasznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q926490" start="5768" end="5798" title="Mikhail Nikolayevich von Giers" label="Mikhail Nikolayevich von Giers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106036" start="5802" end="5816" title="Philippe Leroy" label="Philippe Leroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182057" start="5831" end="5841" title="Paul Lukas" label="Paul Lukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767017" start="5862" end="5876" title="Lynne Sue Moon" label="Lynne Sue Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q168423" start="5889" end="5906" title="Elizabeth Sellars" label="Elizabeth Sellars"/>
<link wikidata="Q698211" start="5933" end="5947" title="Massimo Serato" label="Massimo Serato"/>
<link wikidata="Q636733" start="5971" end="5985" title="Jacques Sernas" label="Jacques Sernas"/>
<link wikidata="Q107413975" start="6006" end="6017" title="Jerome Thor" label="Jerome Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q563232" start="6043" end="6059" title="Geoffrey Bayldon" label="Geoffrey Bayldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q89092" start="6072" end="6084" title="Joseph Furst" label="Joseph Furst"/>
<link wikidata="Q61552" start="6106" end="6119" title="Walter Gotell" label="Walter Gotell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622363" start="6139" end="6151" title="Alfredo Mayo" label="Alfredo Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938408" start="6183" end="6196" title="Robert Rietti" label="Robert Rietti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776197" start="6213" end="6226" title="Martin Miller (actor)" label="Martin Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709538" start="6246" end="6256" title="José Nieto (actor)" label="José Nieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771385" start="6289" end="6311" title="Giuseppe Salvago Raggi" label="Giuseppe Salvago Raggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q84679" start="6315" end="6328" title="Eric Pohlmann" label="Eric Pohlmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q215788" start="6359" end="6379" title="Clemens von Ketteler" label="Clemens von Ketteler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6383" end="6395" title="Aram Stephan" label="Aram Stephan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069292" start="6440" end="6454" title="Stephen Pichon" label="Stephen Pichon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609787" start="6458" end="6473" title="Robert Urquhart (actor)" label="Robert Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q725674" start="6493" end="6503" title="Burt Kwouk" label="Burt Kwouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406829" start="6551" end="6566" title="Fernando Sancho" label="Fernando Sancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838310" start="6599" end="6615" title="Maurice Joostens" label="Maurice Joostens"/>
<link wikidata="Q240677" start="6619" end="6631" title="Nicholas Ray" label="Nicholas Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q462309" start="6661" end="6676" title="Edwin H. Conger" label="Edwin H. Conger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511585" start="6680" end="6693" title="Félix Dafauce" label="Félix Dafauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707010" start="6724" end="6747" title="Fridolin Marinus Knobel" label="Fridolin Marinus Knobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041903" start="6751" end="6769" title="Carlos Casaravilla" label="Carlos Casaravilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4142965" start="6803" end="6817" title="Nishi Tokujirō" label="Nishi Tokujirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364695" start="6821" end="6843" title="Ronald Brittain" label="R.S.M. Ronald Brittain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723095" start="6862" end="6874" title="Alfred Lynch" label="Alfred Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374039" start="6887" end="6899" title="Michael Chow (restaurateur)" label="Michael Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508504" start="6912" end="6923" title="George Wang (actor)" label="George Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265830" start="6948" end="6961" title="Lucille Soong" label="Lucille Soong"/>
<link wikidata="Q947267" start="6977" end="6990" title="Yuen Siu Tien" label="Yuen Siu Tien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379571" start="7008" end="7026" title="John Moulder-Brown" label="John Moulder-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935923" start="7038" end="7049" title="Milton Reid" label="Milton Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q957347" start="7160" end="7170" title="Jerry Wald" label="Jerry Wald"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920514" start="7285" end="7301" title="20th Century Pictures" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q683299" start="7361" end="7373" title="Stephen Boyd" label="Stephen Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q239301" start="7416" end="7426" title="Hope Lange" label="Hope Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q455876" start="7431" end="7443" title="France Nuyen" label="France Nuyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706968" start="7630" end="7645" title="Samuel Bronston" label="Samuel Bronston"/>
<link wikidata="Q762927" start="7740" end="7753" title="King of Kings (1961 film)" label="King of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q240677" start="7780" end="7792" title="Nicholas Ray" label="Nicholas Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q945883" start="7804" end="7810" title="El Cid (film)" label="El Cid"/>
<link wikidata="Q269975" start="7837" end="7849" title="Anthony Mann" label="Anthony Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="7859" end="7874" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7879" end="7884" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q327165" start="7900" end="7913" title="Philip Yordan" label="Philip Yordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893181" start="7918" end="7932" title="Bernard Gordon (writer)" label="Bernard Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="8140" end="8158" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="8541" end="8558" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8747" end="8749" title="UN" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q367748" start="8943" end="8971" title="The Fall of the Roman Empire (film)" label="The Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103894" start="9021" end="9034" title="Alec Guinness" label="Alec Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9190" end="9208" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885821" start="9350" end="9362" title="Barre Lyndon" label="Barre Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="9494" end="9531" title="Motion Picture Association of America" label="Motion Picture Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="9640" end="9643" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="10306" end="10317" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="10715" end="10729" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q271324" start="10810" end="10822" title="Hedda Hopper" label="Hedda Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="10841" end="10858" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="10920" end="10931" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q106099" start="11026" end="11039" title="Jeanne Moreau" label="Jeanne Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q228611" start="11081" end="11096" title="Melina Mercouri" label="Melina Mercouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="11273" end="11277" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q264004" start="11538" end="11550" title="Flora Robson" label="Flora Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q931528" start="11606" end="11621" title="Robert Helpmann" label="Robert Helpmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794499" start="12516" end="12536" title="Arnaud d&amp;#x27;Usseau" label="Arnaud d&amp;#x27;Usseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743287" start="13042" end="13057" title="shooting script" label="shooting script"/>
<link wikidata="Q518366" start="13497" end="13509" title="Robert Hamer" label="Robert Hamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271197" start="13646" end="13663" title="Jon Manchip White" label="Jon Manchip White"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="13860" end="13866" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="14121" end="14142" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q592747" start="14199" end="14208" title="Las Rozas de Madrid" label="Las Matas"/>
<link wikidata="Q525008" start="14309" end="14332" title="Chinese people in Spain" label="Chinese people in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q816429" start="14722" end="14733" title="Ben Barzman" label="Ben Barzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182057" start="14989" end="14999" title="Paul Lukas" label="Paul Lukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q707321" start="15315" end="15324" title="Guy Green (filmmaker)" label="Guy Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138626" start="15367" end="15379" title="Diamond Head (film)" label="Diamond Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q506183" start="15550" end="15563" title="Andrew Marton" label="Andrew Marton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754994" start="15587" end="15598" title="second unit" label="second unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q762114" start="15843" end="15859" title="Michał Waszyński" label="Michael Wasynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="15993" end="16002" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752661" start="16866" end="16890" title="Anchor Bay Entertainment" label="Anchor Bay Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="16958" end="16973" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16983" end="17001" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="17052" end="17059" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="17848" end="17852" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812732" start="18089" end="18100" title="Tartar Wall" label="Tartar Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295749" start="18208" end="18220" title="Dong Kingman" label="Dong Kingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="18528" end="18547" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="18742" end="18759" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="18768" end="18783" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="18935" end="18954" title="Box office bomb" label="commercial disaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19103" end="19121" title="List of highest-grossing films#distributor rental" label="theatrical rentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q753327" start="19134" end="19168" title="1963 in film" label="20th highest-grossing film of 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="19393" end="19407" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q317033" start="19409" end="19424" title="Dimitri Tiomkin" label="Dimitri Tiomkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620897" start="19429" end="19449" title="Paul Francis Webster" label="Paul Francis Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="19469" end="19487" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q488651" start="19550" end="19591" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score" label="Best Music Score – Substantially Original"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="19798" end="19816" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893181" start="19861" end="19875" title="Bernard Gordon (writer)" label="Bernard Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012072" start="19939" end="19950" title="Noel Gerson" label="Noel Gerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534616" start="20038" end="20046" title="Gold Key Comics" label="Gold Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561521" start="20296" end="20326" title="List of American films of 1963" label="List of American films of 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053899" start="20329" end="20367" title="List of historical drama films of Asia" label="List of historical drama films of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012825" start="20370" end="20392" title="Examples of yellowface" label="Examples of yellowface"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962503" wikidata="Q235358" url="?curid=962503" title="FCD">
<text>FCD may refer to:

== Health and medicine ==
* Fibrocystic disease
* Fleck corneal dystrophy
* Focal cortical dysplasia
* Food composition data
* Fuchs&#x27; corneal dystrophy

== Other uses ==
* Family Computer Disk System, an add-on for Nintendo&#x27;s Family Computer game console
* FC Dallas, an American soccer team
* First Chief Directorate, a KGB intelligence organ
* Floating car data, also known as floating cellular data
* Forum for Democratic Change, a political party in Uganda
* Foundation for Child Development
* Free City of Danzig, a semi-autonomous city-state that existed between 1920 and 1939
* Freedom from Chemical Dependency, a non-profit organization that provides substance abuse prevention education for schools.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235358" start="0" end="3" title="FCD" label="FCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423177" start="47" end="66" title="Fibrocystic disease" label="Fibrocystic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4237691" start="69" end="92" title="Fleck corneal dystrophy" label="Fleck corneal dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316942" start="95" end="119" title="Focal cortical dysplasia" label="Focal cortical dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465452" start="122" end="143" title="Food composition data" label="Food composition data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464888" start="146" end="175" title="Fuchs&amp;#x27; corneal dystrophy" label="Fuchs&amp;#x27; corneal dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135321" start="196" end="223" title="Family Computer Disk System" label="Family Computer Disk System"/>
<link wikidata="Q642291" start="286" end="295" title="FC Dallas" label="FC Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031025" start="323" end="346" title="First Chief Directorate" label="First Chief Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q356677" start="375" end="392" title="Floating car data" label="Floating car data"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473101" start="433" end="460" title="Forum for Democratic Change" label="Forum for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993706" start="492" end="524" title="Foundation for Child Development" label="Foundation for Child Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="527" end="546" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="614" end="646" title="Freedom from Chemical Dependency" label="Freedom from Chemical Dependency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962506" wikidata="Q5650087" url="?curid=962506" title="Hans Gruyters">
<text>Hans Gruyters (28 April 1925, Boekel – 24 October 1980) was a Dutch criminal. In the 1950s, he was a car salesman in the Dutch province of North Brabant. His nickname was &quot;The Black Rider&quot;, because he once appeared completely dressed in black at a party.

On 15 November 1954, he fatally shot Jan van Dieten, a post office executive in Ravenstein. Gruyters was 29 at the time, and had already been convicted six times for lesser offences. On 16 November, he robbed a bank, and on 31 December he broke into a vicar&#x27;s house in Volkel (a small village in North Brabant), after which he ran over a man on a bike, killing the man in the process. By then, the police were on his trail, but this did not prevent him from trying to rob a bank in Oss some days later. He was eventually arrested on 5 January 1955 and sentenced to fifteen years in prison in 1956.

In 1957, he escaped from the prison in Scheveningen, which was widely covered in the press, but was soon found and returned to his cell. He was released in 1966.

After being released from prison he briefly embarked on a singing career without much success.

Gruyters married twice; his first wife divorced him when he was in prison. After marrying a second time, he seems to have been a reformed character, building up a cleaning business that at one point employed more than 30 people. The second marriage produced one daughter.

Gruyters died in 1980 after suffering a heart attack while riding his horse. He is buried in Rumpt.

==In popular culture==
* Erik Vink (a Dutch journalist and playwright) wrote a play called &quot;De Zwarte Ruiter (The Black Rider)&quot; about Gruyters, which has been performed by a number of small theater groups. This play should not be confused with &quot;De Zwarte Ruiter (The Black Rider)&quot; - a film by Wim Verstappen.
* The Ottawa-based band, Wise, Young and King made Hans Gruyters the subject of their song, The Black Rider.

==References==
==Further reading==
*J.H.H. Gaute and Robin Odell, &quot;The New Murderer&#x27;s Who&#x27;s Who&quot;, 1996, Harrap Books, London
*Hans van Straaten, &quot;Moordenaarswerk&quot;, 1990, Amsterdam (in Dutch)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5650087" start="0" end="13" title="Hans Gruyters" label="Hans Gruyters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9818" start="30" end="36" title="Boekel" label="Boekel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="101" end="104" title="Automobile" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="105" end="110" title="sales" label="sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101" start="117" end="152" title="North Brabant" label="the Dutch province of North Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="321" end="332" title="post office" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q589056" start="346" end="356" title="Ravenstein, Netherlands" label="Ravenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916183" start="408" end="417" title="conviction (law)" label="convicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="477" end="481" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="518" end="523" title="vicar" label="vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="618" end="622" title="bicycle" label="bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q9859" start="753" end="756" title="Oss" label="Oss"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="909" end="921" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q692944" start="1495" end="1500" title="Rumpt" label="Rumpt"/>
<link wikidata="Q926666" start="1816" end="1830" title="Wim Verstappen" label="Wim Verstappen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="1838" end="1844" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962507" wikidata="Q5383549" url="?curid=962507" title="Episode 2">
<text>Episode 2, Episode II or Episode Two may refer to:

==Books==
* &quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&quot; (novel), 2002 novel

==Film==
* &quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&quot;, a 2002 film

==Music==
* &quot;Episode II&quot; (album), a 2001 album by Safri Duo
* &quot;Episode II&quot; (EP), a 2000 EP by Eiffel 65
* &quot;Episode 2: Medecine Cake&quot;, a 2002 album by Pleymo
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (song), a song by Dragon Ash
* &quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&quot; (soundtrack), a 2002 soundtrack

==Television episodes==
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;All of Us Are Dead&quot;)
* &quot;Ashes to Ashes&quot; episodes
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Ashes to Ashes&quot; series 1)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Ashes to Ashes&quot; series 2)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Ashes to Ashes&quot; series 3)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Baby Reindeer&quot;)
* &quot;Being Human&quot; episodes
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Being Human&quot; series 1)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Being Human&quot; series 2)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;The Casual Vacancy&quot;)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Devs&quot;)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Diyar-e-Dil&quot;)
* &quot;Fleabag&quot; episodes
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Fleabag&quot; series 1)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Fleabag&quot; series 2)
* &quot;Humans&quot; episodes
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Humans&quot; series 1)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Humans&quot; series 2)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Humans&quot; series 3)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Kaos&quot;)
* &quot;Life on Mars&quot; episodes:
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Life on Mars&quot;, series 1)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Life on Mars&quot;, series 2)
* &quot;Luther&quot; episodes:
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Luther&quot; series 1)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Luther&quot; series 2)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Luther&quot; series 3)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Luther&quot; series 4)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Luther&quot; series 5)
* &quot;Mindhunter&quot; episodes:
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Mindhunter&quot; season 1)
** &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Mindhunter&quot; season 2)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Sword Art Online Abridged&quot;)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Tá no Ar&quot;)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Twin Peaks&quot;)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Uyanış: Büyük Selçuklu&quot;)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;Years and Years&quot;)
* &quot;Episode 2&quot; (&quot;The Young Pope&quot;)
* &quot;Episode Two&quot; (&quot;Dark Matter&quot;)
* &quot;Imaginationland Episode II&quot;, a &quot;South Park&quot; episode
* &quot;Robot Chicken: Star Wars Episode II&quot;, a &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; episode
* &quot;Episode Two: Election Blu-Galoo&quot;, a &quot;Clone High&quot; episode
* &quot;Second Episode&quot;, of &quot;The New Pope&quot; episode

==Video games==
* &quot;Coffee Talk Episode 2: Hibiscus &amp; Butterfly&quot;, a 2023 game
* &quot;Half-Life 2: Episode Two&quot;, a 2007 game
* &quot;Math Blaster Episode II: Secret of the Lost City&quot;, a 1994 game
* &quot;Monster Rancher Battle Card Episode II&quot;, a 2000 game
* &quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&quot; (video game), a 2002 game
* &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog 4: Episode II&quot;, a 2012 game
* &quot;Xenosaga Episode II&quot;, a 2004 game

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="" start="64" end="128" title="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="159" end="203" title="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones" label="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q388065" start="236" end="266" title="Episode II (album)" label="&amp;quot;Episode II&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860389" start="296" end="323" title="Episode II (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Episode II&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="356" end="380" title="Episode 2: Medecine Cake" label="Episode 2: Medecine Cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240969" start="413" end="441" title="Episode 2 (song)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="466" end="535" title="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&amp;quot; (soundtrack)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414952" start="582" end="636" title="Episode 2 (All of Us Are Dead)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;All of Us Are Dead&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454797" start="678" end="737" title="Episode 2 (Ashes to Ashes series 1)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Ashes to Ashes&amp;quot; series 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348771" start="741" end="800" title="Episode 2 (Ashes to Ashes series 2)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Ashes to Ashes&amp;quot; series 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348771" start="804" end="863" title="Episode 2 (Ashes to Ashes series 3)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Ashes to Ashes&amp;quot; series 3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115516641" start="866" end="915" title="Episode 2 (Baby Reindeer)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Baby Reindeer&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727718" start="954" end="1010" title="Episode 2 (Being Human series 1)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Being Human&amp;quot; series 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727721" start="1014" end="1070" title="Episode 2 (Being Human series 2)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Being Human&amp;quot; series 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593700" start="1073" end="1127" title="Episode 2 (The Casual Vacancy)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Casual Vacancy&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276177" start="1130" end="1170" title="Episode 2 (Devs)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Devs&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856884" start="1173" end="1220" title="Episode 2 (Diyar-e-Dil)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Diyar-e-Dil&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868648" start="1255" end="1307" title="Episode 2 (Fleabag series 1)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Fleabag&amp;quot; series 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868648" start="1311" end="1363" title="Episode 2 (Fleabag series 2)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Fleabag&amp;quot; series 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647228" start="1397" end="1448" title="Episode 2 (Humans series 1)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Humans&amp;quot; series 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617199" start="1452" end="1503" title="Episode 2 (Humans series 2)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Humans&amp;quot; series 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617199" start="1507" end="1558" title="Episode 2 (Humans series 3)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Humans&amp;quot; series 3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615670" start="1561" end="1601" title="Episode 2 (Kaos)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Kaos&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576850" start="1642" end="1700" title="Episode 2 (Life on Mars, series 1)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Life on Mars&amp;quot;, series 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576850" start="1704" end="1762" title="Episode 2 (Life on Mars, series 2)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Life on Mars&amp;quot;, series 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729145" start="1797" end="1848" title="Episode 2 (Luther series 1)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Luther&amp;quot; series 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729145" start="1852" end="1903" title="Episode 2 (Luther series 2)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Luther&amp;quot; series 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729145" start="1907" end="1958" title="Episode 2 (Luther series 3)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Luther&amp;quot; series 3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729145" start="1962" end="2013" title="Episode 2 (Luther series 4)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Luther&amp;quot; series 4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729145" start="2017" end="2068" title="Episode 2 (Luther series 5)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Luther&amp;quot; series 5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340152" start="2107" end="2162" title="Episode 2 (Mindhunter season 1)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Mindhunter&amp;quot; season 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340152" start="2166" end="2221" title="Episode 2 (Mindhunter season 2)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Mindhunter&amp;quot; season 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130235609" start="2224" end="2285" title="Episode 2 (Sword Art Online Abridged)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Sword Art Online Abridged&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18761403" start="2288" end="2332" title="Episode 2 (Tá no Ar)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Tá no Ar&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383530" start="2335" end="2381" title="Episode 2 (Twin Peaks)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Twin Peaks&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2384" end="2442" title="Episode 2 (Uyanış: Büyük Selçuklu)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Uyanış: Büyük Selçuklu&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60776367" start="2445" end="2496" title="Episode 2 (Years and Years)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Years and Years&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22026371" start="2499" end="2549" title="Episode 2 (The Young Pope)" label="&amp;quot;Episode 2&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Young Pope&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647230" start="2552" end="2601" title="Episode Two (Dark Matter)" label="&amp;quot;Episode Two&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Dark Matter&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124135" start="2610" end="2636" title="Imaginationland Episode II" label="Imaginationland Episode II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2685" end="2720" title="Robot Chicken: Star Wars Episode II" label="Robot Chicken: Star Wars Episode II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2772" end="2803" title="Episode Two: Election Blu-Galoo" label="Episode Two: Election Blu-Galoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q113027327" start="2852" end="2866" title="Second Episode" label="Second Episode"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2935" end="2982" title="Coffee Talk Episode 2: Hibiscus &amp;amp; Butterfly" label="Coffee Talk Episode 2: Hibiscus &amp;amp; Butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3010" end="3034" title="Half-Life 2: Episode Two" label="Half-Life 2: Episode Two"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3062" end="3110" title="Math Blaster Episode II: Secret of the Lost City" label="Math Blaster Episode II: Secret of the Lost City"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846691" start="3138" end="3176" title="Monster Rancher Battle Card Episode II" label="Monster Rancher Battle Card Episode II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3198" end="3267" title="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3289" end="3321" title="Sonic the Hedgehog 4: Episode II" label="Sonic the Hedgehog 4: Episode II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534184" start="3349" end="3368" title="Xenosaga Episode II" label="Xenosaga Episode II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962508" wikidata="Q202108" url="?curid=962508" title="Jaime Sin">
<text>Jaime Lachica Sin (; August 31, 1928 – June 21, 2005), commonly and formally known as Jaime Cardinal Sin, was the 30th Catholic Archbishop of Manila and the third cardinal from the Philippines. He was instrumental in the historic and peaceful 1986 People Power Revolution, which toppled the dictatorship and ended martial law under Ferdinand Marcos and installed Corazon Aquino as his successor in the Fifth Republic of the Philippines. He was also a key figure in the 2001 EDSA Revolution that replaced President Joseph Estrada with Gloria Macapagal Arroyo.

==Early life==
Sin was born on August 31, 1928, in New Washington, Aklan, on the island of Panay to Juan Sin, a merchant of Chinese descent, and Máxima Lachica, an ethnic Aklanon. &quot;Jim&quot; as he was known, was his mother&#x27;s favorite. As the 14th of 16 children, he was a painfully thin, asthmatic child, who often used to cuddle up between his parents to sleep at night. When he asked his nurse why his mother lavished such attention on him, he was told it was because he was &quot;the weakest and ugliest of the brood&quot;.

== Life as a priest ==

=== Early priesthood ===
Sin left his childhood home and his family to study in St. Vincent Ferrer Seminary, and was ordained a priest of the Archdiocese of Jaro on April 3, 1954. He was the first rector of St. Pius X Seminary in Lawaan Hills, Roxas City, Capiz, serving from 1957 to 1967. On February 29, 1960, Sin was named Domestic Prelate (now called honorary prelate, with the title of &quot;Monsignor&quot;).

=== Bishop of Obba ===
Sin was appointed auxiliary bishop of Jaro on February 10, 1967, and was consecrated bishop of the titular see of Obba on March 18 of that year.

=== Archbishop of Jaro ===
On March 15, 1972, Sin was appointed Coadjutor Archbishop of Jaro, taking on administrative roles in the archdiocese, while holding the titular see of Massa Lubrense. On October 8, 1972, Sin was appointed Archbishop of Jaro.

===Archbishop of Manila===

Sin was appointed Archbishop of Manila on January 21, 1974. Initially, he was reluctant to take on the role of leading the Church in the Philippines. He was enthroned as Archbishop at Manila Cathedral on March 19, 1974, making him only the third native Filipino in the office after centuries of Spanish, American, and Irish archbishops.

On May 24, 1976, Pope Paul VI made him a member of the College of Cardinals, creating him Cardinal Priest of the titular church of &quot;Santa Maria ai Monti&quot;. As is traditional for cardinals, the title &quot;Cardinal&quot; is inserted before his surname when addressed formally. He participated as a cardinal-elector in both the August 1978 and October 1978 papal conclaves which elected Popes John Paul I and John Paul II respectively. In the August conclave, he reportedly told Albino Luciani, &quot;You will be the new pope.&quot; After Luciani was elected John Paul I, Cardinal Sin paid him homage, and the new pope said: &quot;You were a prophet, but my reign will be a short one.&quot; He remained the youngest member of the College until 1983.

His title and surname as &quot;cardinal sin&quot; (another term for a deadly sin) were a point of humour in the Philippines and for Filipino Catholics. Examples included &quot;The greatest sin of all: Cardinal Sin,&quot; and even his own pun of &quot;Welcome to the house of Sin&quot; that he used to greet guests at Villa San Miguel, the secondary archiepiscopal palace in Mandaluyong.

==1986 People Power Revolution==
Events in the Philippines under President Ferdinand Marcos forced Sin, the spiritual leader of Filipino Catholics, to become involved in politics. He became witness to corruption, fraud, and even murder by the regime and rising popular discontent with the dictatorial rule of Marcos and his wife, Imelda. Within six months of his appointment as Archbishop, Sin was criticizing authorities after the military raided a Manila seminary on the grounds that it was harbouring insurgents. Sin appealed to Filipinos of all religions to follow the teachings of Jesus in the Gospels and use peaceful means to change the political situation in the Philippines.

Beginning in the 1970s, Cardinal Sin, a moderate, was among the leaders who publicly pressured President Marcos to end martial law, which had been imposed in the belief that leftist radicals would overthrow the government. Sin eventually decided to speak out in support of Corazon Aquino, the widow of the assassinated opposition leader Benigno Aquino Jr., in calling for an end to martial law. This led to massive popular demonstrations, often led by nuns whom riot police dared not attack. In February 1986, Sin called on Filipinos to surround the police and military headquarters in Manila to protect then-military Vice Chief of Staff Fidel Ramos, who had broken with Marcos. More than one million people took to the streets praying the rosary and singing hymns in an outpouring that shielded anti-government rebels from attack. Some soldiers decided to join the marchers.

In what later became known as the People Power Revolution, Marcos, his family, and close advisors were forced to flee the Philippines and took up residence in Honolulu, Hawaii, US, on the invitation of U.S. President Ronald Reagan. Cardinal Sin, along with presidents Corazon Aquino and Fidel Ramos, became known to Filipinos as the architects of the People Power Movement.

==2001 EDSA Revolution==
Sin decided to intervene again in 2001 to become spiritual leader of another People Power Movement. Some Filipinos alleged that president Joseph Estrada was guilty of widespread corruption and graft because of the controversial &quot;second envelope&quot;. Poor people marching in the streets, with the support of Sin, the elite, and military generals, succeeded in toppling Estrada from power and elevating Gloria Macapagal Arroyo as acting president in what was perceived by the international community as a &quot;triumphant&quot; democracy. The &quot;second envelope&quot; was opened after the coup and turned out to be Estrada&#x27;s bank account. Commenting on the endemic corruption that persisted after Marcos, Sin said, &quot;We got rid of Ali Baba, but the 40 thieves remained.&quot; It was reported that the cardinal&#x27;s actions caused uneasiness at the Vatican and that he was summoned to Rome to explain himself.

Hours before hundreds of soldiers and officers staged a failed revolt against President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo in July 2003, Sin urged Filipinos to be vigilant against groups plotting to violently overturn the country&#x27;s democratic institutions.

Two and a half years after Sin&#x27;s death, it was reported that at the height of EDSA II, Sin received a directive from the Vatican ordering him and the Philippine clergy to adopt a non-partisan stance towards the political crisis. Sin, who by then had committed support for the EDSA II revolt, was said to have threatened to resign as archbishop if compelled to withdraw his support. The standoff was reportedly resolved with the mediation of the Supreme Court Associate Justice Artemio Panganiban (later, Chief Justice of the Philippines), a member of the Pontifical Council for the Laity, a department of the Roman Curia. As a result, the Vatican did not persist with its earlier demand. The reports were attributed to persons reputed to have first-hand knowledge of the events, but they were not confirmed officially by the Vatican or the Archdiocese of Manila.

==Retirement and death==
Sin retired as Archbishop of Manila on September 15, 2003, and was succeeded by Lipa Archbishop Gaudencio Borbon Rosales. He was too ill to travel to the 2005 papal conclave that elected Pope Benedict XVI. Afflicted for years with a kidney ailment brought on by diabetes, he was taken on June 19, 2005, to the Cardinal Santos Medical Center in San Juan, Metro Manila, because of a slight but lingering fever. He died of renal failure on June 21, 2005, at the age of 76. The government accorded him the honour of a state funeral and a period of national mourning through Presidential Proclamation No. 863, s. 2005 signed by President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo. He was buried beside his three immediate predecessors in the crypt of Manila Cathedral after a funeral attended by thousands of Filipinos.

==Honors and awards==
===National honors===
*: Philippine Legion of Honor, Chief Commander (CCLH)
*: Order of Sikatuna, Grand Collar (GCS)
*: Order of Lakandula, Grand Cross (GCrL)
*: Knights of Rizal, Knight Grand Cross of Rizal (KGCR)

===Foreign honor===
*: Order of Isabella the Catholic, Knight Grand Cross (gcYC) - (June 24, 1977)

Sin also received 26 honorary doctorates in various fields from higher education institutions in the Philippines and abroad (mostly from notable universities in the United States of America), among which are the Pontifical and Royal University of Santo Tomas in Manila, Yale University, Georgetown University, Brandeis University and Boston College.

New Washington, Aklan also hosts the Museo Kardinal, a museum dedicated to the life of Sin established inside his former residence.

==Views on Catholic social issues==
===Views on condom use===
As a predominantly Catholic country, issues in the Philippines have and are influenced by the church to varying degrees. Condom usage has historically been a controversial topic. As the incumbent Archbishop of Manila in 1996, when the government distributed condoms to curb HIV infection rates, Sin called the programme &quot;intrinsically evil&quot;, in line with Church teaching on the matter. Sin also denounced then-Health Secretary Juan Flavier, with some asserting that the latter&#x27;s condom promotion had made him an unwitting agent of Satan. Prominent Catholics also protested against the government&#x27;s condom-distribution programme by publicly burning boxes of condoms.

== References ==
==External links==
*&quot;Philippine Cardinal Jaime L. Sin Dies at 76&quot;. &quot;Washington Post&quot; Retrieved 2011-09-18.
*Archdiocese of Manila Biostatistics
*Catholic Hierarchy – Jaime Lachica Cardinal Sin †</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202108" start="0" end="17" title="Jaime Sin" label="Jaime Lachica Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202108" start="86" end="104" title="Jaime Sin" label="Jaime Cardinal Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355834" start="128" end="148" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Manila" label="Archbishop of Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="163" end="171" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="248" end="271" title="People Power Revolution" label="People Power Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740956" start="314" end="348" title="martial law under Ferdinand Marcos" label="martial law under Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="363" end="377" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870217" start="402" end="435" title="Fifth Republic of the Philippines" label="Fifth Republic of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980316" start="469" end="489" title="Second EDSA Revolution" label="2001 EDSA Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q212733" start="514" end="528" title="Joseph Estrada" label="Joseph Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="534" end="557" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q626992" start="611" end="625" title="New Washington, Aklan" label="New Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q13723" start="627" end="632" title="Aklan" label="Aklan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974839" start="684" end="699" title="Chinese Filipino" label="Chinese descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701435" start="731" end="738" title="Aklanon people" label="Aklanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592089" start="1202" end="1229" title="St. Vincent Ferrer Seminary" label="St. Vincent Ferrer Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q630859" start="1264" end="1283" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Jaro" label="Archdiocese of Jaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591567" start="1329" end="1348" title="St. Pius X Seminary" label="St. Pius X Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209" start="1366" end="1376" title="Roxas City" label="Roxas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13772" start="1378" end="1383" title="Capiz" label="Capiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095504" start="1477" end="1493" title="Honorary Prelate" label="honorary prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q854905" start="1519" end="1528" title="Monsignor" label="Monsignor"/>
<link wikidata="Q75178" start="1579" end="1595" title="auxiliary bishop" label="auxiliary bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217609" start="1660" end="1671" title="titular see" label="titular see"/>
<link wikidata="Q853982" start="1771" end="1791" title="Coadjutor Archbishop" label="Coadjutor Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217609" start="1870" end="1881" title="titular see" label="titular see"/>
<link wikidata="Q72239" start="1885" end="1899" title="Massa Lubrense" label="Massa Lubrense"/>
<link wikidata="Q773443" start="2172" end="2188" title="Manila Cathedral" label="Manila Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="2343" end="2355" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q852242" start="2381" end="2401" title="College of Cardinals" label="College of Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="2416" end="2431" title="Cardinal Priest" label="Cardinal Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095195" start="2463" end="2483" title="Santa Maria ai Monti" label="Santa Maria ai Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754441" start="2661" end="2672" title="papal conclave, August 1978" label="August 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421431" start="2677" end="2689" title="papal conclave, October 1978" label="October 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="2690" end="2704" title="papal conclave" label="papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q37278" start="2726" end="2737" title="Pope John Paul I" label="John Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="2742" end="2754" title="Pope John Paul II" label="John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37278" start="2812" end="2826" title="Pope John Paul I" label="Albino Luciani"/>
<link wikidata="Q166502" start="3154" end="3164" title="Seven deadly sins" label="deadly sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9085" start="3458" end="3469" title="Mandaluyong" label="Mandaluyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="3537" end="3546" title="President of the Philippines" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="3547" end="3563" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q285536" start="3802" end="3808" title="Imelda Marcos" label="Imelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="4071" end="4077" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222805" start="4494" end="4511" title="Benigno Aquino Jr" label="Benigno Aquino Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q215351" start="4795" end="4806" title="Fidel Ramos" label="Fidel Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="4897" end="4903" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="5068" end="5091" title="People Power Revolution" label="People Power Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="5193" end="5209" title="Honolulu, Hawaii" label="Honolulu, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="5236" end="5250" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="5251" end="5264" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="5302" end="5316" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q215351" start="5321" end="5332" title="Fidel Ramos" label="Fidel Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980316" start="5503" end="5532" title="EDSA II" label="another People Power Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q212733" start="5572" end="5586" title="Joseph Estrada" label="Joseph Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="5842" end="5865" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="6741" end="6748" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q514212" start="7065" end="7078" title="Supreme Court of the Philippines" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809128" start="7079" end="7096" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines" label="Associate Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337910" start="7097" end="7115" title="Artemio Panganiban" label="Artemio Panganiban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545268" start="7175" end="7207" title="Pontifical Council for the Laity" label="Pontifical Council for the Laity"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="7229" end="7240" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467514" start="7605" end="7629" title="Gaudencio Borbon Rosales" label="Gaudencio Borbon Rosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q666536" start="7663" end="7682" title="Papal conclave, 2005" label="2005 papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="7696" end="7713" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="7742" end="7748" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="7771" end="7779" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q749283" start="7853" end="7875" title="San Juan, Metro Manila" label="San Juan, Metro Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="7929" end="7942" title="renal failure" label="renal failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="8023" end="8036" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q773443" start="8237" end="8253" title="Manila Cathedral" label="Manila Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480017" start="8354" end="8380" title="Philippine Legion of Honor" label="Philippine Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q980578" start="8408" end="8425" title="Order of Sikatuna" label="Order of Sikatuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q690262" start="8449" end="8467" title="Order of Lakandula" label="Order of Lakandula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355670" start="8491" end="8507" title="Knights of Rizal" label="Knights of Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="8568" end="8598" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401524" start="8857" end="8913" title="University of Santo Tomas" label="Pontifical and Royal University of Santo Tomas in Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="8915" end="8930" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="8932" end="8953" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="8955" end="8974" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="8979" end="8993" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q626992" start="8996" end="9017" title="New Washington, Aklan" label="New Washington, Aklan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="9312" end="9318" title="Condom" label="Condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="9465" end="9468" title="Human Immunodeficiency Virus" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q683261" start="9556" end="9585" title="Humanae vitae" label="Church teaching on the matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545669" start="9611" end="9627" title="Department of Health (Philippines)" label="Health Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q471869" start="9628" end="9640" title="Juan Flavier" label="Juan Flavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="9978" end="9993" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962509" wikidata="Q6010868" url="?curid=962509" title="Solitude">
<text>Solitude, also known as social withdrawal, is a state of seclusion or isolation, meaning lack of socialisation. Effects can be either positive or negative, depending on the situation. Short-term solitude is often valued as a time when one may work, think, or rest without disturbance. It may be desired for the sake of privacy. Long-term solitude may stem from soured relationships, loss of loved ones, deliberate choice, infectious disease, mental disorders, neurological disorders such as circadian rhythm sleep disorder, or circumstances of employment or situation.

A distinction has been made between solitude and loneliness. In this sense, these two words refer, respectively, to the joy and the pain of being alone.

==Health effects==
Symptoms from complete isolation, called sensory deprivation, may include anxiety, sensory illusions, or distortions of time and perception. However, this is the case when there is no stimulation of the sensory systems at all and not just lack of contact with people. Thus, this can be avoided by having other things to keep one&#x27;s mind busy.

Long-term solitude is often seen as undesirable, causing loneliness or reclusion resulting from inability to establish relationships. Furthermore, it might lead to clinical depression, although some people do not react to it negatively. Buddhist monks regard long-term solitude as a means of enlightenment. Marooned people have been left in solitude for years without any report of psychological symptoms afterwards. Some psychological conditions (such as schizophrenia and schizoid personality disorder) are strongly linked to a tendency to seek solitude.

Enforced loneliness (solitary confinement) has been a punishment method throughout history. It is often considered a form of torture.

Emotional isolation is a state of isolation where one feels emotionally separated from others despite having a well-functioning social network.

Researchers, including Robert J. Coplan and Julie C. Bowker, have rejected the notion that solitary practices and solitude are inherently dysfunctional and undesirable. In their 2013 book &quot;A Handbook of Solitude&quot;, the authors note how solitude can allow for enhancements in self-esteem, generates clarity, and can be highly therapeutic. In the edited work, Coplan and Bowker invite not only fellow psychology colleagues to chime in on this issue but also a variety of other faculty from different disciplines to address the issue. Fong&#x27;s chapter offers an alternative view on how solitude is more than just a personal trajectory for one to take inventory on life; it also yields a variety of important sociological cues that allow the protagonist to navigate through society, even highly politicized societies. In the process, political prisoners in solitary confinement were examined to see how they concluded their views on society. Thus Fong, Coplan, and Bowker conclude that a person&#x27;s experienced solitude generates immanent and personal content as well as collective and sociological content, depending on context.

==Psychological effects==

There are both positive and negative psychological effects of solitude. Much of the time, these effects and the longevity is determined by the amount of time a person spends in isolation. The positive effects can range anywhere from more freedom to increased spirituality, while the negative effects are socially depriving and may trigger the onset of mental illness. While positive solitude is often desired, negative solitude is often involuntary or undesired at the time it occurs.

===Positive effects===
Freedom is considered to be one of the benefits of solitude; the constraints of others will not have any effect on a person who is spending time in solitude, therefore giving the person more latitude in their actions. With increased freedom, a person’s choices are less likely to be affected by exchanges with others.

A person&#x27;s creativity can be sparked when given freedom. Solitude can increase freedom and moreover, freedom from distractions has the potential to spark creativity. In 1994, psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi found that adolescents who cannot bear to be alone often stop enhancing creative talents.

Another proven benefit to time given in solitude is the development of the self. When a person spends time in solitude from others, they may experience changes to their self-concept. This can also help a person to form or discover their identity without any outside distractions. Solitude also provides time for contemplation, growth in personal spirituality, and self-examination. In these situations, loneliness can be avoided as long as the person in solitude knows that they have meaningful relations with others.

===Negative effects===
Negative effects have been observed in prisoners. The behavior of prisoners who spend extensive time in solitude may worsen. Solitude can trigger physiological responses that increase health risks.

Negative effects of solitude may also depend on age. Elementary age school children who experience frequent solitude may react negatively. This is largely because often, solitude at this age is not the child&#x27;s choice. Solitude in elementary-age children may occur when they are unsure of how to interact socially, so they prefer to be alone, causing shyness or social rejection.

While teenagers are more likely to feel lonely or unhappy when not around others, they are also more likely to have a more enjoyable experience with others if they have had time alone first. However, teenagers who frequently spend time alone do not have as good a global adjustment as those who balance their time of solitude with their time of socialization.

==Other uses==
===As pleasure===
Solitude does not necessarily entail feelings of loneliness, and it may in fact be one&#x27;s sole source of genuine pleasure for those who choose it with deliberate intent. Some individuals seek solitude for discovering a more meaningful and vital existence. For example, in religious contexts, some saints preferred silence, finding immense pleasure in their uniformity with God. Solitude is a state that can be positively modified utilizing it for prayer allowing to &quot;be alone with ourselves and with God, to put ourselves in listening to His will, but also of what moves in our hearts, let purify our relationships; solitude and silence thus become spaces inhabited by God, and ability to recover ourselves and grow in humanity.&quot;

In psychology, introverted persons may require spending time alone to recharge, whereas those who are simply socially apathetic might find it a pleasurable setting in which to occupy oneself with solitary tasks.

The Buddha attained enlightenment through uses of meditation, deprived of sensory input, bodily necessities, and external desires, including social interaction. The context of solitude is attainment of pleasure from within, but this does not necessitate complete detachment from the external world.

This is well demonstrated in the writings of Edward Abbey with particular regard to &quot;Desert Solitaire&quot; where solitude focused only on isolation from other people allows for a more complete connection to the external world, as in the absence of human interaction the natural world itself takes on the role of the companion. In this context, the individual seeking solitude does so not strictly for personal gain or introspection, though this is often an unavoidable outcome, but instead in an attempt to gain an understanding of the natural world as entirely removed from the human perspective as possible, a state of mind much more readily attained in the complete absence of outside human presence.

===As punishment===
Isolation in the form of solitary confinement is a punishment or precaution used in many countries throughout the world for prisoners accused of serious crimes, those who may be at risk in the prison population, those who may commit suicide, or those unable to participate in the prison population due to sickness or injury. Research has found that solitary confinement does not deter inmates from committing further violence in prison.

Psychiatric institutions may institute full or partial isolation for certain patients, particularly the violent or subversive, in order to address their particular needs and to protect the rest of the recovering population from their influence.

==See also==
* Existential isolation
* Hermit
* Hikikomori
* Hitbodedut
* Boredom
* Loner
* Privacy regulation theory
* Solitude (painting)
==References==
==External links==
*Deresiewicz, William (March 2010). Solitude and Leadership. &quot;If you want others to follow, learn to be alone with your thoughts.&quot; &quot;The American Scholar&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6010868" start="0" end="8" title="Solitude" label="Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010868" start="24" end="41" title="Solitude" label="social withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815274" start="57" end="66" title="seclusion" label="seclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q185467" start="97" end="110" title="socialisation" label="socialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="319" end="326" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="422" end="440" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="442" end="457" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="460" end="481" title="neurological disorder" label="neurological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712607" start="491" end="522" title="circadian rhythm sleep disorder" label="circadian rhythm sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q223270" start="619" end="629" title="loneliness" label="loneliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q944333" start="784" end="803" title="sensory deprivation" label="sensory deprivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="817" end="824" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q182593" start="834" end="842" title="illusion" label="illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="863" end="867" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11101" start="946" end="961" title="sensory systems" label="sensory systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q223270" start="1148" end="1158" title="loneliness" label="loneliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303143" start="1162" end="1171" title="recluse" label="reclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="1210" end="1223" title="interpersonal relationship" label="relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1255" end="1274" title="clinical depression" label="clinical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="1337" end="1341" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="1383" end="1396" title="Enlightenment in Buddhism" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q282971" start="1398" end="1406" title="marooning" label="Marooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="1547" end="1560" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q498237" start="1565" end="1594" title="schizoid personality disorder" label="schizoid personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="1670" end="1690" title="solitary confinement" label="solitary confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155534" start="1784" end="1803" title="Emotional isolation" label="Emotional isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="1912" end="1926" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="3275" end="3284" title="Solitary confinement" label="isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="3336" end="3343" title="free will" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="3357" end="3369" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="3450" end="3464" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="3942" end="3952" title="creativity" label="creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q316147" start="4119" end="4142" title="Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi" label="Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q674328" start="5341" end="5357" title="social rejection" label="social rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="6205" end="6211" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127588" start="6514" end="6525" title="Extraversion and introversion" label="introverted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426195" start="6608" end="6626" title="Asociality" label="socially apathetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="6716" end="6722" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q937610" start="7057" end="7069" title="Edward Abbey" label="Edward Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264018" start="7102" end="7118" title="Desert Solitaire" label="Desert Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="7768" end="7788" title="solitary confinement" label="solitary confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="8181" end="8204" title="Psychiatric institution" label="Psychiatric institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q119506015" start="8442" end="8463" title="Existential isolation" label="Existential isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="8466" end="8472" title="Hermit" label="Hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q224156" start="8475" end="8485" title="Hikikomori" label="Hikikomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q958247" start="8488" end="8498" title="Hitbodedut" label="Hitbodedut"/>
<link wikidata="Q34255" start="8501" end="8508" title="Boredom" label="Boredom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310043" start="8511" end="8516" title="Loner" label="Loner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246031" start="8519" end="8544" title="Privacy regulation theory" label="Privacy regulation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17492343" start="8547" end="8566" title="Solitude (Harrison)" label="Solitude (painting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578467" start="8602" end="8622" title="William Deresiewicz" label="Deresiewicz, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788611" start="8748" end="8768" title="The American Scholar" label="The American Scholar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962511" wikidata="Q397381" url="?curid=962511" title="Alone">
<text>Alone may refer to:

* Solitude, a state of seclusion or isolation
* Loneliness, negative emotions arising from seclusion
==Film and television==
===Film===
* &quot;Alone&quot; (1931 French film), by Henri Diamant-Berger
* &quot;Alone&quot; (1931 Soviet film), by Leonid Trauberg and Grigori Kozintsev
* &quot;Alone&quot;, a 1991 short film featuring Paul Ben-Victor
* &quot;Alone&quot;, a 1997 American television film starring Ed Begley Jr.
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2001 film), a Croatian film by Lukas Nola
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2004 film), a German film
* &quot;Alone&quot;, a 2004 short film by Gregory Orr
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2007 film), a Thai horror film by Banjong Pisanthanakun and Parkpoom Wongpoom
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2008 film), a Turkish film by Çağan Irmak
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2013 film) or &quot;Phobia&quot;, an American horror film
* &quot;Alone.&quot; (2014 film), an American documentary film
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2015 Hindi film), an Indian horror film by Bhushan Patel
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2015 Kannada film), an Indian action film by JKS
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2015 Peruvian film), a Peruvian road comedy-drama film by Joanna Lombardi
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2020 horror film), an American film by Johnny Martin
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2020 thriller film), an American film by John Hyams
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2021 film), also known as &quot;Seuls&quot;, a Canadian documentary film by Paul Tom
* &quot;Alone&quot; (2023 film), an Indian Malayalam-language film by Shaji Kailas
* &quot;Alone&quot;, a 2023 Taiwanese film starring Michael Huang

===Television===
* &quot;Alone&quot; (TV series), a 2015 American reality game show
* &quot;Alone&quot; (&quot;American Crime Story&quot;), a 2018 episode
* &quot;Alone&quot; (&quot;Black Summer&quot;), a 2019 episode
* &quot;Alone&quot; (&quot;House&quot;), a 2007 episode
* &quot;Alone&quot; (&quot;The Walking Dead&quot;), a 2014 episode
* &quot;Alone&quot; (&quot;The X-Files&quot;), a 2001 episode

==Literature==
* &quot;Alone&quot; (novella), a 1903 novella by August Strindberg
* &quot;Alone&quot; (poem), an 1829 poem by Edgar Allan Poe
* &quot;&quot;, a 2020 book and podcast (since 2017) by Michelle Parise
* &quot;Alone&quot;, a 1921 travel book by Norman Douglas
* &quot;Alone&quot;, a 1938 memoir by Richard Evelyn Byrd

==Music==
===Albums===
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Bill Evans album), 1970
** &quot;Alone (Again)&quot;, by Bill Evans, 1977
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Chet Atkins album), 1973
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Eleanor McEvoy album), 2011
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Evan Brewer album), 2011
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Judy Garland album), 1957
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Modern Talking album), 1999
* &quot;Alone&quot; (The Morning After Girls album) or the title song, 2011
* &quot;Alone&quot; (The Pretenders album) or the title song, 2016
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Solitude Aeturnus album), 2006
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Vern Gosdin album) or the title song, 1989
* &quot;&quot;, by André Previn, 2007
* &quot;&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Alone&quot; (EP), by Sistar, or the title song, 2012

===Songs===
* &quot;Alone&quot; (1935 song), performed by Allan Jones and Kitty Carlisle in the Marx Brothers film &quot;A Night at the Opera&quot;
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Alan Walker song), 2016
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Armin van Buuren song), 2014
* &quot;Alone&quot; (B&#x27;z song), 1991
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Bee Gees song), 1997
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Big Country song), 1993
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Chisato Moritaka song), 1988
* &quot;Alone&quot; (The Cure song), 2024
* &quot;Alone&quot; (E.M.D. song), 2008
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Falling in Reverse song), 2013
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Halsey song), 2018
* &quot;Alone&quot; (i-Ten song), 1983; covered by Heart (1987) and Celine Dion (2008)
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Jessie Ware song), 2017
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Jimin song), 2023
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Kim Petras and Nicki Minaj song), 2023
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Lasgo song), 2001
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Lay song), 2015
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Marshmello song), 2016
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Rod Wave song), 2022
* &quot;Alone&quot; (Selah Sue song), 2014
* &quot;Alone (Why Must I Be Alone)&quot;, by the Shepherd Sisters, 1957; covered by the Four Seasons (1964)
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Alexandra Stan from &quot;Alesta&quot;, 2016
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Amorphis from &quot;Am Universum&quot;, 2001
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Anathema from &quot;The Silent Enigma&quot;, 1995
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Arcturus from &quot;La Masquerade Infernale&quot;, 1997
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Avril Lavigne, the B-side of &quot;Girlfriend&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Babylon, 2021
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Band-Maid from &quot;Brand New Maid&quot;, 2016
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Bazzi, 2016
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by the Beautiful South from &quot;Blue Is the Colour&quot;, 1996
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Ben Harper from &quot;Burn to Shine&quot;, 1999
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Blink-182; see List of songs recorded by Blink-182, 1983
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Buckcherry from &quot;Music from and Inspired by Mission: Impossible 2&quot;, 2000
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Bullet for My Valentine from &quot;Fever&quot;, 2010
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Burna Boy from &quot;Black Panther: Wakanda Forever – Music from and Inspired By&quot;, 2022
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Carly Simon from &quot;Carly Simon&quot;, 1971
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Current 93 from &quot;Imperium&quot;, 1987
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Cyrus Villanueva, 2017
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Dami Im from &quot;My Reality&quot;, 2021
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by the Damned from &quot;Music for Pleasure&quot;, 1977
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Dan Black from &quot;UN&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Dark Tranquillity from &quot;Skydancer&quot;, 1993
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Dinosaur Jr. from &quot;Hand It Over&quot;, 1997
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Doja Cat from &quot;Planet Her&quot;, 2021
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by the Gathering from &quot;Home&quot;, 2006
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by the God Machine from &quot;One Last Laugh in a Place of Dying&quot;, 1994
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Green Carnation from &quot;Acoustic Verses&quot;, 2006
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by I Prevail from &quot;Lifelines&quot;, 2016
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Jolin Tsai from &quot;Agent J&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Judas Priest from &quot;Nostradamus&quot;, 2008
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Justin Timberlake from &quot;Everything I Thought It Was&quot;, 2024
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Kelly Clarkson from &quot;Stronger&quot;, 2011
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Love Amongst Ruin from &quot;Love Amongst Ruin&quot;, 2010
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Mikuni Shimokawa, 2000
* &quot;Alone?&quot;, by Nightingale from &quot;The Breathing Shadow&quot;, 1995
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark, B-side of &quot;If You Want It&quot;, 2010
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Parkway Drive from &quot;Deep Blue&quot;, 2010
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Pearl Jam from &quot;Ten&quot;, 1991
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by the Prom Kings from &quot;The Prom Kings&quot;, 2005
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Rag&#x27;n&#x27;Bone Man from &quot;Life by Misadventure&quot;, 2021
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Sanctus Real from &quot;Fight the Tide&quot;, 2004
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Sara Evans from &quot;Stronger&quot;, 2011
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Sleeping with Sirens from &quot;Feel&quot;, 2013
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by the Spencer Davis Group from &quot;Gluggo&quot;, 1973
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Stars from &quot;There Is No Love in Fluorescent Light&quot;, 2017
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Suicidal Tendencies from &quot;Lights...Camera...Revolution!&quot;, 1990
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Tech N9ne from &quot;Boiling Point&quot;, 2012
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Toby Lightman from &quot;Bird on a Wire&quot;, 2006
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Toto from &quot;40 Trips Around the Sun&quot;, 2018
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Trevor Daniel, 2021
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Trey Songz from &quot;Passion, Pain &amp; Pleasure&quot;, 2010
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Waltari from &quot;Rare Species&quot;, 2004
* &quot;Alone&quot;, by Zebrahead from &quot;MFZB&quot;, 2003

==Places==
* Alavana, or Alone, an Ancient Roman settlement at Watercrook
* Alone, Kentucky, US, an unincorporated townsite

==Other uses==
* ALONE, a charity providing support for elderly people in Ireland
* &quot;Alone&quot; (radio series), a 2017 BBC Radio 4 series
* Alone (&quot;Saint Seiya: The Lost Canvas&quot;), a fictional character in the manga/anime &quot;Saint Seiya: The Lost Canvas&quot;
* Alone (writer), Hernán Díaz Arrieta (1891–1984), Chilean literary critic
* Amarna letter EA 282, or &quot;Alone&quot;, a 14th-century BC clay tablet at the British Museum

==See also==
* Alona (disambiguation)
* Alauna (disambiguation)
* Solo (disambiguation)
* Single (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397381" start="0" end="5" title="Alone" label="Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010868" start="23" end="31" title="Solitude" label="Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q223270" start="69" end="79" title="Loneliness" label="Loneliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489103" start="159" end="195" title="Alone (1931 French film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (1931 French film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q651553" start="223" end="259" title="Alone (1931 Soviet film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (1931 Soviet film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q746337" start="351" end="366" title="Paul Ben-Victor" label="Paul Ben-Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q464425" start="429" end="442" title="Ed Begley Jr." label="Ed Begley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4734370" start="445" end="474" title="Alone (2001 film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2001 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170777" start="508" end="537" title="Alone (2004 film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2004 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607094" start="595" end="606" title="Gregory Orr (filmmaker)" label="Gregory Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697979" start="609" end="638" title="Alone (2007 film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2007 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275371" start="708" end="737" title="Alone (2008 film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2008 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18703902" start="771" end="800" title="Alone (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2013 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363535" start="850" end="880" title="Alone. (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone.&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18621824" start="913" end="948" title="Alone (2015 Hindi film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2015 Hindi film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649931" start="991" end="1028" title="Alone (2015 Kannada film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2015 Kannada film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116521587" start="1061" end="1099" title="Alone (2015 Peruvian film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2015 Peruvian film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85973235" start="1156" end="1192" title="Alone (2020 horror film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2020 horror film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104242973" start="1230" end="1268" title="Alone (2020 thriller film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2020 thriller film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q121000208" start="1303" end="1332" title="Alone (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2021 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109801772" start="1409" end="1438" title="Alone (2023 film)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (2023 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9455506" start="1542" end="1555" title="Michael Huang" label="Michael Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351803" start="1576" end="1605" title="Alone (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201310" start="1643" end="1695" title="Alone (American Crime Story)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;American Crime Story&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56235675" start="1714" end="1758" title="Alone (Black Summer)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Black Summer&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q169054" start="1777" end="1814" title="Alone (House)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;House&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635460" start="1833" end="1881" title="Alone (The Walking Dead)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Walking Dead&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734381" start="1900" end="1943" title="Alone (The X-Files)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The X-Files&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734379" start="1978" end="2005" title="Alone (novella)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (novella)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807857" start="2045" end="2069" title="Alone (poem)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (poem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243973" start="2218" end="2232" title="Norman Douglas" label="Norman Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q210268" start="2271" end="2290" title="Richard Evelyn Byrd" label="Richard Evelyn Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839221" start="2317" end="2353" title="Alone (Bill Evans album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Bill Evans album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q928001" start="2369" end="2382" title="Alone (Again)" label="Alone (Again)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734371" start="2412" end="2449" title="Alone (Chet Atkins album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Chet Atkins album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734373" start="2458" end="2498" title="Alone (Eleanor McEvoy album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Eleanor McEvoy album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839224" start="2507" end="2544" title="Alone (Evan Brewer album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Evan Brewer album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734377" start="2553" end="2591" title="Alone (Judy Garland album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Judy Garland album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956318" start="2600" end="2640" title="Alone (Modern Talking album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Modern Talking album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734367" start="2649" end="2698" title="Alone (The Morning After Girls album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (The Morning After Girls album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452028" start="2725" end="2765" title="Alone (The Pretenders album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (The Pretenders album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734378" start="2792" end="2835" title="Alone (Solitude Aeturnus album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Solitude Aeturnus album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734383" start="2844" end="2881" title="Alone (Vern Gosdin album)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Vern Gosdin album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734376" start="2967" end="2989" title="Alone (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734369" start="3041" end="3070" title="Alone (1935 song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (1935 song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949628" start="3177" end="3213" title="Alone (Alan Walker song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Alan Walker song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108174551" start="3222" end="3263" title="Alone (Armin van Buuren song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Armin van Buuren song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734374" start="3272" end="3305" title="Alone (B&amp;#x27;z song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (B&amp;#x27;z song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734372" start="3314" end="3347" title="Alone (Bee Gees song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Bee Gees song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80357818" start="3356" end="3392" title="Alone (Big Country song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Big Country song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371838" start="3401" end="3442" title="Alone (Chisato Moritaka song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Chisato Moritaka song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130369220" start="3451" end="3484" title="Alone (The Cure song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (The Cure song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734375" start="3493" end="3524" title="Alone (E.M.D. song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (E.M.D. song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362720" start="3533" end="3576" title="Alone (Falling in Reverse song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Falling in Reverse song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q57903094" start="3585" end="3616" title="Alone (Halsey song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Halsey song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097859" start="3625" end="3655" title="Alone (i-Ten song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (i-Ten song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48782182" start="3712" end="3748" title="Alone (Jessie Ware song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Jessie Ware song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123553933" start="3757" end="3787" title="Alone (Jimin song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Jimin song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117818254" start="3796" end="3847" title="Alone (Kim Petras and Nicki Minaj song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Kim Petras and Nicki Minaj song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352336" start="3856" end="3886" title="Alone (Lasgo song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Lasgo song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48726406" start="3895" end="3923" title="Alone (Lay song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Lay song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452023" start="3932" end="3967" title="Alone (Marshmello song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Marshmello song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113903678" start="3976" end="4009" title="Alone (Rod Wave song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Rod Wave song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022998" start="4018" end="4052" title="Alone (Selah Sue song)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (Selah Sue song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734384" start="4067" end="4094" title="Alone (Why Must I Be Alone)" label="Alone (Why Must I Be Alone)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22914026" start="4218" end="4224" title="Alesta" label="Alesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q451527" start="4281" end="4293" title="Am Universum" label="Am Universum"/>
<link wikidata="Q584705" start="4350" end="4367" title="The Silent Enigma" label="The Silent Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755017" start="4424" end="4447" title="La Masquerade Infernale" label="La Masquerade Infernale"/>
<link wikidata="Q738474" start="4519" end="4529" title="Girlfriend (Avril Lavigne song)" label="Girlfriend"/>
<link wikidata="Q31179151" start="4566" end="4573" title="Babylon (singer)" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24081278" start="4625" end="4639" title="Brand New Maid" label="Brand New Maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48720231" start="4676" end="4681" title="Bazzi (singer)" label="Bazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929268" start="4743" end="4761" title="Blue Is the Colour" label="Blue Is the Colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267676" start="4820" end="4833" title="Burn to Shine (album)" label="Burn to Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247692" start="4885" end="4920" title="List of songs recorded by Blink-182" label="List of songs recorded by Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4973" end="5021" title="Music from and Inspired by Mission: Impossible 2" label="Music from and Inspired by Mission: Impossible 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410217" start="5093" end="5098" title="Fever (Bullet for My Valentine album)" label="Fever"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5156" end="5215" title="Black Panther: Wakanda Forever – Music from and Inspired By" label="Black Panther: Wakanda Forever – Music from and Inspired By"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660196" start="5275" end="5286" title="Carly Simon (album)" label="Carly Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007048" start="5345" end="5353" title="Imperium (Current 93 album)" label="Imperium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5390" end="5406" title="Cyrus Villanueva#Singles" label="Cyrus Villanueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q109229151" start="5456" end="5466" title="My Reality" label="My Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130719" start="5525" end="5543" title="Music for Pleasure (The Damned album)" label="Music for Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052359" start="5601" end="5603" title="UN (album)" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753373" start="5669" end="5678" title="Skydancer (Dark Tranquillity album)" label="Skydancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647121" start="5739" end="5751" title="Hand It Over" label="Hand It Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q106474259" start="5808" end="5818" title="Planet Her" label="Planet Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625909" start="5880" end="5884" title="Home (The Gathering album)" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092783" start="5948" end="5982" title="One Last Laugh in a Place of Dying" label="One Last Laugh in a Place of Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033324" start="6046" end="6061" title="Acoustic Verses" label="Acoustic Verses"/>
<link wikidata="Q25097124" start="6119" end="6128" title="Lifelines (I Prevail album)" label="Lifelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q713629" start="6187" end="6194" title="Agent J (album)" label="Agent J"/>
<link wikidata="Q838273" start="6255" end="6266" title="Nostradamus (album)" label="Nostradamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124356647" start="6332" end="6359" title="Everything I Thought It Was" label="Everything I Thought It Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056686" start="6422" end="6430" title="Stronger (Kelly Clarkson album)" label="Stronger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13570513" start="6496" end="6513" title="Love Amongst Ruin (album)" label="Love Amongst Ruin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6550" end="6566" title="Mikuni Shimokawa#Singles" label="Mikuni Shimokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719937" start="6621" end="6641" title="The Breathing Shadow" label="The Breathing Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991021" start="6729" end="6743" title="If You Want It" label="If You Want It"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293673" start="6805" end="6814" title="Deep Blue (Parkway Drive album)" label="Deep Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q383227" start="6872" end="6875" title="Ten (Pearl Jam album)" label="Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758516" start="6938" end="6952" title="The Prom Kings" label="The Prom Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833853" start="7025" end="7045" title="Life by Misadventure" label="Life by Misadventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447828" start="7106" end="7120" title="Fight the Tide" label="Fight the Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624635" start="7179" end="7187" title="Stronger (Sara Evans album)" label="Stronger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13392535" start="7256" end="7260" title="Feel (Sleeping with Sirens album)" label="Feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958288" start="7332" end="7338" title="Gluggo" label="Gluggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39059360" start="7392" end="7429" title="There Is No Love in Fluorescent Light" label="There Is No Love in Fluorescent Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q941656" start="7497" end="7526" title="Lights...Camera...Revolution!" label="Lights...Camera...Revolution!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908873" start="7584" end="7597" title="Boiling Point (EP)" label="Boiling Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915954" start="7659" end="7673" title="Bird on a Wire (Toby Lightman album)" label="Bird on a Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203999" start="7726" end="7749" title="40 Trips Around the Sun" label="40 Trips Around the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738417" start="7786" end="7799" title="Trevor Daniel (singer)" label="Trevor Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278951" start="7852" end="7880" title="Passion, Pain &amp;amp; Pleasure" label="Passion, Pain &amp;amp; Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419755" start="7936" end="7948" title="Rare Species (album)" label="Rare Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553247" start="8006" end="8010" title="MFZB" label="MFZB"/>
<link wikidata="Q18654686" start="8037" end="8044" title="Alavana" label="Alavana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55012933" start="8100" end="8115" title="Alone, Kentucky" label="Alone, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824274" start="8166" end="8171" title="ALONE" label="ALONE"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740994" start="8233" end="8265" title="Alone (radio series)" label="&amp;quot;Alone&amp;quot; (radio series)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8295" end="8343" title="Alone (Saint Seiya: The Lost Canvas)" label="Alone (&amp;quot;Saint Seiya: The Lost Canvas&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9003221" start="8429" end="8443" title="Alone (writer)" label="Alone (writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002772" start="8504" end="8524" title="Amarna letter EA 282" label="Amarna letter EA 282"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734354" start="8616" end="8638" title="Alona (disambiguation)" label="Alona (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708855" start="8641" end="8664" title="Alauna (disambiguation)" label="Alauna (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q82583" start="8667" end="8688" title="Solo (disambiguation)" label="Solo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q347210" start="8691" end="8714" title="Single (disambiguation)" label="Single (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962514" wikidata="Q3815274" url="?curid=962514" title="Seclusion">
<text>Seclusion is the act of secluding (i.e. isolating from society), the state of being secluded, or a place that facilitates it (a secluded place). A person, couple, or larger group may go to a secluded place for privacy or peace and quiet. The seclusion of an individual is called solitude.

==Restrictions on the seclusion of a man and a woman==

In some cases where there are legal, religious or social restrictions on two people having physical intimacy, there may be restrictions on being together in a secluded place. For example, under traditional schools of sharia or Islamic law, a man and a woman who are not married and not mahram, may be forbidden to be together in a house, a bathroom, or a secluded place. A man and woman could be in a secluded area for work purposes, just talking, or anything that does not allow them to pass their limits. See also yichud—a similar rule in Judaism.

==As a therapy==

Seclusion may be used as a control tactic in psychological treatment settings. Seclusion of an agitated person in a quiet room free of stimulation may help de-escalate a situation which may be dangerous to the agitated person or those around them.

In relation to administering medications, seclusion is a tactic devised for non-compliant patients. Methods used to restrict the freedom of such patients include medication (including chemical restraint), physical restraint, and behavioral therapy.

Seclusion must only be used in the best interest of the patient, it must only be used as a last resort method, and it must not be prolonged as a form of punishment on the patient. When it is otherwise used, it may be considered a form of solitary confinement. In Ireland, The Mental Health Commission governs seclusion in psychiatric institutions. The act states that people can only be placed in seclusion if
* it prevents them from hurting themselves and/or others
* and it complies with the rules set out by the commission.

To prevent contagious disease transmission self-isolation is used as a public health measure.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3815274" start="0" end="9" title="Seclusion" label="Seclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815274" start="128" end="142" title="Seclusion" label="secluded place"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="210" end="217" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271903" start="221" end="236" title="Quiet Time" label="peace and quiet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010868" start="279" end="287" title="solitude" label="solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190058" start="437" end="454" title="physical intimacy" label="physical intimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="563" end="569" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="573" end="578" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="581" end="584" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506934" start="632" end="638" title="mahram" label="mahram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917972" start="862" end="868" title="yichud" label="yichud"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="960" end="973" title="psychological" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1240" end="1262" title="non-compliant patients" label="non-compliant patients"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090495" start="1348" end="1366" title="chemical restraint" label="chemical restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q357003" start="1369" end="1387" title="physical restraint" label="physical restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q16262180" start="1393" end="1411" title="behavioral therapy" label="behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="1652" end="1672" title="solitary confinement" label="solitary confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="1736" end="1760" title="psychiatric institutions" label="psychiatric institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995419" start="1953" end="1971" title="contagious disease" label="contagious disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1985" end="1999" title="Isolation (health care)#Self-isolation" label="self-isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="2013" end="2026" title="public health" label="public health"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962515" wikidata="Q1691004" url="?curid=962515" title="Joby Talbot">
<text>Joby Talbot (born 25 August 1971) is a British composer. He has written for a wide variety of purposes, with a broad range of styles, including instrumental and vocal concert music, film and television scores, pop arrangements and works for dance. He is known, to sometimes disparate audiences, for quite different works.

Prominent compositions include the a cappella choral works &quot;The Wishing Tree&quot; (2002) and &quot;Path of Miracles&quot; (2005); orchestral works &quot;Sneaker Wave&quot; (2004), &quot;Tide Harmonic&quot; (2009), &quot;Worlds, Stars, Systems, Infinity&quot; (2012) and &quot;Meniscus&quot; (2012); the theme and score for the popular BBC Two comedy series &quot;The League of Gentlemen&quot; (1999–2002); silent film scores &quot;The Lodger&quot; (1999) and &quot;The Dying Swan&quot; (2002) for the British Film Institute; film scores &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; (2005), &quot;Son of Rambow&quot; (2007) and &quot;Penelope&quot; (2008).

Works for dance include shorter works &quot;Chroma&quot; (2006), &quot;Genus&quot; (2007), &quot;Fool&#x27;s Paradise&quot; (2007), and &quot;Chamber Symphony&quot; (2012); and four full-length narrative ballet scores, commissioned by The Royal Ballet, the National Ballet of Canada and The Australian Ballet, &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot; (2011, revived 2012 and 2013), &quot;The Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot; (2014), &quot;Like Water for Chocolate&quot; (2022), and &quot;Oscar&quot; (2024).

Talbot premiered his first opera in January 2015 with Dallas Opera, a one-act work entitled &quot;Everest&quot; to a libretto by Gene Scheer, which follows three of the climbers involved in the 1996 Mount Everest disaster.

==Early life==
Talbot was born in August 1971 in Wimbledon, London. He grew up in Mitcham, South London, and attended King&#x27;s College School, Wimbledon, on a music scholarship from the age of eight. Talbot played the piano and oboe, studied composition privately with Brian Elias and after receiving a Bachelor of Music from Royal Holloway University of London, he completed a Master of Music (Composition) at Guildhall School of Music and Drama under Simon Bainbridge.

==Early career and concert works==
Though classically trained, Talbot&#x27;s early career centred on film and television scores and pop arrangements. His work as arranger and keyboardist with Neil Hannon&#x27;s band The Divine Comedy continued from 1993 until 2002. He also played saxophone on the song &quot;Time of Legends&quot; for gothic rock band NOSFERATU, appearing on their 1993 single &quot;Savage Kiss&quot; and their 1994 album &quot;The Prophecy&quot;. In 1999, following some minor television scoring jobs, Talbot was commissioned to write the theme and score for BBC Two&#x27;s comedy series &quot;The League of Gentlemen&quot;, for which he was awarded the Royal Television Society Award for Best Title Music and which he would continue to score throughout its three series and film, &quot;The League of Gentlemen&#x27;s Apocalypse&quot; (2005). Talbot was commissioned, also in 1999, by the British Film Institute to provide a new score for Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s 1927 silent film &quot;The Lodger&quot;, and again in 2002 the BFI had Talbot write a piano trio to accompany Evgenii Bauer&#x27;s &quot;The Dying Swan&quot; (1917).

Concert works of this period include &quot;Luminescence&quot; (1997) for the BBC Philharmonic; &quot;Falling&quot; (1998), written for cellist Phillip Sheppard; &quot;Incandescence&quot; (1998) for percussion and orchestra, commissioned by the Brunel Ensemble and later toured by Evelyn Glennie and the London Sinfonietta; String Quartet No. 1 (1999) and No. 2 (2002), for the Duke Quartet; the saxophone quartet &quot;Blue Cell&quot; (2001) for the Apollo Saxophone Quartet; and &quot;Minus 1500&quot; (2001) for bassoon, percussion, strings and piano, commissioned by the London Sinfonietta. During this time, Talbot also completed a popular reworking of Portishead&#x27;s &#x27;All Mine&#x27; for The Divine Comedy&#x27;s contribution to Tom Jones&#x27; covers album &quot;Reload&quot; (1999).

In 2002, Talbot wrote &quot;The Wishing Tree&quot;, a short a cappella madrigal setting a text by Kathleen Jamie, for The King&#x27;s Singers, commissioned by the ensemble and The Proms as part of the Queen&#x27;s Golden Jubilee. Subsequent to this, Talbot was asked by Nigel Short, artistic director of chamber choir Tenebrae, to create a work that described the ancient Christian pilgrimage route across northern Spain to Santiago de Compostela. The resultant piece was the hour-long, a cappella journey &quot;Path of Miracles&quot;, setting multilingual texts collated by Robert Dickinson, which has steadily gained popularity with vocal ensembles and audiences.

&quot;Sneaker Wave&quot; (2004) for the BBC National Orchestra of Wales was Talbot&#x27;s second Proms commission, and also in that year, he was appointed Classic FM&#x27;s inaugural Composer-in-Residence, a project which involved the composition of one short piece for small ensemble per month and resulted in the album &quot;Once Around the Sun&quot; (2005 Sony BMG). In 2006, Talbot wrote the trumpet concerto &quot;Desolation Wilderness&quot; for soloist Alison Balsom and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic and Turku Philharmonic Orchestras. A third work for the Proms was Talbot&#x27;s 2011 arrangement of Purcell&#x27;s Chacony in G Minor for the BBC Symphony Orchestra. The next year, Talbot was commissioned by the Philharmonia Orchestra to write an eighth movement to Holst&#x27;s &quot;The Planets&quot;, as part of their interactive installation &quot;Universe of Sound&quot; at the Science Museum, London. The work, entitled &quot;Worlds, Stars, Systems, Infinity&quot; premiered at The Royal Festival Hall, London, in 2012, as part of the 2012 London Cultural Olympiad.

==Works for dance==
===Collaborations with Wayne McGregor===
Among the pieces composed as part of Talbot&#x27;s Classic FM residency are &quot;A Yellow Disc Rising from the Sea&quot;, &quot;Transit of Venus&quot; and &quot;Cloudpark&quot;, all of which went on to form part of Talbot&#x27;s score for the Royal Ballet production &quot;Chroma&quot; (2005), his first collaboration with current Royal Ballet Resident Choreographer Wayne McGregor C.B.E. McGregor had heard Talbot&#x27;s 2004 orchestral work &quot;Hovercraft&quot; and approached him about creating a larger score around this. The remaining elements of the &quot;Chroma&quot; score are the tracks &#x27;Aluminum&#x27;, &#x27;Blue Orchid&#x27; and &#x27;Hardest Button to Button&#x27; from Talbot&#x27;s 2005 instrumental covers album of songs by The White Stripes, entitled &quot;Aluminium&quot;, a project conceived and executed in partnership with XL Recordings founder Richard Russell, and Talbot&#x27;s long-time collaborator, the conductor and orchestrator Christopher Austin. &quot;Chroma&quot; won the South Bank Show Award for Dance and an Olivier Award for Best New Dance Production, and continues to be staged by numerous companies internationally, including the Bolshoi Ballet, San Francisco Ballet, Royal Danish Ballet, National Ballet of Canada, Boston Ballet, The Australian Ballet and Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.

Following &quot;Chroma&quot;, McGregor and Talbot collaborated on two further works, &quot;Genus&quot; (2007) for the Paris Opera Ballet, for which Talbot produced an electro-acoustic score with LA-based electronic musician Deru; and &quot;Entity&quot; (2008) for McGregor&#x27;s company Random Dance, a score divided between electro-acoustic string works by Talbot, and an electronic score by Jon Hopkins. Talbot&#x27;s half was adapted from his string quartet &quot;Manual Override&quot;, originally commissioned in 2007 by Singapore&#x27;s T&#x27;ang Quartet; and from the 2005 cello work &quot;Motion Detector&quot;, written for cellist Maya Beiser.

===Collaborations with Christopher Wheeldon===
Subsequent to &quot;Chroma&quot;, Talbot became increasingly involved in projects for dance, adapting his 2002 score for Evgenii Bauer&#x27;s silent film &quot;The Dying Swan&quot; to score &quot;Fool&#x27;s Paradise&quot;, a short 2007 work devised by choreographer Christopher Wheeldon for his company Morphoses and later integrated into the repertoire of The Royal Ballet.

When Wheeldon was appointed to choreograph The Royal Ballet&#x27;s first new, full-length narrative ballet commissioned in almost 20 years, he approached Talbot to write the score. &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;, commissioned jointly by the Royal and the National Ballet of Canada, premiered at the Royal Opera House Covent Garden on 28 February 2011, and at the Four Seasons Performing Arts Centre, Toronto, on 4 June 2011. The production has had its third consecutive run with The Royal Ballet in March 2013 and has thus far been successfully toured to Los Angeles and Washington D.C. by the National Ballet of Canada. &quot;The New York Times&quot; stated in 2011: &quot;Mr. Talbot&#x27;s score is the trump card for &quot;Alice&quot;.&quot; The 2012 and 2013 productions received very good to excellent reviews. Talbot was praised for his &quot;sublimely witty score, which seems to use every instrument to match the sounds from the pit to the action on the stage, creating a lush soundscape that drives the action.&quot; A suite from &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;, along with the score from the duo&#x27;s first collaboration &quot;Fool&#x27;s Paradise&quot;, was recorded in London in November 2012 by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra under Christopher Austin and released in January 2013.

In May 2013, Wheeldon choreographed sections of an orchestral version of Talbot&#x27;s 2009 work &quot;Tide Harmonic&quot; for Pacific Northwest Ballet, under the same title.

In London in April 2014, the pair premiered a second full-length narrative work for The Royal Ballet and National Ballet of Canada, an adaptation of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;The Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot;. Talbot commented that he spent two years thinking about &#x27;nothing else.&#x27; The project proved especially challenging as he was composing music to be played by unusual instruments and the contrasting nature of each act from one to three made it feel he had to &#x27;start again&#x27; twice more. The critical reception was favourable with five stars from The Times and The Telegraph and four from the &quot;Financial Times&quot; and &quot;The Guardian&quot;, which called the work &#x27;a ballet to keep&#x27;. &quot;The Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot; was premiered in North America by the National Ballet of Canada in Toronto in November 2015 and returned to Covent Garden the following year. With some amendment it was performed again at the Royal Opera House in 2018.

In 2023 Talbot received an Ivor Novello Award nomination at The Ivors Classical Awards 2023. &quot;Like Water for Chocolate&quot; was nominated for Best Stage Work.

The ballet &quot;Oscar&quot;, based on the life of Oscar Wilde, was premiered by The Australian Ballet at the Regent Theatre, Melbourne in September 2024.

===&quot;Eau&quot; and &quot;Chamber&quot;===
French choreographers Carolyn Carlson and Medhi Walerski have both created works to specially commissioned scores by Talbot. Carlson&#x27;s production &quot;Eau&quot; for CCN Roubaix and the Orchestre National de Lille had its premiere in Lille in 2008, and Talbot later adapted the score as &quot;Tide Harmonic&quot;, a five-movement chamber work released on Signum Classics in 2011. Walerski&#x27;s &quot;Chamber&quot; was choreographed to Talbot&#x27;s Chamber Symphony (2012) for Netherlands Dance Theatre and the Norwegian National Opera and Ballet, and premiered in The Hague in October 2012. The piece formed part of a worldwide programming focus on the 100th anniversary of Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;The Rite of Spring&quot; (1913).

==Screen scores and arrangements==
Talbot has continued to write for film and television, with notable scores including &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; (Garth Jennings, 2005); &quot;Penelope&quot; (Mark Palansky, 2006); &quot;Son of Rambow&quot; (Garth Jennings, 2007); &quot;Is Anybody There?&quot; (John Crowley, 2008); &quot;Franklyn&quot; (Gerald McMorrow, 2008); &quot;Burke and Hare&quot; (John Landis, 2010); and &quot;Hunky Dory&quot; (Marc Evans, 2011), for which Talbot developed orchestral arrangements of pop songs with the film&#x27;s young actors and musicians, alongside writing the largely electronic score. Following his work on BBC Two comedy series &quot;The League of Gentlemen&quot; (1999–2002), Talbot wrote the theme and, with Jeremy Holland-Smith, the score for League co-creators and actors Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton&#x27;s new series, &quot;Psychoville&quot; (2011–12). Further work for the BBC has included the theme and (with Jeremy Holland-Smith and Richard Chester) score for the popular children&#x27;s series &quot;Tracy Beaker Returns&quot; (2010–12). Talbot also wrote the theme for the BBC One drama series &quot;Frankie&quot;.

As an arranger, Talbot has worked with numerous contemporary pop musicians, including Paul McCartney, Tom Jones, Air, Charlotte Gainsbourg, Neil Hannon and The Divine Comedy, Travis, and Ute Lemper, and with record producer Nigel Godrich. Talbot himself acted as producer as well as arranger on the XL Recordings album &quot;Aluminium&quot;, a limited-edition collection of songs by The White Stripes, arranged by Talbot and Christopher Austin for chamber orchestra.

In 2016, Talbot provided the score for animated movie &quot;Sing&quot; and received an Annie Award for Outstanding Achievement, Music in an Animated Feature Production.

==Notable works==
* &quot;Time of Legends&quot; (1994), hired on a session basis to play saxophone on this Nosferatu song which appeared on their album &quot;The Prophecy&quot;
* &quot;Luminescence&quot; (1997), commissioned by the BBC Philharmonic Orchestra
* &quot;The Lodger&quot; (1999), a new score for Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s 1927 silent film, commissioned by the British Film Institute
* &quot;The League of Gentlemen&quot; (1999–2002), television soundtrack
* &quot;The Dying Swan&quot; (2002), a new score for Evgenii Bauer&#x27;s 1917 silent film, commissioned by the British Film Institute
* &quot;Hovercraft&quot; (2004), commissioned by the Kensington Symphony Orchestra and later incorporated into the score for &quot;Chroma&quot;
* &quot;Path of Miracles&quot; (2005), an a cappella choral work commissioned by Tenebrae
* &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; (2005), film soundtrack
* &quot;Chroma&quot; (2006), an arrangement of existing works commissioned by The Royal Ballet and choreographed by Wayne McGregor
* &quot;Desolation Wilderness&quot; (2006), a trumpet concerto commissioned by the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic and Turku Philharmonic Orchestras, soloist Alison Balsom
* &quot;Fool&#x27;s Paradise&quot; (2007), an adaptation of Talbot&#x27;s 2002 score for Evgenii Bauer&#x27;s silent film &quot;The Dying Swan&quot;, commissioned by Sadler&#x27;s Wells Theatre for Morphoses&#x27; &quot;Fool&#x27;s Paradise&quot;, choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon.
* &quot;Genus&quot; (2007), an electro-acoustic score written with electronic musician Deru, commissioned by the Paris Opera Ballet and choreographed by Wayne McGregor
* &quot;Tide Harmonic&quot; (2010), originally commissioned by CCN Roubaix for the dance work &quot;Eau&quot; (2008) by Carolyn Carlson
* Chacony in G Minor (after Purcell) (2011), commissioned by the BBC Symphony Orchestra and The Proms
* &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot; (2011), commissioned by The Royal Ballet and National Ballet of Canada, choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon
* &quot;Worlds, Stars, Systems, Infinity&quot; (2012), commissioned by the Philharmonia Orchestra for their 2012 interactive installation &quot;Universe of Sound&quot;
* Chamber Symphony (2012), commissioned by Nederlands Dans Theater and Het Residentie Orkest, choreographed as &quot;Chamber&quot; by Medhi Walerski
* &quot;Meniscus&quot; (2012), commissioned by the National Centre for the Performing Arts, Beijing
* &quot;The Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot; (2014), commissioned by The Royal Ballet and National Ballet of Canada, choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon
* &quot;Everest&quot;, one-act opera 
* &quot;Sing&quot; (2016), film soundtrack
* &quot;Sing 2&quot; (2021), film soundtrack
* &quot;Wonka&quot; (2023), film soundtrack

==Recordings==
* &quot;The Dying Swan, Music for 1 to 7 Players&quot; (2002, Black Box Music), Talbot&#x27;s score for Evgenii Bauer&#x27;s 1917 silent film, along with a selection of early works
* &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; (2005, Hollywood Records Inc), film soundtrack
* &quot;Once Around the Sun&quot; (2005, Sony BMG), the collected works written during Talbot&#x27;s 2004 Classic FM residency, along with other short works
* &quot;Path of Miracles&quot; (2005, Signum Classics), an a cappella work descriptive of the ancient Christian pilgrimage route across northern Spain to Santiago de Compostela, in Galicia
* &quot;Aluminium&quot; (2006, XL Recordings), Talbot&#x27;s chamber arrangements of songs by The White Stripes
* &quot;Arctic Tale&quot; (2007, Bulletproof), film soundtrack
* &quot;Genus&quot; (2007, Dear Oh Dear!/Ant-Zen), Talbot and Deru&#x27;s original electro-acoustic score for choreographer Wayne McGregor&#x27;s work of the same name, for the Paris Opera Ballet
* &quot;Son of Rambow&quot; (2008, Bulletproof), film soundtrack
* &quot;Penelope&quot; (2008, Lakeshore Records), film soundtrack
* &quot;Franklyn&quot; (2009, Silva Screen Records), film soundtrack
* &quot;Tide Harmonic&quot; (2011, Signum Classics), originally written for choreographer Carolyn Carlson&#x27;s work &quot;Eau&quot;, Tide Harmonic is a five-movement chamber work describing the different states and functions of water
* &quot;Hunky Dory&quot; (2012, Decca Records), film soundtrack
* Suite from &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot; (2012, Signum Classics), the score for Christopher Wheeldon&#x27;s full-length narrative ballet, for The Royal Ballet and National Ballet of Canada. Includes the score from another Wheeldon collaboration, &quot;Fool&#x27;s Paradise&quot;. Performed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra under Christopher Austin.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1691004" start="0" end="11" title="Joby Talbot" label="Joby Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="47" end="55" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161433" start="428" end="444" title="Path of Miracles" label="Path of Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="664" end="671" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573292" start="692" end="715" title="The League of Gentlemen" label="The League of Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="760" end="770" title="The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog" label="The Lodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334530" start="794" end="808" title="The Dying Swan" label="The Dying Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="830" end="852" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q836821" start="872" end="913" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (film)" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q708831" start="934" end="947" title="Son of Rambow" label="Son of Rambow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074032" start="971" end="979" title="Penelope (2006 film)" label="Penelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113706" start="1039" end="1045" title="Chroma (ballet)" label="Chroma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1092" end="1112" title="List of Morphoses productions#Fools.E2.80.99 Paradise" label="Fool&amp;#x27;s Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="1230" end="1246" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881270" start="1252" end="1277" title="National Ballet of Canada" label="National Ballet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872164" start="1282" end="1303" title="The Australian Ballet" label="The Australian Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725679" start="1311" end="1348" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland (ballet)" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149693" start="1392" end="1414" title="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale (ballet)" label="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q130316651" start="1484" end="1489" title="Oscar (ballet)" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354550" start="1559" end="1571" title="Dallas Opera" label="Dallas Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q55409769" start="1603" end="1610" title="Everest (opera)" label="Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531435" start="1634" end="1645" title="Gene Scheer" label="Gene Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517252" start="1699" end="1726" title="1996 Mount Everest disaster" label="1996 Mount Everest disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="1778" end="1795" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q687798" start="1811" end="1818" title="Mitcham" label="Mitcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410900" start="1847" end="1873" title="King&amp;#x27;s College School" label="King&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963671" start="2001" end="2012" title="Brian Elias" label="Brian Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202039" start="2058" end="2093" title="Royal Holloway, University of London" label="Royal Holloway University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401337" start="2110" end="2125" title="Master of Music" label="Master of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419737" start="2143" end="2178" title="Guildhall School of Music and Drama" label="Guildhall School of Music and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518215" start="2185" end="2201" title="Simon Bainbridge" label="Simon Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916110" start="2396" end="2407" title="Neil Hannon" label="Neil Hannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543686" start="2420" end="2437" title="The Divine Comedy (band)" label="The Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="2781" end="2788" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573292" start="2816" end="2839" title="The League of Gentlemen" label="The League of Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446049" start="2876" end="2906" title="Royal Television Society" label="Royal Television Society Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489821" start="3009" end="3050" title="The League of Gentlemen&amp;#x27;s Apocalypse" label="The League of Gentlemen&amp;#x27;s Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="3111" end="3133" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3208" end="3218" title="The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog" label="The Lodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334530" start="3322" end="3336" title="The Dying Swan" label="The Dying Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q795551" start="3429" end="3445" title="BBC Philharmonic" label="BBC Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184373" start="3495" end="3511" title="Philip Sheppard (musician)" label="Phillip Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q239275" start="3632" end="3646" title="Evelyn Glennie" label="Evelyn Glennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q775490" start="3655" end="3673" title="London Sinfonietta" label="London Sinfonietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413674" start="3729" end="3741" title="Duke Quartet" label="Duke Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191352" start="4009" end="4019" title="Portishead (band)" label="Portishead"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="4093" end="4102" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279062" start="4128" end="4134" title="Reload (Tom Jones album)" label="Reload"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376757" start="4248" end="4262" title="Kathleen Jamie" label="Kathleen Jamie"/>
<link wikidata="Q917972" start="4268" end="4291" title="King&amp;#x27;s Singers" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="4326" end="4335" title="The Proms" label="The Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579602" start="4347" end="4378" title="Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="the Queen&amp;#x27;s Golden Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699675" start="4468" end="4476" title="Tenebrae (choir)" label="Tenebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q205136" start="4522" end="4548" title="Pilgrimage Church of St James" label="Christian pilgrimage route"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="4574" end="4596" title="Santiago de compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="4637" end="4647" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347575" start="4857" end="4888" title="BBC National Orchestra of Wales" label="BBC National Orchestra of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128150" start="4972" end="4982" title="Classic FM (UK)" label="Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q451849" start="5276" end="5289" title="Alison Balsom" label="Alison Balsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818979" start="5298" end="5326" title="Royal Liverpool Philharmonic" label="Royal Liverpool Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082994" start="5331" end="5359" title="Turku Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Turku Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="5427" end="5434" title="Purcell" label="Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q795630" start="5469" end="5491" title="BBC Symphony Orchestra" label="BBC Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046309" start="5539" end="5561" title="Philharmonia Orchestra" label="Philharmonia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="5593" end="5598" title="Gustav Holst" label="Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q303508" start="5612" end="5623" title="The Planets" label="The Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="5710" end="5732" title="Science Museum, London" label="Science Museum, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q647390" start="5811" end="5834" title="Royal Festival Hall" label="The Royal Festival Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="5868" end="5879" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5880" end="5897" title="Cultural Olympiad#Cultural Olympiad" label="Cultural Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553119" start="6329" end="6343" title="Wayne McGregor" label="Wayne McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="6709" end="6726" title="The White Stripes" label="The White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737370" start="6743" end="6752" title="Aluminium (album)" label="Aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="6813" end="6826" title="XL Recordings" label="XL Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328786" start="6835" end="6850" title="Richard Russell (XL Recordings)" label="Richard Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111876" start="6925" end="6943" title="Christopher Austin" label="Christopher Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989403" start="6972" end="6993" title="South Bank Show" label="South Bank Show Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="7011" end="7024" title="Olivier Award" label="Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q891586" start="7136" end="7150" title="Bolshoi Ballet" label="Bolshoi Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150942" start="7152" end="7172" title="San Francisco Ballet" label="San Francisco Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252864" start="7174" end="7193" title="Royal Danish Ballet" label="Royal Danish Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881270" start="7195" end="7220" title="National Ballet of Canada" label="National Ballet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642950" start="7222" end="7235" title="Boston Ballet" label="Boston Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872164" start="7237" end="7258" title="The Australian Ballet" label="The Australian Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q449026" start="7263" end="7297" title="Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater" label="Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="7418" end="7436" title="Paris Opera Ballet" label="Paris Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889429" start="7524" end="7528" title="Deru" label="Deru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553119" start="7588" end="7600" title="Random Dance Company" label="Random Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q903592" start="7694" end="7705" title="Jon Hopkins" label="Jon Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667725" start="7843" end="7861" title="T&amp;#x27;ang Quartet" label="T&amp;#x27;ang Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4081184" start="7941" end="7952" title="Maya Beiser" label="Maya Beiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688645" start="8123" end="8136" title="Evgenii Bauer" label="Evgenii Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966661" start="8269" end="8289" title="Christopher Wheeldon" label="Christopher Wheeldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966661" start="8306" end="8315" title="Morphoses" label="Morphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725679" start="8566" end="8603" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland (ballet)" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="8697" end="8728" title="Royal Opera House" label="Royal Opera House Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614377" start="8761" end="8796" title="Four Seasons Centre" label="Four Seasons Performing Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9025" end="9043" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q856125" start="9630" end="9658" title="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122574" start="9842" end="9866" title="Pacific Northwest Ballet" label="Pacific Northwest Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q743194" start="10065" end="10087" title="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="10508" end="10523" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10540" end="10552" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="10894" end="10912" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q130316651" start="11050" end="11055" title="Oscar (ballet)" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="11084" end="11095" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308110" start="11143" end="11157" title="Regent Theatre, Melbourne" label="Regent Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="11159" end="11168" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q435185" start="11257" end="11272" title="Carolyn Carlson (artist)" label="Carolyn Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355309" start="11426" end="11453" title="Orchestre National de Lille" label="Orchestre National de Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="11474" end="11479" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810961" start="11719" end="11744" title="Netherlands Dance Theatre" label="Netherlands Dance Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186798" start="11753" end="11788" title="Norwegian National Opera and Ballet" label="Norwegian National Opera and Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="11917" end="11932" title="Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="11946" end="11964" title="The Rite of Spring" label="The Rite of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q836821" start="12106" end="12147" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (film)" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q598683" start="12155" end="12169" title="Garth Jennings" label="Garth Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074032" start="12184" end="12192" title="Penelope (2006 film)" label="Penelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769142" start="12200" end="12213" title="Mark Palansky" label="Mark Palansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q708831" start="12228" end="12241" title="Son of Rambow" label="Son of Rambow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177246" start="12278" end="12295" title="Is Anybody There?" label="Is Anybody There?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227781" start="12303" end="12315" title="John Crowley (director)" label="John Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q164224" start="12330" end="12338" title="Franklyn" label="Franklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760867" start="12346" end="12361" title="Gerald McMorrow" label="Gerald McMorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016369" start="12376" end="12390" title="Burke &amp;amp; Hare (2010 film)" label="Burke and Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q51564" start="12398" end="12409" title="John Landis" label="John Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943628" start="12428" end="12438" title="Hunky Dory (film)" label="Hunky Dory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892607" start="12446" end="12456" title="Marc Evans" label="Marc Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306585" start="12818" end="12834" title="Reece Shearsmith" label="Reece Shearsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613581" start="12839" end="12854" title="Steve Pemberton" label="Steve Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107270" start="12880" end="12891" title="Psychoville" label="Psychoville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12930" end="12933" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235094" start="13060" end="13080" title="Tracy Beaker Returns" label="Tracy Beaker Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="13134" end="13141" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490897" start="13161" end="13168" title="Frankie (TV series)" label="Frankie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="13263" end="13277" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="13279" end="13288" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q318452" start="13290" end="13293" title="Air (French band)" label="Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q276005" start="13295" end="13315" title="Charlotte Gainsbourg" label="Charlotte Gainsbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916110" start="13317" end="13328" title="Neil Hannon" label="Neil Hannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543686" start="13333" end="13350" title="The Divine Comedy (band)" label="The Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160103" start="13352" end="13358" title="Travis (band)" label="Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60659" start="13364" end="13374" title="Ute Lemper" label="Ute Lemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q544301" start="13401" end="13414" title="Nigel Godrich" label="Nigel Godrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="13476" end="13489" title="XL Recordings" label="XL Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737370" start="13502" end="13511" title="Aluminium (album)" label="Aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q20762698" start="13705" end="13709" title="Sing (2016 American film)" label="Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="13732" end="13743" title="Annie Award" label="Annie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q795551" start="14047" end="14073" title="BBC Philharmonic" label="BBC Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="14123" end="14139" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="14185" end="14207" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573292" start="14216" end="14239" title="The League of Gentlemen" label="The League of Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391488" start="14469" end="14498" title="Kensington Symphony Orchestra" label="Kensington Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113706" start="14547" end="14553" title="Chroma (ballet)" label="Chroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161433" start="14568" end="14584" title="Path of Miracles" label="Path of Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="14602" end="14612" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699675" start="14641" end="14649" title="Tenebrae (choir)" label="Tenebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q836821" start="14658" end="14699" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (film)" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113706" start="14738" end="14744" title="Chroma (ballet)" label="Chroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="14808" end="14824" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553119" start="14846" end="14860" title="Wayne McGregor" label="Wayne McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818979" start="14944" end="14972" title="Royal Liverpool Philharmonic" label="Royal Liverpool Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082994" start="14977" end="15005" title="Turku Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Turku Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q451849" start="15016" end="15029" title="Alison Balsom" label="Alison Balsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688645" start="15119" end="15132" title="Yevgeni Bauer" label="Evgenii Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334530" start="15158" end="15172" title="The Dying Swan" label="The Dying Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352949" start="15196" end="15223" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Theatre" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590772" start="15228" end="15237" title="List of Morphoses productions" label="Morphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966661" start="15295" end="15315" title="Christopher Wheeldon" label="Christopher Wheeldon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15404" end="15408" title="Benjamin Wynn#Deru" label="Deru"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="15430" end="15448" title="Paris Opera Ballet" label="Paris Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553119" start="15470" end="15484" title="Wayne McGregor" label="Wayne McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q435185" start="15605" end="15620" title="Carolyn Carlson (artist)" label="Carolyn Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="15649" end="15656" title="Purcell" label="Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q795630" start="15686" end="15708" title="BBC Symphony Orchestra" label="BBC Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="15713" end="15722" title="The Proms" label="The Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725679" start="15731" end="15768" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland (ballet)" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="15799" end="15815" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881270" start="15820" end="15845" title="National Ballet of Canada" label="National Ballet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966661" start="15864" end="15884" title="Christopher Wheeldon" label="Christopher Wheeldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046309" start="15960" end="15982" title="Philharmonia Orchestra" label="Philharmonia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810961" start="16096" end="16119" title="Netherlands Dance Theatre" label="Nederlands Dans Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q612590" start="16124" end="16145" title="Residentie Orchestra" label="Het Residentie Orkest"/>
<link wikidata="Q860188" start="16253" end="16292" title="National Centre for the Performing Arts (China)" label="National Centre for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="16294" end="16301" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149693" start="16310" end="16332" title="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale (ballet)" label="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q55409769" start="16457" end="16464" title="Everest (opera)" label="Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q20762698" start="16495" end="16499" title="Sing (2016 American film)" label="Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30933418" start="16538" end="16544" title="Sing 2" label="Sing 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q108456719" start="16583" end="16588" title="Wonka (film)" label="Wonka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920418" start="16697" end="16712" title="Black Box Music" label="Black Box Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688645" start="16739" end="16752" title="Evgenii Bauer" label="Evgenii Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q836821" start="16824" end="16865" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (film)" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q387539" start="16879" end="16900" title="Hollywood Records" label="Hollywood Records Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="16960" end="16968" title="Sony BMG" label="Sony BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128150" start="17025" end="17035" title="Classic FM (UK)" label="Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="17178" end="17187" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="17188" end="17198" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q205136" start="17230" end="17252" title="Pilgrimage Church of St James" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="17257" end="17264" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737370" start="17273" end="17282" title="Aluminium (album)" label="Aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="17296" end="17309" title="XL Recordings" label="XL Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="17359" end="17376" title="The White Stripes" label="The White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796193" start="17385" end="17396" title="Arctic Tale" label="Arctic Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q108196190" start="17481" end="17488" title="List of industrial music labels" label="Ant-Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889429" start="17502" end="17506" title="Deru" label="Deru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553119" start="17564" end="17578" title="Wayne McGregor" label="Wayne McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="17617" end="17635" title="Paris Opera Ballet" label="Paris Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q708831" start="17644" end="17657" title="Son of Rambow" label="Son of Rambow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074032" start="17709" end="17717" title="Penelope (2006 film)" label="Penelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321379" start="17731" end="17748" title="Lakeshore Records" label="Lakeshore Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q164224" start="17775" end="17783" title="Franklyn" label="Franklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q435185" start="17926" end="17941" title="Carolyn Carlson (artist)" label="Carolyn Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943628" start="18080" end="18090" title="Hunky Dory (film)" label="Hunky Dory"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="18104" end="18117" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725679" start="18155" end="18192" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland (ballet)" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966661" start="18238" end="18258" title="Christopher Wheeldon" label="Christopher Wheeldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="18300" end="18316" title="Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881270" start="18321" end="18346" title="National Ballet of Canada" label="National Ballet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q856125" start="18455" end="18483" title="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111876" start="18490" end="18508" title="Christopher Austin" label="Christopher Austin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962517" wikidata="Q7754424" url="?curid=962517" title="The Notebooks of Lazarus Long">
<text>The Notebooks of Lazarus Long is a 1978 collection of aphorisms by Robert Heinlein&#x27;s main character, &quot;Lazarus Long&quot;, excerpted from his 1973 novel &quot;Time Enough for Love&quot;. The aphorisms were originally published as two &quot;intermission&quot; sections in the novel.

In the context of the novel, the quotes were selected from Long&#x27;s much longer memoirs (which make up a significant portion of the novel). Some of the quotes are humorous or ironic, some philosophical, and some merely quirky. They range in length from one sentence to multiple paragraphs. For example:

Always store beer in a cold, dark place.

Cheops&#x27; Law: Nothing &quot;ever&quot; gets built on schedule or within budget.

Anyone who cannot cope with mathematics is not fully human. At best he is a tolerable subhuman who has learned to wear shoes, bathe, and not make messes in the house.

Rub her feet.

If the universe has any purpose more important than topping a woman you love and making a baby with her hearty help, I have never heard of it.

Never try to teach a pig to sing – it wastes your time and annoys the pig.

In 1978, these &quot;notebooks&quot; were published as a stand-alone work, with some quotes illuminated by D. F. Vassallo (similar to medieval scripture). More excerpts were published in 1988.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="54" end="63" title="aphorisms" label="aphorisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="67" end="89" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert Heinlein&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505916" start="112" end="124" title="Lazarus Long" label="Lazarus Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274025" start="168" end="188" title="Time Enough for Love" label="Time Enough for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091690" start="641" end="657" title="Cheops law" label="Cheops&amp;#x27; Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="1221" end="1232" title="Illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962520" wikidata="Q1049644" url="?curid=962520" title="Piton de la Fournaise">
<text>Piton de la Fournaise (; ) is a shield volcano on the eastern side of Réunion island, a French overseas department and region, in the Indian Ocean. It is currently one of the most active volcanoes in the world, along with Kīlauea in the Hawaiian Islands, Stromboli and Etna in Italy and Mount Erebus in Antarctica. A previous eruption began in August 2006 and ended in January 2007. The volcano erupted again in February 2007, on 21 September 2008, on 9 December 2010, which lasted for two days, and on 1 August 2015. The most recent eruption began on 15 September 2022. The volcano is located within Réunion National Park, a World Heritage Site.

Residents of Réunion sometimes refer to Piton de la Fournaise simply as &quot;le Volcan&quot; (&quot;the Volcano&quot;). It is a major tourist attraction.

==Geology==
The uppermost section of the volcano is occupied by the Enclos Fouqué, a caldera wide. High cliffs, known as &quot;remparts&quot; in French, form the caldera&#x27;s rim. The caldera is breached to the southeast towards the sea. The eastern flank of the volcano is unstable and is in the initial stages of failure. It will eventually collapse into the Indian Ocean and if it is a cataclysmic debris avalanche, it will generate a megatsunami. There is evidence of earlier failures on the submerged flanks and surrounding abyssal plain. The lower slopes are known as the &quot;Grand Brûlé&quot; (&quot;Great Burn&quot;). Most volcanic eruptions are confined to the caldera.

Inside the caldera is a high lava shield named Dolomieu. At the top of this lava shield are Bory Crater (&quot;Cratère Bory&quot;) and Dolomieu Crater (&quot;Cratère Dolomieu&quot;), which is by far the wider of the two and named for French geologist Déodat Gratet de Dolomieu.

Many craters and spatter cones can be found inside the caldera and on the higher flanks of the volcano. Lavas with high concentrations of iridium are routinely ejected through these vents. By the trailhead of the summit path there lies a small noteworthy crater called Formica Leo, named for its resemblance to the sand pit trap of an antlion.

Located outside of the main caldera is Commerson Crater, an inactive caldera notable for receiving intense rainfall, particularly during tropical storms. During Cyclone Hyacinthe in January 1980, it received of rainfall in 15 days, the most precipitation produced by a tropical cyclone in a single location.

Some beaches in the proximity of the volcano are greenish in color, due to olivine sand derived from picrite basalt lavas. The &quot;Grand Brûlé&quot; is formed from solidified lava flows accumulated over hundreds of thousands of years; the most recent ones are often the darkest and most vegetation-free, while older ones can be covered by dense natural vegetation.

This volcano is over 530,000 years old, and for most of its history, its flows have intermingled with those from Piton des Neiges, a larger, older and heavily eroded inactive volcano which forms the northwest two-thirds of Réunion Island. There were three episodes of caldera collapses 250,000, 65,000 and 5,000 years ago. The volcano was formed by the Réunion hotspot, which is believed to have been active for the past 66 million years. There is evidence for explosive eruptions in the past. One explosive eruption about 4,700 years ago may have had a VEI (Volcanic Explosivity Index) of 5, which is the same as the 18 May 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens.

==Eruptions==

Most eruptions of Piton de la Fournaise are of the Hawaiian style: fluid basaltic lava flowing out with fire fountaining at the vent. Occasionally, phreatic eruptions (groundwater steam-generated eruptions) occur. Lava flows crossing the &quot;Grand Brûlé&quot; occasionally reach the sea. Piton de la Fournaise is one of the most active volcanoes in the world, with more than 150 recorded eruptions since the 17th century.

Eruptions within the caldera do not cause much devastation, because the caldera is uninhabited, but little infrastructure exists apart from the highway. Lava flows are generally confined to the caldera. However, lava flows have been known to cross the N2 highway; areas where the road was destroyed by the eruption are signposted with the year of eruption after the road is rebuilt. In the early 2000s, the highway was destroyed one or more times a year; road engineering services then wait for the lava to cool off and build another stretch of road. For months after an eruption, the core of the lava flows can still be hot enough to steam in rainy weather.

Eruptions outside of the caldera can pose serious hazards to the population, but are rare. Only six eruptions outside of the caldera have been recorded, most recently in 1986. The village of Piton-Sainte-Rose was evacuated in 1977 before it was inundated by a lava flow which destroyed several buildings. The lava flow crossed the highway and surrounded the local church, entered the front door, then stopped without destroying the building. The front entrance was later cleared out, and the church was brought back into service under the name of &quot;Notre-Dame des Laves&quot; (&quot;Our Lady of the Lavas&quot;).

In April 2007, the volcano erupted and produced an estimated of lava per day. During this eruption of 2007, an incremental caldera collapse of Dolomieu occurred at the volcano over more than nine days. The collapse displaced of floor downward by , with a volume of . The caldera collapse accompanied one of the largest eruptions of lava at the volcano in the past 100 years.

An eruption began on 2 July 2023 at 8:30 a.m. local time.

==Monitoring==
Volcanic activity is constantly monitored by geophysical sensors (tiltmeters, extensometers, differential GPS receivers, etc.). The data from those various sensors is sent to the Piton de la Fournaise Volcano Observatory, located in Bourg-Murat, northwest of the volcano. The observatory, founded in 1978 following
the Piton-Sainte-Rose flow, is operated by the &quot;Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris&quot; (Global Geophysics Institute of Paris), in association with CNRS and the University of Réunion. The OVPF often publishes reports on Piton de la Fournaise&#x27;s current activity via their website in French. RIGIC (the Réunion Island Geological Information Center) takes this information and translates it into English for distribution to the English-speaking scientific community.

Procedures specify several levels of alert, which are decided by the prefect of Réunion on the basis of scientific reports:
* Pre-alert: Warnings about possible eruptions; hikers accessing the caldera are warned about possible developments.
* Level 1: An eruption will occur soon; the public may not access the caldera until specialists have examined the situation and set pathways for those willing to admire the eruption.
* Level 2: An eruption is occurring inside the caldera. Access to the caldera is restricted to authorized personnel only.
* Level 3: An eruption is occurring or will occur soon outside of the caldera; some villages may have to be evacuated for safety.

==Access==
A forestry road followed by a track connects the highway of the plains in Bourg-Murat to the Pas de Bellecombe (Bellecombe Pass), where a parking lot and a snack bar are located. The Pas de Bellecombe is situated over the caldera rim cliffs and offers a view over the northeast part of the caldera. A stairway path descends from the pass to the caldera floor. This path is closed for safety reasons during seismic events that may precede eruptions and during eruptions. White paint marks over rocks delimit a number of footpaths ascending the lava shield inside the caldera.

The lower parts of the &quot;Grand Brûlé&quot; can be visited from the N2 highway. Lava flows that have crossed the road are indicated by signs. Completely free access during eruptions was permitted until 1998; access has been limited since that date, being virtually banned at present.

==See also==
* List of volcanoes in Réunion
* Mamelon (volcanology)

==References==
==External links==

* RIGIC (Réunion Island Geological Information Center)
* Reunion Island – anglophone site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1049644" start="0" end="21" title="Piton de la Fournaise" label="Piton de la Fournaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q212057" start="32" end="46" title="shield volcano" label="shield volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="70" end="77" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="88" end="94" title="French Fifth Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="95" end="125" title="overseas departments and regions of France" label="overseas department and region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="134" end="146" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="187" end="194" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q188698" start="222" end="229" title="Kilauea" label="Kīlauea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="237" end="253" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131148" start="255" end="264" title="Stromboli" label="Stromboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="269" end="273" title="Mount Etna" label="Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q188982" start="287" end="299" title="Mount Erebus" label="Mount Erebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="303" end="313" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q550389" start="601" end="622" title="Réunion National Park" label="Réunion National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="626" end="645" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053796" start="872" end="885" title="Enclos Fouqué" label="Enclos Fouqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="889" end="896" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q583313" start="1244" end="1255" title="megatsunami" label="megatsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q380520" start="1739" end="1764" title="Déodat Gratet de Dolomieu" label="Déodat Gratet de Dolomieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q109391" start="1772" end="1779" title="Volcanic crater" label="craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368970" start="1784" end="1797" title="spatter cones" label="spatter cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="1905" end="1912" title="iridium" label="iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077516" start="2036" end="2047" title="Formica Leo" label="Formica Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q231439" start="2102" end="2109" title="antlion" label="antlion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002216" start="2151" end="2167" title="Commerson Crater" label="Commerson Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="2181" end="2188" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774391" start="2273" end="2290" title="Cyclone Hyacinthe" label="Cyclone Hyacinthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48780358" start="2348" end="2418" title="list of wettest tropical cyclones" label="most precipitation produced by a tropical cyclone in a single location"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="2496" end="2503" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382545" start="2522" end="2536" title="picrite basalt" label="picrite basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545452" start="2902" end="2918" title="Piton des Neiges" label="Piton des Neiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="3012" end="3019" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393388" start="3142" end="3157" title="Réunion hotspot" label="Réunion hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="3343" end="3346" title="Volcanic Explosivity Index" label="VEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675" start="3431" end="3447" title="Mount St. Helens" label="Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199175" start="3516" end="3530" title="Hawaiian eruption" label="Hawaiian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067217" start="3613" end="3630" title="phreatic eruption" label="phreatic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389375" start="4741" end="4758" title="Piton Sainte-Rose" label="Piton-Sainte-Rose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5103" end="5123" title="Notre-Dame des Laves" label="Notre-Dame des Laves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528565" start="5684" end="5693" title="tiltmeter" label="tiltmeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q636169" start="5696" end="5708" title="extensometer" label="extensometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="5724" end="5727" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348504" start="5797" end="5838" title="Piton de la Fournaise Volcano Observatory" label="Piton de la Fournaise Volcano Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q932132" start="5851" end="5862" title="Bourg-Murat" label="Bourg-Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152060" start="5986" end="6024" title="Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris" label="Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q280413" start="6091" end="6095" title="CNRS" label="CNRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285463" start="6482" end="6489" title="préfet" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367142" start="7194" end="7211" title="Pas de Bellecombe" label="Pas de Bellecombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128349" start="7980" end="8008" title="List of volcanoes in Réunion" label="List of volcanoes in Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745599" start="8011" end="8032" title="Mamelon (volcanology)" label="Mamelon (volcanology)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962522" wikidata="Q32286" url="?curid=962522" title="Eastern Shore of Virginia">
<text>The Eastern Shore of Virginia is the easternmost region of the Commonwealth of Virginia in the United States. It consists of two counties (Accomack and Northampton) on the Atlantic coast. It is detached from the mainland of Virginia by the Chesapeake Bay. The region is part of the Delmarva Peninsula. Its population was 45,695 as of 2020.

==History==
Accomac Shire was established in the Virginia Colony by the House of Burgesses in 1634 under the direction of King Charles I. It was one of the original eight shires of Virginia, and consisted of the whole of Virginia&#x27;s Delmarva territory. The shire&#x27;s name comes from the Native American word Accawmack, which means, &quot;the other shore&quot;.

In 1642, the name was changed to Northampton County. (In England, &quot;shires&quot; and &quot;counties&quot; are the same thing.) In 1663, Northampton County was split into two counties. The northern two thirds took the original Accomac name, while the southern third remained as Northampton.

In 1670, the Virginia Colony&#x27;s Royal Governor William Berkeley abolished Accomac County, but the Virginia General Assembly re-created it in 1671. In 1940, the General Assembly officially added a &quot;k&quot; to the end of the county&#x27;s name to arrive at its current spelling, which is Accomack.

==Geography==
The terrain is overall very flat, ranging from sea level to just above sea level. It is characterized by sandy and deep soil. The weather in the area has temperate summers and winters, significantly affected by the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean. The rural area has long been devoted to cotton, soybean, vegetable and truck farming, and large-scale chicken farms. Since the late 20th century, vineyards have been developed in both counties, and the Eastern Shore has received recognition as an American Viticultural Area (AVA).

The region has more than 78,000 acres of preserved parks, refuges, preserves and a national seashore and is a popular outdoor recreation destination for fishing, boating, hiking and kayaking. It is also an important birding hotspot along the Atlantic Flyway at the southernmost tip of the Delmarva Peninsula. There are public beaches at Cape Charles, Kiptopeke State Park, Savage Neck Dunes Natural Area Preserve, Tangier Island and the Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge abutting the Assateague Island National Seashore.

The area includes 70 miles of barrier islands, the longest chain of undeveloped barrier islands in the global temperate zone and a United Nations International Biosphere Reserve. At the northern end of the Atlantic side is the beach community of Chincoteague, famous for its annual wild pony roundup, gathered from Assateague Island. Wallops Flight Facility, a NASA space launch base, is located near Chincoteague. At the southern end of the Chesapeake Bay coast, the beach community of Cape Charles, a historic railroad town, is home to the Cape Charles Yacht Center, a super yacht service center. The town of Wachapreague on the Atlantic coast is a popular destination for fishing and guided trips out to the wild barrier islands. Onancock, a harbor town on the Chesapeake Bay, has a ferry service to Tangier Island, off the western shore in the Chesapeake Bay, during spring, summer and fall.

==Culture==
Some maps of Virginia do not include the Eastern Shore. &quot;Encyclopedia Virginia&quot;″s logo began depicting the region in 2018, after the inauguration of Ralph Northam, the second Governor of Virginia from the Eastern Shore. Geographically removed from the rest of Virginia, it has had a unique history of settlement and development influenced by agriculture, fishing, tourism, and the Pennsylvania Railroad. William G. Thomas describes the Eastern Shore during the late 19th and early 20th century as &quot;a highly complex and interdependent landscape&quot;. He continues:

It was a liminal place, a zone of interpenetration, where the settlement patterns, speech, demography, and political outcomes defined its place in the South but its engagement with technology and rapid transformation of the landscape betrayed other allegiances, motives, forces, and effects.

==Transportation==
===Airports===
*Accomack County Airport, in Melfa
*Campbell Field Airport, in Weirwood
*Tangier Island Airport, on Tangier Island

===Highway===
The Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel, which is part of U.S. Route 13, spans the mouth of the Bay and connects the Eastern Shore to South Hampton Roads and the rest of Virginia. Before the Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel was built in 1964, the Little Creek-Cape Charles Ferry provided the continuation of U.S. 13 across this stretch of water.
==== U.S Highways ====
* (Accomac)
* (Cape Charles)
==== State Routes ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Public transportation===
STAR Transit provides public transit services for both Accomack and Northampton counties, serving both with fixed-route bus and paratransit operations.

===Railroads===
*Delmarva Central Railroad (former)

==Media==
The area is served by the weekl&quot;y Eastern Shore Post&quot; and the monthly publication &quot;Eastern Shore First&quot;. The predominant radio station is WESR 103.3 FM, which operates the website ShoreDailyNews.com.

== Demographics ==

==Politics==

The Eastern Shore is politically divided, with Accomack County generally voting for the Republican Party and Northampton County generally voting for the Democratic Party. As a whole, the Shore is generally a competitive region, but also leans Republican owing to Accomack&#x27;s larger share of the population. 

It voted against the presidential winner in 2020 and 1992. Also, Democrats won Virginia in 2016, 2020, and 2024, but lost the Eastern Shore each time. In the 2017 gubernatorial election, it gave 50.5% of the vote to Republican Ed Gillespie and 49.0% of the vote to Democrat Ralph Northam, with Northam winning the election statewide. 

It is represented in the U.S. House of Representatives by Republican Jen Kiggans, in the Virginia Senate by Republican Bill DeSteph, and in the Virginia House of Delegates by Republican Robert Bloxom Jr.

==See also==

* Battle of Kedges Strait – the last naval engagement of the American Revolutionary War
* Debedeavon
* Delmarva Peninsula
* Eastern Shore of Maryland
* Chincoteague Island, Virginia

==References==
==Further reading==
* William G. Thomas &quot;The Countryside Transformed:The Eastern Shore of Virginia, the Pennsylvania Railroad, and the Creation of a Modern Landscape&quot; &quot;Southern Spaces,&quot; 31 July 2007.

==External links==
* Eastern Shore of Virginia - Official State Tourism Website &amp; Map
* Eastern Shore Visitor
* Accomack-Northampton Planning District Commission
* Eastern Shore of Virginia Tourism Commission
* Northampton County Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q32286" start="4" end="29" title="Eastern Shore of Virginia" label="Eastern Shore of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="63" end="75" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="79" end="87" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="95" end="108" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="129" end="137" title="counties" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q49289" start="139" end="147" title="Accomack County, Virginia" label="Accomack"/>
<link wikidata="Q49290" start="152" end="163" title="Northampton County, Virginia" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="172" end="180" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="240" end="254" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="282" end="300" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="390" end="405" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="413" end="431" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="468" end="477" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460109" start="512" end="530" title="shires of Virginia" label="shires of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49290" start="743" end="761" title="Northampton County, Virginia" label="Northampton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="1018" end="1033" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q887234" start="1041" end="1055" title="List of Virginia Governors" label="Royal Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809463" start="1056" end="1072" title="William Berkeley (governor)" label="William Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="1107" end="1132" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q49289" start="1300" end="1308" title="Accomack County, Virginia" label="Accomack"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1430" end="1434" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="1540" end="1554" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1563" end="1577" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1619" end="1625" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="1627" end="1634" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="1650" end="1660" title="truck farm" label="truck farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527817" start="1826" end="1852" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s Eastern Shore AVA" label="American Viticultural Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847780" start="2103" end="2118" title="Atlantic Flyway" label="Atlantic Flyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376790" start="2198" end="2210" title="Cape Charles, Virginia" label="Cape Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414718" start="2212" end="2232" title="Kiptopeke State Park" label="Kiptopeke State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427750" start="2234" end="2273" title="Savage Neck Dunes Natural Area Preserve" label="Savage Neck Dunes Natural Area Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373391" start="2275" end="2289" title="Tangier Island" label="Tangier Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100328" start="2298" end="2335" title="Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge" label="Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808547" start="2349" end="2384" title="Assateague Island National Seashore" label="Assateague Island National Seashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="2417" end="2431" title="barrier island" label="barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073686" start="2633" end="2645" title="Chincoteague, Virginia" label="Chincoteague"/>
<link wikidata="Q739739" start="2669" end="2686" title="Chincoteague Pony" label="wild pony roundup"/>
<link wikidata="Q289161" start="2702" end="2719" title="Assateague Island" label="Assateague Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q182348" start="2721" end="2744" title="Wallops Flight Facility" label="Wallops Flight Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2748" end="2752" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376790" start="2874" end="2886" title="Cape Charles, Virginia" label="Cape Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376692" start="2998" end="3010" title="Wachapreague, Virginia" label="Wachapreague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373949" start="3120" end="3128" title="Onancock, Virginia" label="Onancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373391" start="3190" end="3204" title="Tangier, Virginia" label="Tangier Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934268" start="3358" end="3379" title="Encyclopedia Virginia" label="Encyclopedia Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287916" start="3455" end="3468" title="Ralph Northam" label="Ralph Northam"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="3481" end="3501" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="3687" end="3708" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672683" start="4205" end="4228" title="Accomack County Airport" label="Accomack County Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175704" start="4233" end="4238" title="Melfa, Virginia" label="Melfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274353" start="4240" end="4262" title="Campbell Field Airport" label="Campbell Field Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980366" start="4267" end="4275" title="Weirwood, Virginia" label="Weirwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863962" start="4277" end="4299" title="Tangier Island Airport" label="Tangier Island Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373391" start="4304" end="4318" title="Tangier Island" label="Tangier Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070563" start="4338" end="4366" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818361" start="4385" end="4398" title="U.S. Route 13 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567420" start="4461" end="4480" title="South Hampton Roads" label="South Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649676" start="4570" end="4601" title="Little Creek-Cape Charles Ferry" label="Little Creek-Cape Charles Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130302357" start="4788" end="4800" title="STAR Transit (Virginia)" label="STAR Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="4916" end="4927" title="paratransit" label="paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q29469218" start="4958" end="4983" title="Delmarva Central Railroad" label="Delmarva Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49289" start="5306" end="5321" title="Accomack County, Virginia" label="Accomack County"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5347" end="5363" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49290" start="5368" end="5386" title="Northampton County, Virginia" label="Northampton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="5412" end="5428" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19428942" start="5730" end="5757" title="2017 Virginia gubernatorial election" label="2017 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334860" start="5799" end="5811" title="Ed Gillespie" label="Ed Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287916" start="5846" end="5859" title="Ralph Northam" label="Ralph Northam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="5933" end="5962" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q83119566" start="5977" end="5988" title="Jen Kiggans" label="Jen Kiggans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="5997" end="6012" title="Virginia Senate" label="Virginia Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208268" start="6027" end="6039" title="Bill DeSteph" label="Bill DeSteph"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="6052" end="6079" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199598" start="6094" end="6111" title="Robert Bloxom Jr." label="Robert Bloxom Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q61999896" start="6129" end="6152" title="Battle of Kedges Strait" label="Battle of Kedges Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248040" start="6217" end="6227" title="Debedeavon" label="Debedeavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="6230" end="6248" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="6251" end="6276" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073686" start="6279" end="6298" title="Chincoteague, Virginia" label="Chincoteague Island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962527" wikidata="Q204061" url="?curid=962527" title="Viviparous lizard">
<text>The viviparous lizard, or common lizard, (Zootoca vivipara, formerly &quot;Lacerta vivipara&quot;) is a Eurasian lizard. It lives farther north than any other species of non-marine reptile, and is named for the fact that it is viviparous, meaning it gives birth to live young (although they will sometimes lay eggs normally). Both &quot;&quot;Zootoca&quot; and &quot;vivipara&quot;&quot; mean &quot;live birth&quot;, in (Latinized) Greek and Latin respectively. It was called &quot;Lacerta vivipara&quot; until the genus &quot;Lacerta&quot; was split into nine genera in 2007 by Arnold, Arribas &amp; Carranza.

Male and female &quot;Zootoca vivipara&quot; are equally likely to contract blood parasites. Additionally, larger males have been shown to reproduce more times in a given reproductive season than smaller ones.

The lizard is also unique as it is exclusively carnivorous, eating only flies, spiders, and insects. Studies show that the more carnivorous an individual is (the more insects they eat), the less diverse the population of parasitic helminths that infest the lizards.

&quot;Zootoca vivipara&quot; lives in very cold climates, yet participates in normal thermoregulation instead of thermoconformity. They have the largest range of all terrestrial lizards which even include subarctic regions. It is able to survive these harsh climates as individuals will freeze in especially cold seasons and thaw two months later. They also live closer to geological phenomena that provide a warmer environment for them.

==Description==

&quot;Zootoca vivipara&quot; is a small lizard, with an average length between {150-200 mm} . They exhibit no particular colour, but can be brown, red, grey, green, or black. The species exhibits some sexual dimorphisms. Female &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; undergo colour polymorphism more commonly than males. A female lizard&#x27;s display differs in ventral coloration, ranging from pale yellow to bright orange and a mixed coloration. There have been many hypotheses for the genetic cause of this polymorphic coloration. These hypothesis test for coloration due to thermoregulation, predator avoidance, and social cues, specifically sexual reproduction. Through an experiment conducted by Vercken et al., colour polymorphism in viviparous lizard is caused by social cues, rather than the other hypotheses. More specifically, the ventral coloration that is seen in female lizards is associated with patterns of sexual reproduction and sex allocation.

The underside of the male is typically more colourful and bright, with yellow, orange, green, and blue, and the male typically has spots along its back. On the other hand, females typically have darker stripes down their backs and sides. Additionally, males have been found to have larger heads than their female counterparts, and this trait appears to be sexually selected for. Males with larger heads are more likely to be successful in mating and male-male interactions than smaller-headed &quot;Z. vivipara&quot;. Larger males also have been shown to reproduce more frequently during one mating season compared to smaller males. Characteristic behaviors of the species includes tongue flicking in the presence of a predator and female-female aggression that seems to be mediated by the colour of their side stripe.

==Habitat and distribution==

=== Habitat ===
&quot;Z. vivipara&quot; is terrestrial, so they spend most of their time on the ground, though they do occasionally visit sites of higher elevation. The lizard thermoregulates by basking in the sun for much of the time. In colder weather, they have been known to hibernate to maintain proper body temperatures. They hibernate between October and March. Their typical habitats include heathland, moorland, woodland and grassland.

The viviparous lizard is native to much of northern Eurasia. In Europe, it is mainly found north of the Alps and the Carpathians, including the British Isles but not Iceland, as well as in parts of northern Iberia and the Balkans; In Asia it is mostly found in Russia, excluding northern Siberia, and in northern Kazakhstan, Mongolia, China, and Japan. &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; has the largest distribution of any species of lizard in the world.

== Home range ==
The size of the home range of the lizard ranges from 539 m2 to 1692 m2, with males generally having larger home ranges. The size of an individual lizard&#x27;s home range is also dependent on population density and the presence of prey.

== Ecology ==

=== Diet ===
Unlike many other lizards, &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; is exclusively carnivorous. Their diet consists of flies, spiders, and various other insects, including hemipterans (such as cicadas), moth larvae, and mealworms. The species is a predator, so it actively hunts down all of its prey. One study found that when controlled for body size, females consumed more food than males. Feeding rates also increased with increased sunshine.

=== Predation ===
Birds are common predators of &quot;Z. vivipara&quot;. Male-biased predation of &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; by the great grey shrike (&quot;L. excubitor&quot;) has been studied, finding that adult males, over adult females and juveniles, were preferentially predated on. This bias may be due to increased activity of adult males during the reproductive season.

Predators of this species include birds of prey, crows, snakes, shrikes, hedgehogs, shrews, foxes, and domestic cats.

=== Diseases and parasites ===
&quot;Z. vivpara&quot; can be infested by helminths, a small parasitic worm. The species diversity of parasites is affected by the diet of the individual lizard and the number of parasites on a host is affected by the host&#x27;s size. Results of a study shows that the more carnivorous an individual is, the less diverse its parasite population. Additionally, larger lizards had a greater number of parasites on them.
&quot;Z. vivipara&quot; is also infected by blood parasites. In a study investigating the prevalence of blood parasites in &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; and &quot;L. agilis&quot;, &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; was found to be parasitized with an incidence rate of 39.8%, while &quot;L. agilis&quot; was parasitized with an incidence rate of 22.3%. This same study shows that there was not a significant difference between the parasitization of male and female &quot;Z. vivipara&quot;.
== Reproduction and life history ==

=== Viviparity and oviparity ===
The viviparous lizard is named as such because it is viviparous. This refers to its ability to give birth to live young, although the lizards are also able to lay eggs. The origin of this characteristic is under debate. Some scientists argue that viviparity evolved from oviparity, or the laying of eggs, only once. Proponents of this theory also argue that if this is the case, it is possible, though rare, for species to transition back to oviparity. Research from Yann Surget-Groba suggests that there have in fact been multiple events of the evolution of viviparity from oviparity across different clades of the viviparous lizard. They also argue that a reversion to oviparity is not as rare as once believed, but has occurred 2 to 3 times in the history of the species.

The range of viviparous populations of &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; extends from France to Russia. Oviparous populations are only found in northern Spain and the southwest of France. Some research in the Italian alps has suggested that distinct populations of oviparous and viviparous &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; should be considered separate species. Cornetti et al. (2015) identified that viviparous and oviparous subpopulations in contact with each other in the Italian alps are reproductively isolated. Hybridization between viviparous and oviparous individuals of &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; leads to embryonic malformations in the laboratory. However, these crosses do produce a &quot;hybridized&quot; generation of offspring, with females retaining embryos for much longer in utero than oviparous females, with embryos surrounded by thin, translucent shells.

=== Fertilization ===
&quot;Z. vivipara&quot; juveniles reach sexual maturity during their second year of their life. A study that explored the presence of male sex cells in reproducing males found that for the two weeks following the end of hibernation, males are infertile, and therefore incapable of reproducing. The same study also found that larger males produce more sperm during the reproductive season and have fewer left over at the end of the reproductive season than their smaller counterparts. This suggests that the larger a male is, the more reproductive events they participate in.

=== Brood size ===
Research also suggests that in exclusively oviparous populations of &quot;Z. vivipara&quot;, altitude influences the number of clutches laid in a reproductive season as well as when reproduction begins. Generally, lizards living at higher altitudes have been found to begin reproduction later and lay fewer clutches (often 1) in a given reproductive season.

=== Life span ===
&quot;Z. vivipara&quot; typically lives for 5 to 6 years.

== Mating ==

=== Mate searching behavior ===
Head size is a sexually dimorphic trait, with males having larger heads than females. The average head width and length of the males measured were found to be , respectively. The average head width and length of the females measured were found to be , respectively. During the first state of courtship in &quot;Z. vivipara&quot;, called &quot;Capture&quot;, the male uses its mouth and jaw to capture the female and initiate copulation. The results of this study demonstrated that males with larger head sizes (both length and width) were more successful in mating than those with smaller heads, suggesting that head size undergoes sexual selection.

=== Male-male interaction ===
Head size has also been shown to be a predictor of success in male-male interactions. The head is used as a weapon in male-male interactions, and a larger head is typically more effective, leading to greater success during male-male aggressive encounters. This aggression and interaction is centered around available mates, so males with smaller heads have significantly less access to females for reproduction.

== Thermoregulation ==
This lizard has an exceptionally large range that includes subarctic geography. As a result, thermoregulation is necessary for the thermal homeostasis of the species. Typically, in temperature extremes, a species will adopt the behavioral strategy of thermoconformity, where they do not actively thermoregulate, but adapt to survive in the harsh temperature. This occurs because the cost of thermoregulating in such an extreme environment becomes too high and begins to outweigh the benefits. Despite this, &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; still employs the strategy of thermoregulation, like basking. Thermoregulation is important in &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; as it allows for proper locomotive performance, escape behavior, and other key behaviors for survival. The ability of &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; to thermoregulate in such harsh environments has been attributed to two primary reasons. The first is that &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; has remarkable behaviors to combat the cold, and there are geological phenomena in their distribution that maintains their habitats at a temperature that the species can survive in. One of the specific behaviors used to combat the extreme cold is a &quot;supercooled&quot; state. &quot;Z. vivipara remains&quot; in this state through the winter until temperatures dropped below . After that, individuals completely froze until they were thawed by warmer weather later in the year, often 2 months later. Despite very cold air in the subarctic habitats of these lizards, the soil-heating effects of unfrozen groundwater has been observed regulating the temperature of their soil habitats. They find warm microhabitats that do not drop below the freezing point of their body fluids. These lizards have exceptional hardiness to the cold, which allows them to hibernate in upper soil layers in temperatures as low as . This cold hardiness along with the favorable hydrogeological conditions of groundwater-warmed soil habitats allows for the wide distribution of lizards throughout the palearctic.
==Colour polymorphism==
The colour polymorphism of female &quot;Z. vivipara&quot; has not been thoroughly studied in past years, regardless of the extensive research done on the species itself. Females exhibit three types of body colouration within a population: yellow, orange, and mixture of the two. These discrete traits are inherited maternally and exist throughout the individual&#x27;s lifetime. The organism&#x27;s colour morphs are determined by their genotype as well as their environment.

The frequency of multiple morphs occurring in a population varies with the level of population density and frequency-dependent environments. These factors cause the lizards to vary in terms of their fitness (clutch size, sex ratio, hatching success). In lower density populations, colour polymorphism is more prevalent. This is because viviparous lizards thrive in environments where intraspecific competition is low. Increased competition among individuals results in lower survival rates of lizards. Additionally, female lizards disperse through habitats based on the frequency of colour types that are already present in the population. Their reproductive abilities vary according to this frequency-dependent environment. The number of offspring that they produce correlates with the colour morph: yellow females produce the fewest offspring, while orange females produce more than yellow, but fewer than mixed females, which produce the most offspring. The amount of offspring produced varies in regards to colour frequencies in the population; for example, if yellow females have higher density within the population, the clutch size for orange lizards is usually lower.

Orange females are more sensitive to intraspecific and colour-specific competition. They have smaller clutch sizes when the density of the population is high, or when the number of yellow females in the population is high. This could be due to their need to conserve energy for survival and reproductive events. Their colour morph remains in the population due to the trade-off between the size of offspring and the clutch size. Offspring born in smaller clutches are often larger and thus have a higher survival likelihood. Natural selection will favor individuals with larger size because of their advantage in physical competition with others. Yellow females have larger clutch sizes early in their life, but their hatch success decreases as the female ages. Their reproductive viability decreases, resulting in fewer offspring throughout their lifetime. Yellow morphs remain in the population due to their large clutch size, which causes an increased frequency of those females. Selection favors the yellow morph because of the ability to produce large clutch sizes, which increases the female&#x27;s fitness. In mixed-coloured females, reproductive success is less sensitive to competition and frequency-dependent environments. Since these lizards show a mixture of yellow and orange colouration, they adopt benefits from both of the morphs. As a result, they can maintain high reproductive success and hatching success with large clutch sizes. Their colour morph remains in the population due to its high fitness, which selection will favor.

All three colours have evolutionary advantages in different ways. While yellow females have higher fitness due to their large clutch sizes, orange females enjoy high fitness due to their large body size and increased competitive advantages. Mixed females exhibit both of these advantages.

==See also==

*Bimodal reproduction

==Notes==
==References==

*E. N. Arnold, J. A. Burton (1978). &quot;A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians of Britain and Europe&quot;.
*Jiří Čihař (1994). &quot;Amphibians and reptiles&quot;. Wingston: Magna. .
*ARKive: viviparous lizard.
*The Reptile Database – Distribution details, authority information.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204061" start="4" end="21" title="Viviparous lizard" label="viviparous lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q204061" start="26" end="39" title="Viviparous lizard" label="common lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="104" end="111" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="113" end="119" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="227" end="237" title="viviparous" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="561" end="567" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048798" start="579" end="585" title="Edwin Nicholas Arnold" label="Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="1054" end="1063" title="helminths" label="helminths"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="1813" end="1825" title="polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159408" start="3625" end="3634" title="Hibernation" label="hibernate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="3746" end="3755" title="heathland" label="heathland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="3757" end="3765" title="moorland" label="moorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="3767" end="3775" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="3780" end="3789" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3856" end="3862" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="3936" end="3949" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="3958" end="3965" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="3999" end="4005" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="4014" end="4021" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="4026" end="4030" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4053" end="4059" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="4080" end="4087" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="4105" end="4115" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="4117" end="4125" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4127" end="4132" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4138" end="4143" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q422692" start="4271" end="4281" title="home range" label="home range"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="4623" end="4628" title="Fly" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="4630" end="4636" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="4657" end="4663" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q26371" start="4676" end="4685" title="hemiptera" label="hemiptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947892" start="4697" end="4703" title="cicada" label="cicada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="4707" end="4711" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="4712" end="4717" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q184508" start="5080" end="5097" title="great grey shrike" label="great grey shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="5361" end="5374" title="Bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="5376" end="5380" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="5383" end="5388" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q171052" start="5391" end="5397" title="shrike" label="shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120" start="5400" end="5408" title="hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q41631" start="5411" end="5416" title="shrew" label="shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="5419" end="5422" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="5430" end="5443" title="Cat" label="domestic cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="5519" end="5528" title="helminths" label="helminths"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="5538" end="5547" title="Parasitism" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="9183" end="9201" title="Sexual dimorphism" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="12336" end="12348" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="12762" end="12770" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q770985" start="13186" end="13211" title="intraspecific competition" label="intraspecific competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="14504" end="14521" title="Natural selection" label="Natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q331710" start="15084" end="15091" title="fitness (biology)" label="fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q104879140" start="15833" end="15853" title="Bimodal reproduction" label="Bimodal reproduction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962529" wikidata="Q306070" url="?curid=962529" title="Netcat">
<text>netcat (often abbreviated to nc) is a computer networking utility for reading from and writing to network connections using TCP or UDP. The command is designed to be a dependable back-end that can be used directly or easily driven by other programs and scripts. At the same time, it is a feature-rich network debugging and investigation tool, since it can produce almost any kind of connection its user could need and has a number of built-in capabilities.

It is able to perform port scanning, file transferring and port listening.

==Features==
The original netcat&#x27;s features include:

* Outbound or inbound connections, TCP or UDP, to or from any ports
* Full DNS forward/reverse checking, with appropriate warnings
* Ability to use any local source port
* Ability to use any locally configured network source address
* Built-in port-scanning capabilities, with randomization
* Built-in loose source-routing capability
* Can read command line arguments from standard input
* Slow-send mode, one line every N seconds
* Hex dump of transmitted and received data
* Optional ability to let another program service establish connections
* Optional telnet-options responder

Rewrites like GNU&#x27;s and OpenBSD&#x27;s support additional features. For example, OpenBSD&#x27;s nc supports TLS, and GNU netcat natively supports a tunneling mode supporting UDP and TCP (optionally allowing one to be tunneled over the other) in a single command, where other versions may require piping data from one netcat instance to another.

==Ports and reimplementations==
The original version of netcat was a Unix program. The last version (1.10) was released in March 1996.

There are several implementations on POSIX systems, including rewrites from scratch like GNU netcat or OpenBSD netcat,
the latter of which supports IPv6 and TLS. The OpenBSD version has been ported to the FreeBSD base,
Windows/Cygwin,
and Linux.
Mac OS X comes with netcat installed as of OSX 10.13 or users can use MacPorts to install a variant.

A DOS version of &quot;netcat&quot; called &quot;NTOOL&quot; is included in the FreeDOS Package group &quot;Networking&quot;. It is based on the WatTCP stack and licensed under the European Union Public Licence Version 1.1.

Known ports for embedded systems includes versions for Windows CE (named &quot;Netcat 4 wince&quot;) or for the iPhone.

BusyBox includes by default a lightweight version of netcat named mini-netcat. Another version with more features, named bloaty nc, is also available.

Solaris 11 includes netcat implementation based on OpenBSD netcat.

Socat is a more complex variant of &quot;netcat&quot;. It is larger and more flexible and has more options that must be configured for a given task. On February 1, 2016, Santiago Zanella-Beguelin and Microsoft Vulnerability Research issued a security advisory regarding a composite Diffie-Hellman parameter which had been hard-coded into the OpenSSL implementation of &quot;socat&quot;. The implausibility that a composite might have been unintentionally introduced where a prime number is required has led to the suspicion of sabotage to introduce a backdoor software vulnerability. This socat bug affected version 1.7.3.0 and 2.0.0-b8 it was corrected in following releases from 1.7.3.1 and 2.0.0-b9.

Cryptcat is a version of &quot;netcat&quot; with integrated transport encryption capabilities.

In the middle of 2005, Nmap announced another netcat incarnation called Ncat. It features new possibilities such as &quot;Connection Brokering&quot;, TCP/UDP Redirection, SOCKS4 client and server support, ability to &quot;Chain&quot; Ncat processes, HTTP CONNECT proxying (and proxy chaining), SSL connect/listen support and IP address/connection filtering. Like Nmap, Ncat is cross-platform.

On some systems, modified versions or similar netcat utilities go by the command name(s) codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, codice_4, codice_5, codice_6, codice_7.

===ncat===
Ncat is a similar tool to netcat provided by Nmap suite. &quot;While Ncat isn&#x27;t built on any code from the “traditional” Netcat (or any other implementation), Ncat is most definitely based on Netcat in spirit and functionality.&quot;

Ncat features includes: ability to chain Ncats together, redirect both TCP and UDP ports to other sites, SSL support, and proxy connections via SOCKS4 or HTTP (CONNECT method) proxies (with optional proxy authentication as well).

==See also==

* List of Unix commands
* Nmap
* OpenSSL
* Telnet
* Plink
* Packet Sender
* Banner grabbing

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q306070" start="0" end="6" title="Netcat" label="netcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q306070" start="29" end="31" title="Netcat" label="nc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="124" end="127" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="131" end="134" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="UDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079196" start="140" end="147" title="command (computing)" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="Q620167" start="179" end="187" title="front and back ends" label="back-end"/>
<link wikidata="Q833766" start="480" end="493" title="Port scanner" label="port scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q534400" start="495" end="512" title="File transfer" label="file transferring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388487" start="668" end="696" title="Reverse DNS lookup" label="DNS forward/reverse checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295357" start="1026" end="1034" title="Hex dump" label="Hex dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="1151" end="1157" title="telnet" label="telnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="1290" end="1293" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q957589" start="1330" end="1339" title="Tunneling protocol" label="tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1597" end="1601" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="1701" end="1706" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="1753" end="1756" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="1767" end="1774" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="1821" end="1824" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="1869" end="1876" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="1910" end="1918" title="macOS" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475706" start="1980" end="1988" title="MacPorts" label="MacPorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="2014" end="2017" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q473751" start="2092" end="2099" title="FreeDOS" label="FreeDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376919" start="2193" end="2222" title="European Union Public Licence" label="European Union Public Licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="2292" end="2302" title="Windows CE" label="Windows CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="2349" end="2355" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q620558" start="2358" end="2365" title="BusyBox" label="BusyBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="2510" end="2517" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2748" end="2773" title="Santiago Zanella-Beguelin" label="Santiago Zanella-Beguelin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2778" end="2810" title="Microsoft Vulnerability Research" label="Microsoft Vulnerability Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q50707" start="2850" end="2859" title="composite number" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="2860" end="2874" title="Diffie-Hellman" label="Diffie-Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111125" start="2900" end="2910" title="hard-coded" label="hard-coded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="2920" end="2927" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="3052" end="3064" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="3105" end="3113" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q254569" start="3129" end="3137" title="backdoor (computing)" label="backdoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q631425" start="3138" end="3160" title="software vulnerability" label="software vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q623332" start="3401" end="3405" title="Nmap" label="Nmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q623332" start="3741" end="3745" title="Nmap" label="Nmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q174666" start="3755" end="3769" title="cross-platform" label="cross-platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q623332" start="3988" end="3992" title="Nmap" label="Nmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061918" start="4327" end="4333" title="SOCKS4" label="SOCKS4"/>
<link wikidata="Q839478" start="4430" end="4451" title="List of Unix commands" label="List of Unix commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q623332" start="4454" end="4458" title="Nmap" label="Nmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="4461" end="4468" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="4471" end="4477" title="Telnet" label="Telnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q841685" start="4480" end="4485" title="Plink" label="Plink"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975272" start="4488" end="4501" title="Packet Sender" label="Packet Sender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856937" start="4504" end="4519" title="Banner grabbing" label="Banner grabbing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962530" wikidata="Q7209362" url="?curid=962530" title="Polgooth">
<text>Polgooth () is a former mining village in south Cornwall, England, United Kingdom. It lies mainly in the parish of St Mewan and partly in the parish of St Ewe. The nearest town is St Austell two miles (3.5 km) to the north-east.

==&quot;The greatest tin mine in the world&quot;==
Antiquarians once claimed that the mines of Polgooth had supplied Phoenician traders with tin 3000 years ago, but in fact the earliest historical record is a list compiled in 1593, in which several well-established Polgooth workings were named. At that time and subsequently, the mines were owned by the Edgcumbe family.

By the eighteenth century, Polgooth was celebrated as the &quot;greatest tin mine in the world&quot; and the richest mine in the United Kingdom. To pump water from the workings an early 50-inch Newcomen steam engine was erected in 1727 by Joseph Hornblower, superseded in 1784 by a 58-inch Boulton &amp; Watt steam engine and in 1823 (when John Taylor was manager) by an 80-inch William Sims engine. In 1822, Polgooth was the birthplace of geologist John Arthur Phillips.

In the late eighteenth century shareholders or &#x27;adventurers&#x27; in the mines included the engineers James Watt (who may have lived in Polgooth for a time) and Matthew Boulton, the industrialist John Wilkinson, local entrepreneur Charles Rashleigh (who built the port of Charlestown, from which much of the tin was shipped), landowner Lord Henry Arundell, and the potters Josiah and John Wedgwood. By 1800, over 1000 people were employed at Polgooth though, judging by a contemporary visitor, not in the most cheerful of conditions: &quot;The shafts...are scattered over a considerable extent of sterile ground, whose dreary appearance, and the sallow countenances of the miners, concur to excite ideas of gloom, apprehension, and melancholy.&quot;
In the nineteenth century, disputes and periodic slumps in tin prices led to several cycles of closures and reopenings. In 1836, a new mine known as South Polgooth opened to the west of the village, producing not only tin, but copper, wolfram, arsenic, and zinc. However, falling prices meant that by 1894 mining at Polgooth came to an end, though some little work continued at South Polgooth till 1916 and the spoil heaps were picked over till 1929.

==&quot;Enlivened by humble cottages&quot;==
The village of Polgooth grew up amongst the mines. In 1824, a travel guide noted that &quot;The whole surface of the country in [this] vicinity, has been completely disfigured, and presents a very gloomy aspect...The immense piles of earth, which have been excavated and thrown up, have quite a mountainous appearance: roads have been formed in several directions leading to the places or shafts, where the miners are at work; and the dreariness of the scene is only enlivened by the humble cottages, which have been erected for their residence.&quot; Many of these cottages were originally grouped in small settlements in and around the mines. These only coalesced into a single village in the nineteenth century, when most of the mine workings had moved onto the surrounding hillsides. Following the end of mining, Polgooth&#x27;s population dropped sharply and the village became a mainly agricultural, rural settlement. More recently, from the 1960s onwards, large numbers of bungalows and suburban houses have been built, thanks to the proximity of St Austell, Truro, and the south Cornish coast.

==Religious radicals==
Tregongeeves Farm on the northern edge of the village was home to Loveday Hambly, (1604–1682), who was later dubbed &quot;the Quaker saint of Cornwall&quot;. George Fox, founder of the Religious Society of Friends, stayed at the farm in 1656, 1663, and 1668 when meetings of Cornish Quakers (much persecuted at the time) were held there. The Quaker Burial Ground nearby was donated for that purpose in 1706 by Richard Edgcumbe, 1st Baron Edgcumbe to the Quaker Thomas Lower (brother of the physician Richard Lower), though much of the ground was destroyed by road-widening in the 1960s. Tregongeeves farmhouse was rebuilt in the nineteenth century and the farm buildings have now been converted to &#x27;holiday cottages&#x27;.

John Wesley, founder of Methodism, preached at Polgooth in 1755. A Wesleyan Meeting House was subsequently built in the village and later enlarged as a Methodist chapel. The latter has now been demolished, but a former Sunday School has been converted in its stead.

==The village today==
Many of the older buildings in the village were built from elvan stone, quarried locally until the 1920s. The Polgooth Inn dates back to the sixteenth century and is still extant, though the present building is mainly nineteenth century. The old count house survives, as does one of the old engine houses and a stamping mill (all now converted to private residences) plus several mining cottages.

In 2000 the prime minister Tony Blair visited Polgooth Post Office for a photo opportunity, to the bemusement of several residents.

==Notes==
==Related==

Trewoon – village in St Mewan Parish, St Austell

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7209362" start="0" end="8" title="Polgooth" label="Polgooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="48" end="56" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494339" start="115" end="123" title="St Mewan" label="St Mewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466623" start="152" end="158" title="St Ewe" label="St Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="180" end="190" title="St Austell" label="St Austell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="347" end="356" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="371" end="374" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326340" start="585" end="593" title="Earl of Mount Edgcumbe" label="Edgcumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224989" start="797" end="818" title="Newcomen steam engine" label="Newcomen steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239961" start="842" end="859" title="Joseph Hornblower" label="Joseph Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099902" start="893" end="924" title="Watt steam engine" label="Boulton &amp;amp; Watt steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260357" start="943" end="954" title="John Taylor (civil engineer)" label="John Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="982" end="994" title="William Sims (engineer)" label="William Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219500" start="1053" end="1073" title="John Arthur Phillips" label="John Arthur Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="1183" end="1193" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q469269" start="1242" end="1257" title="Matthew Boulton" label="Matthew Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204884" start="1277" end="1291" title="John Wilkinson (industrialist)" label="John Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294970" start="1312" end="1329" title="Charles Rashleigh" label="Charles Rashleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q937918" start="1353" end="1364" title="Charlestown, Cornwall" label="Charlestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146091" start="1417" end="1436" title="Henry Arundell, 8th Baron Arundell of Wardour" label="Lord Henry Arundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q319331" start="1454" end="1460" title="Josiah Wedgwood" label="Josiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263356" start="1465" end="1478" title="John Wedgwood (1766–1844)" label="John Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="2066" end="2073" title="tungsten" label="wolfram"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="2075" end="2082" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="2088" end="2092" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q180803" start="3394" end="3399" title="Truro" label="Truro"/>
<link wikidata="Q310439" start="3612" end="3622" title="George Fox" label="George Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="3639" end="3667" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Religious Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q367875" start="3864" end="3900" title="Richard Edgcumbe, 1st Baron Edgcumbe" label="Richard Edgcumbe, 1st Baron Edgcumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851558" start="3954" end="3967" title="Richard Lower (physician)" label="Richard Lower"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="4183" end="4194" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="4207" end="4216" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367976" start="4531" end="4536" title="elvan" label="elvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177150" start="4718" end="4729" title="counting house" label="count house"/>
<link wikidata="Q364000" start="4783" end="4796" title="stamping mill" label="stamping mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="4897" end="4907" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839553" start="5026" end="5033" title="Trewoon" label="Trewoon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962540" wikidata="Q459948" url="?curid=962540" title="Ambrym">
<text>Ambrym is a volcanic island in Malampa Province in the archipelago of Vanuatu. Volcanic activity on the island includes lava lakes in two craters near the summit.

==Etymology==
Ambrym (also known as &quot;Ambrin&quot;, &quot;ham rim&quot; in the Ranon language) was allegedly named by Captain Cook, who is said to have anchored off there in 1774. In fact, his expedition never touched Ambrym.

==Geography==
Located near the center of the Vanuatuan archipelago, Ambrym is roughly triangular in shape, about wide. With of surface area, it is the fifth largest island in the country. The summit at the centre of the island is dominated by a desert-like caldera, which covers an area of . With the exception of human settlements, the rest of the island is covered by a dense jungle.

===Important Bird Area===
The western part of the island, comprising 17,605 ha of forest, together with gardens around habitation, has been recognised as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports populations of Vanuatu megapodes, Tanna fruit doves, red-bellied fruit doves, grey-eared honeyeaters, cardinal myzomelas, fan-tailed gerygones, long-tailed trillers, streaked fantails, Melanesian flycatchers, buff-bellied monarchs and Vanuatu white-eyes.

==Volcanology==
Ambrym is a large basaltic volcano with a 12-km-wide caldera, and is one of the most active volcanoes of the New Hebrides volcanic arc. The caldera is the result of a huge Plinian eruption, which took place around AD 50. Its explosive force is rated 6, the third highest in the Smithsonian Institution&#x27;s Volcanic Explosivity Index ranks of the largest volcanic explosions in recent geological history.

While at higher elevations cinder cones predominate, the western tip of the island is characterized by a series of basaltic tuff rings, of which the largest is about in diameter. These were produced by phreatic eruptions when magma contacted the water table and water-saturated sediments along the coast. The massive, 1900-year-old, × caldera is the site of two active volcanic cones, Benbow and Marum (also spelled Maroum). Mount Benbow was named after English Admiral John Benbow (1653–1702) by Captain Cook.

Several times a century, Ambrym volcano has destructive eruptions. Mount Benbow last erupted explosively in 1913, destroying the mission hospital at Dip Point. Volcanic gas emissions from this volcano are measured by a Multi-Component Gas Analyzer System, which detects pre-eruptive degassing of rising magmas, improving prediction of volcanic activity.

In March 2017, Google added Marum crater with its lava lakes to Google Streetview. Since the last fissure eruption on 16 Dec 2018, the lava lake has disappeared.

==Demographics==
With the neighbouring island of Malakula and a few smaller islands, Ambrym forms Malampa Province. The population of 7,275 inhabitants lives mainly off coconut plantations in the three corners of the island.

==Languages==
Like many islands in Vanuatu, Ambrym has its own Austronesian languages.

In the north:

* Fanbyak
* North Ambrym language

In the southeast:

* Vatlongos (Southeast Ambrym language)

In the southwest:

* Daakie
* Daakaka
* Dalkalaen
* Lonwolwol
* Raljago

==Towns and villages==
===Southwest===
* Fali, Craig Cove, Baiap, Sesivi, Port Vato, Bwele, Lalinda, Tow, Yaotilie, Sanesup, Emiotungan, Maranata and Pelibetakever

===Southeast===
* Maat, Paamal, Toak, Uléi, Utas, Tavéak, Asé, Pawé, Saméo, Endu, Pahakol and Benebo

===North===
* Ranuetlam, Ranon, Olal, Fanla, Linboul, Wilit, Lonwara, Fona, Nebul and Megham

==Tourism==
Tourists are attracted by Ambrym&#x27;s active volcanoes, tropical vegetation, and the customs of the local villagers. They stay in traditional bungalows, as there are no hotels on the island.

==Transportation==
The island is served by two airports, Ulei Airport in the southeast and Craig Cove Airport in the southwest.

==Popular culture==
Ambrym is featured in the 2016 Werner Herzog documentary, &quot;Into the Inferno&quot;.

Episode two of the BBC documentary &quot;Into the Volcano&quot; hosted by Kate Humble was filmed on Ambrym in 2014.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459948" start="0" end="6" title="Ambrym" label="Ambrym"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="12" end="20" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="21" end="27" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q740656" start="31" end="47" title="Malampa Province" label="Malampa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="55" end="66" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="70" end="77" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q119306" start="120" end="129" title="lava lake" label="lava lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="286" end="298" title="Captain Cook" label="Captain Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="440" end="447" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="652" end="659" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="939" end="958" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="968" end="990" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190882" start="1026" end="1042" title="Vanuatu megapode" label="Vanuatu megapode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274698" start="1045" end="1061" title="Tanna fruit dove" label="Tanna fruit dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263328" start="1064" end="1086" title="red-bellied fruit dove" label="red-bellied fruit dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q901966" start="1089" end="1110" title="grey-eared honeyeater" label="grey-eared honeyeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313726" start="1113" end="1130" title="cardinal myzomela" label="cardinal myzomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301876" start="1133" end="1152" title="fan-tailed gerygone" label="fan-tailed gerygone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667606" start="1155" end="1174" title="long-tailed triller" label="long-tailed triller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923245" start="1177" end="1193" title="streaked fantail" label="streaked fantail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224640" start="1196" end="1217" title="Melanesian flycatcher" label="Melanesian flycatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q905062" start="1220" end="1240" title="buff-bellied monarch" label="buff-bellied monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319474" start="1246" end="1263" title="Vanuatu white-eye" label="Vanuatu white-eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="1301" end="1309" title="basaltic" label="basaltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q752431" start="1392" end="1404" title="New Hebrides" label="New Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q747501" start="1455" end="1471" title="Plinian eruption" label="Plinian eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q30310" start="1497" end="1502" title="AD 50" label="AD 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="1561" end="1584" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="1592" end="1618" title="Volcanic Explosivity Index" label="Volcanic Explosivity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="1806" end="1814" title="basaltic" label="basaltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="1815" end="1819" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067217" start="1893" end="1911" title="phreatic eruptions" label="phreatic eruptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="1917" end="1922" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="1937" end="1948" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2076" end="2082" title="Benbow (volcano)" label="Benbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q592237" start="2161" end="2172" title="John Benbow" label="John Benbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231684" start="2422" end="2457" title="Multi-Component Gas Analyzer System" label="Multi-Component Gas Analyzer System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409314" start="2524" end="2555" title="prediction of volcanic activity" label="prediction of volcanic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q213602" start="2622" end="2639" title="Google Streetview" label="Google Streetview"/>
<link wikidata="Q618594" start="2770" end="2778" title="Malakula" label="Malakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q740656" start="2819" end="2835" title="Malampa Province" label="Malampa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="2890" end="2897" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="2898" end="2909" title="plantations" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="3010" end="3032" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102970" start="3052" end="3059" title="Fanbak language" label="Fanbyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842468" start="3062" end="3083" title="North Ambrym language" label="North Ambrym language"/>
<link wikidata="Q252411" start="3117" end="3142" title="Southeast Ambrym language" label="Southeast Ambrym language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398323" start="3166" end="3172" title="Daakie" label="Daakie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157729" start="3175" end="3182" title="Daakaka language" label="Daakaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845773" start="3185" end="3194" title="Dalkalaen language" label="Dalkalaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259216" start="3197" end="3206" title="Lonwolwol language" label="Lonwolwol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259216" start="3209" end="3216" title="Raljago language" label="Raljago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3259" end="3263" title="Fali, Vanuatu" label="Fali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3265" end="3275" title="Craig Cove" label="Craig Cove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3277" end="3282" title="Baiap" label="Baiap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3284" end="3290" title="Sesivi" label="Sesivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231004" start="3292" end="3301" title="Port Vato" label="Port Vato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3303" end="3308" title="Bwele" label="Bwele"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3310" end="3317" title="Lalinda" label="Lalinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372515" start="3343" end="3353" title="Emiotungan" label="Emiotungan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3368" end="3381" title="Pelibetakever" label="Pelibetakever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3415" end="3419" title="Toak" label="Toak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3421" end="3425" title="Uléi" label="Uléi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598445" start="3459" end="3463" title="Endu Pahakol" label="Endu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598445" start="3465" end="3472" title="Pahakol" label="Pahakol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3499" end="3508" title="Ranuetlam" label="Ranuetlam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3510" end="3515" title="Ranon, Vanuatu" label="Ranon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3517" end="3521" title="Olal" label="Olal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066419" start="3523" end="3528" title="Fanla" label="Fanla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3530" end="3537" title="Linboul" label="Linboul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878832" start="3842" end="3854" title="Ulei Airport" label="Ulei Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655171" start="3876" end="3894" title="Craig Cove Airport" label="Craig Cove Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="3965" end="3978" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q26821183" start="3998" end="4014" title="Into the Inferno (film)" label="Into the Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375552" start="4097" end="4108" title="Kate Humble" label="Kate Humble"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962542" wikidata="Q6844070" url="?curid=962542" title="Might">
<text>Might or MIGHT may refer to:
* Power (social and political)
* &quot;might&quot;, an epistemic modal verb in English

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Might&quot; (magazine), an American satirical periodical (1994–1997)
* &quot;Might!&quot;, a 1995 noise music album by Boyd Rice (&quot;NON&quot;) based on the book Might is Right
* &quot;Might&quot;, a song on Modest Mouse&#x27;s 1996 album &quot;This Is a Long Drive for Someone with Nothing to Think About&quot;

==Other uses==
* USS &quot;Might&quot; (PG-94), an American gunboat
* Malaysian Industry Government Group for High Technology, a tech think tank

== See also ==
* Mighty (disambiguation)
* Might makes right, an aphorism on morality
* Mite (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6844070" start="0" end="5" title="Might" label="Might"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844070" start="9" end="14" title="Might" label="MIGHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="31" end="59" title="Power (social and political)" label="Power (social and political)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84" end="115" title="English modal verbs#May and might" label="epistemic modal verb in English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844083" start="146" end="174" title="Might (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Might&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="229" end="235" title="Might!" label="Might!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="271" end="298" title="Boyd Rice#NON" label="Boyd Rice (&amp;quot;NON&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q951265" start="317" end="331" title="Might is Right" label="Might is Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087381" start="400" end="460" title="This Is a Long Drive for Someone with Nothing to Think About" label="This Is a Long Drive for Someone with Nothing to Think About"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871794" start="485" end="514" title="USS Might (PG-94)" label="USS &amp;quot;Might&amp;quot; (PG-94)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453976" start="538" end="593" title="Malaysian Industry Government Group for High Technology" label="Malaysian Industry Government Group for High Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753391" start="631" end="654" title="Mighty (disambiguation)" label="Mighty (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258484" start="657" end="674" title="Might makes right" label="Might makes right"/>
<link wikidata="Q20660703" start="702" end="723" title="Mite (disambiguation)" label="Mite (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962547" wikidata="Q6634301" url="?curid=962547" title="List of ideological symbols">
<text>This is a partial list of symbols and labels used by political parties, groups or movements around the world. Some symbols are associated with one or more worldwide ideologies and used by many parties that support a particular ideology. Others are region or country-specific.

== Colors ==
=== Worldwide ===

* Black – anarchism, fascism, pirate parties, black nationalism
* Blue – conservatism, pro-Europeanism, Zionism, American liberalism, Japanese liberalism
* Brown – fascism, Nazism, far-right politics 
* Gold – capitalism, classical liberalism, right-libertarianism
* Green – agrarianism, anarcho-egoism, anarcho-primitivism, capitalism, environmentalism, Islamism, green anarchism, green politics, black nationalism, Irish republicanism
* Gray – independent politicians
* Lavender – LGBT movements, transgender rights movement
* Magenta – centrism
* Orange – Christian democracy, populism, mutualist anarchism, classical liberalism, Ulster unionism
* Pink – feminism, LGBT movements, transgender rights movement
* Purple – monarchism, royalism
* Red – communism, democratic socialism, social democracy, socialism, American conservatism, Japanese conservatism
* Saffron – Hindu nationalism
* White – anti-communism, independent politicians, monarchism, pacifism, white nationalism, Zionism
* Yellow – liberalism, left-libertarianism
=== Armenia ===

* Gold and silver – Hosank
=== Australia ===

* Blue – The Liberal Party
* Brown – National Socialist Party of Australia
* Red – The Labor Party
* Green – The Greens
* Green and yellow – The National Party
* Blue and orange - Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation
=== Brazil ===

* Blue – Brazilian Integralist Action
* Green, yellow, blue and white – Brazilian Labour Renewal Party
=== Bangladesh ===

* Blue, red and green – Bangladesh Nationalist Party
* Fern Green – Bangladesh Jamaat Islami
* Green – Bangladesh Awami League
* Yellow – Jatiyo Party
=== Canada ===

* Blue – Conservative Party of Canada
* Green – Green Party of Canada
* Light blue – Bloc Québécois
* Orange – New Democratic Party
* Purple – People&#x27;s Party of Canada 
* Red – Liberal Party of Canada
=== Chile ===

* Blue – Christian Democratic Party
* Orange and navy blue – National Libertarian Party
=== France ===

* Red – La France Insoumise
* Red – Parti Communiste Français
* Pink – Parti Socialiste
* Green – Europe Ecologie Les Verts
* Green – Génération.s
* Orange – Mouvement Démocrate
* Orange – La République en Marche
* Yellow – Renaissance
* Blue – Les Républicains
* Dark blue – Rassemblement National
=== Guatemala ===

* Red and blue – Victoria
=== Hungary ===

* Green and gold – Christian Democratic People&#x27;s Party
* Orange – Fidesz
* Red, white and green – Arrow Cross Party
=== Italy ===

* Black and red – South Tyrolean People&#x27;s Party 
=== India ===

* Blue – Bahujan Samaj Party
* Blue – Mizo National Front
* Blue, red, and green – Rashtiya Lok Janshakti Party and Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas)
* Blue, white, and green – Yuvajana Sramika Rythu Congress Party
* Bright green – All India Trinamool Congress
* Deep green – Biju Janata Dal
* Blue – Aam Aadmi Party
* Green – All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
* Green – All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen, Janata Dal (Secular)
* Green – Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
* Green – National People&#x27;s Party (India)
* Green and yellow – Rashtriya Loktantrik Party
* Maize and green – Indigenous People&#x27;s Front of Tripura
* Navy blue and orange – Shiromani Akali Dal
* Pacific Blue – Nationalist Congress Party
* Pink – Janta Congress Chhattisgarh, Bharat Rashtra Samithi
* Red – All India Forward Bloc, Communist Party of India, Communist Party of India (Marxist), Left Front, Revolutionary Socialist Party (India)
* Red – Sikkim Krantikari Morcha
* Red and black – Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
* Red and green – Samajwadi Party
* Red and white – Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party
* Saffron and green – Bharatiya Janata Party
* Sky blue – Indian National Congress
* White – other parties and independents
* Yellow – Right to Recall Party
* Yellow – Telugu Desam Party
* Yellow and green – Jannayak Janta Party
=== Ireland ===

* Blue – Fine Gael
* Dark green – Sinn Féin
* Dark green and white – The National Party
* Green – Fianna Fáil
* Green and gold – Green Party
* Maroon – Solidarity–People Before Profit
* Purple – Social Democrats
* Red – Labour Party
=== Japan ===

* Blue – Constitutional Democratic Party
* Blue and pink – Komeito
* Red – Liberal Democratic Party, Communist Party
=== Lebanon ===

* Green, white and brown – Kataeb Party
* Black, red and white – Syrian Social Nationalist Party in Lebanon
=== Mexico ===

* Black and red – Camisas Rojas
* Red, white and green – National Synarchist Union
* Green, gold and black – Nationalist Front of Mexico
=== The Netherlands ===

* Azure and navy – Christian Union
* Green – Christian Democratic Appeal
* Green – Democrats 66
* Green – Farmer–Citizen Movement
* Green – Party for the Animals
* Green and red – GreenLeft
* Maroon – Forum for Democracy
* Navy and red – JA21
* Orange – Reformed Political Party
* Orange and blue – People&#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy
* Purple – Volt
* Red – Labour Party
* Red – Socialist Party
* Red, white, and blue – Party for Freedom
* Turquoise – DENK
=== New Zealand ===

* ACT New Zealand
* Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand
* New Zealand Labour Party
* New Zealand National Party
* New Zealand First
* Te Pāti Māori
=== Portugal ===

* Blue – People&#x27;s Monarchist Party
* Dark blue – Chega
* Green – Ecologist Party &quot;The Greens&quot;
* Green – Earth Party
* Green – Together for the People
* Green – LIVRE
* Orange – Social Democratic Party
* Red – Portuguese Communist Party
* Red – Portuguese Workers&#x27; Communist Party
* Red (official) and maroon (customary) – Left Bloc
* Red (official) and pink (customary) – Socialist Party
* Sky blue – CDS – People&#x27;s Party
* Sky blue – Liberal Initiative
* Teal – People Animals Nature
=== Russia ===
* White, blue and red – United Russia
* Red – Communist Party
* Yellow and maroon – A Just Russia – For Truth
* Blue and yellow (official), light blue (customary) – LDPR
* Turquoise and black – New People
=== Rwanda ===

* Sky blue – Rwandan Patriotic Front
=== Serbia ===

* Grey – Party of Serbian Unity
=== Slovakia ===

* Dark blue and white – Slovak Togetherness
* Green – People&#x27;s Party Our Slovakia
* White, blue and red – Slovak People&#x27;s Party
=== South Africa ===
* Orange, white, blue, and green – Afrikaner Volksfront
* Red, white and black – Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging
* Orange, white and blue – Herstigte Nasionale Party 
* Red, black and yellow – South African Communist Party

=== Sweden ===

* Blue – Moderate Party
* Blue and white – Christian Democrats
* Blue and white – Liberals
* Green – Centre Party
* Green – Green Party
* Orange and blue – Alliance
* Pink – Feminist Initiative
* Purple – Pirate Party
* Red – Left Party
* Red – Swedish Social Democratic Party
* Red and green – Red-Greens
* Yellow and light-blue – Sweden Democrats
=== Syria ===

* Black, red and white – Syrian Social Nationalist Party
=== Turkey ===

* Blue – Good Party
* Purple – Peoples&#x27; Democratic Party
* Red – Nationalist Movement Party
* Red – Republican People&#x27;s Party
* Yellow – Justice and Development Party
=== United Kingdom ===

* Blue – Conservative Party
* Green – Green Party
* Green and yellow – Plaid Cymru
* Orange – Liberal Democrats
* Purple and yellow – UKIP
* Red – Labour Party
* Red, white, and blue – DUP
* Turquoise and white – Reform UK
* Yellow and black – SNP
=== United States ===

* Black, gold, white and maroon – American Indian Movement
* Blue – Democratic Party
* Blue and buff – Whig Party (United States)
* Gold with dark gray, sometimes with dark blue or purple – Libertarian Party
* Green – Green Party
* Orange – American Solidarity Party (Christian democracy)
* Purple – politically mixed or moderate regions; Constitution Party, Veterans Party of America
* Red – Republican Party
* Teal and white – Justice Party
* White or gray – senior citizens, women&#x27;s voting rights, third parties (other than the Greens), independent candidates and voters
=== Venezuela ===

* Red and black – Revolutionary Movement Tupamaro
* Red – United Socialist Party of Venezuela
== Icons ==
===Worldwide===

* a³ (lowercase a, cubed) – Agorism
* Ballot – democracy
* Beehive – co-operative movement
* Bird in flight – classical liberalism, right-libertarianism
* Black rose – anarchism 
* Arrow Cross – Hungarism
* Black sail – pirate parties
* Black sun – esoteric Nazism, neo-Nazism, white nationalism
* Bear – Putinism, Russian conservatism
* Carnation – social democracy and democratic socialism
* Cat, wildcat – worker collectivism, symbol of Industrial Workers of the World; Georgism
* Celtic cross – white nationalism, neo-Nazism, white pride, Irish nationalism, Celtic neopaganism
* ✝ Christian cross – Christianity
* Cross and sickle – Christian communism
* Ⓐ Circumscribed A – anarchism
* ⚙ Cogwheel – Labour movement, working class, agriculturalism
* Constitution – democracy
* Cross of Burgundy – Spanish nationalism, Carlism, nostalgia for the Spanish Empire
* ☨ Cross of Lorraine – Gaullism
* Cross of Saint Peter – Satanism, Opposition to Christianity, Anti-Christian sentiment
* Cross potent – Roman Catholicism, Austrofascism
* ♕ Crown – monarchism
* 🕊 Dove – love and/or peace (often used by pacifist groups)
* Eagle – nationalism, patriotism, conservatism
* Easter lily (calla lily) – Irish republicanism, Irish nationalism
* Fasces – fascism, neo-fascism, Italian fascism, magisterial power, authority
* Fist and rose – socialism, social democracy, left-wing politics, center-left politics
* Flash and circle – British fascism
* 🍀 Four-leaf clover – agrarianism, Hibernophila, Irish nationalism, good luck
* 🌐Globe – globalism, neoliberalism, Internationalism
* ☭ Hammer and sickle – communism, Marxism–Leninism
* Hammer, sickle and brush – Juche, Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism
* Hawk of Quraish – Arab nationalism, Pan-Arabism
* Heart ensigned with a crosslet (&quot;Sacred Heart&quot;) – Integralism
* Labrys – Lesbian feminism, Metaxism, Matriarchy, Third Positionism, Révolution nationale, Nazi-Maoism
* Lambda – Identitarianism, Nouvelle Droite
* Lion – Nobility, Judeo Christianity, Rastafari
* Machete and Gear – Angolanidade
* ♂ Mars symbol - masculinity
* 📰 Newspaper – democracy, press freedom
* Nordic cross – Nordic model social democracy
* Olive tree – peace, community, health
* Parthenon – democracy
* ☮ Peace sign – peace, pacifism, nuclear disarmament, democracy
* Plough – communism, agrarian socialism, peasant movement, peasants rights
* Poppy – remembrance, WW1 and WW2
* Protest sign - democracy and resistance to tyranny
* Rainbow or rainbow flag – LGBT rights
* Raised fist – solidarity, syndicalism, unity, resistance, communism, radicalism in general 
* Rebel Alliance - democracy and resistance to tyranny
* ⚑ Red flag – socialism, communism, anti-fascism
* Red Hand of Ulster – Ulster loyalism, Ulster unionism, Ulster nationalism
* ★ Red star – socialism, Marxism, communism, Neozapatismo
* Red whirlwind (Zawba&#x27;a) – Syrian Social Nationalism
* Ribbon of Saint George – Anti-Maidan, Ruscism, Pro-war nationalist opposition to Vladimir Putin, support for the Russian invasion of Ukraine
* Rose – social democracy and democratic socialism
* Runic letters – various letters of the runic alphabet – particularly the Algiz, Eihwaz, Odal, Sowilō, and Tiwaz runes – have been used by various neo-Nazi and white supremacist groups post-WW2. However, these runes are also very commonly used by non-racialist Heathens and followers of Germanic Neopaganism in an apolitical context.
* Shahada – Wahhabism, Islamism 
* Sigma – Brazilian integralism, Manosphere, Tateism
* Six-pointed Star and Fist – Kahanism
* Six Arrows – Kemalism
* Smiling Sun – anti-nuclear movement
* St. Michael&#x27;s Cross (Archangel Michael Cross) – Legionarism, Neo-Legionarism
* ✡ Star of David – Zionism
* Starry Plough – Irish republican socialism
* 🗽 Statue of Liberty - liberty, democracy, American democracy
* 🌻 Sunflower – green politics
* Swastika – Nazism, fascism, neo-Nazism; Hindu, Jain, or Buddhist theology (original use)
* Three Arrows – mid 20th century European social democracy; the arrows represent anti-fascism, anti-communism, and anti-monarchism
* Three-finger salute (pro-democracy) - democracy and resistance to tyranny
* Throne, sword and altar – conservatism
* Torch – right-libertarianism, conservatism, patriotism, classical liberalism
* Triskelion – Polytheistic reconstructionism, Celtic neopaganism 
* Upside-down crown – republicanism, anti-monarchism
* ♀ Venus symbol – feminism
* Venus symbol and raised fist combined – radical feminism
* ✌ V sign – voluntarism, peace, victory, veganism
* ⚖ Weighing scale – law, justice
* Wolf salute – Pan-Turkism
* Wolfsangel – Azov movement, Ukrainian nationalism, Third Positionism, neo-Nazism, rebellion 
* Yoke and arrows – Falangism
* Z (military symbol) – Putinism, Ruscism, Russian irredentism 
=== Bangladesh ===

* Boat – Bangladesh Awami League
* Sheaf of Paddy – Bangladesh Nationalist Party
* Plough – Jatiya Party
=== Belgium ===

* Circled upright triangle – Vlaamsch Nationaal Verbond 
* Inverted Arrow Cross – French National-Collectivist Party
* Bold rooster (coq hardi) – Walloon Movement, Rassemblement Wallonie France, Wallonie Libre, Walloon Rally, 
* Sword, cog and plough – Verdinaso
=== Brazil ===

* Dove and olive branch – Brazilian Socialist Party
* Fist and rose – Democratic Labour Party (Brazil)
* Oak tree – Republicans (Brazil)
* Red star – Workers&#x27; Party (Brazil)
* Toucan – Brazilian Social Democracy Party
* Sigma – Brazilian Integralist Action, Brazilian Integralist Front
=== Cambodia ===

* Devata – Cambodian People&#x27;s Party
* Golden Angkor Wat – Khmer Rouge
=== Canada ===

* Red maple leaf — Liberal Party of Canada
* Red maple leaf within the letter C — Conservative Party of Canada
* Orange maple leaf — New Democratic Party
* Orange torch — National Unity Party of Canada
=== Colombia ===

* letter C – Colombian Conservative Party
* letter L – Colombian Liberal Party
* letter U – Social National Unity Party (&quot;Party of the U&quot;)
=== Costa Rica ===

* Golden torch – People&#x27;s Vanguard Party
=== Croatia ===

* letter U – Ustaša – Croatian Revolutionary Movement
=== Denmark ===

* letter A – Social Democrats
* Rose – Social Democrats
* letter B – Social Liberal Party
* letter C – Conservative People&#x27;s Party
* letter F – Socialist People&#x27;s Party
* letter I – Liberal Alliance
* letter K – Christian Democrats
* letter N – People&#x27;s Movement against the EU
* letter O – Danish People&#x27;s Party
* letter Ø – Red-Green Alliance
* letter V – Venstre, Liberal Party of Denmark
* Tiwaz rune – Nordic Resistance Movement
=== Finland ===

* Tiwaz rune – Nordic Resistance Movement
=== Greece ===

* Green Sun - Panhellenic Socialist Movement
* Compass - Greek Solution
* Meandros - Golden Dawn
* Swastika - Golden Dawn (Greece)
* Hand holding a Torch - Nea Dimokratia 

===Hong Kong===
* Yellow Umbrella - pro-democracy symbol popularized in 2014 Hong Kong protests

===Hungary===
* Arrow Cross - Arrow Cross Party

=== Iceland ===
* Tiwaz rune – Nordic Resistance Movement

=== India ===
* Ard – Bodoland People&#x27;s Front (Jharkhand)
* Arrow – Janata Dal (United) (Bihar, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Nagaland)
* Banana – All Jharkhand Students Union (Jharkhand)
* Bicycle – Jammu and Kashmir National Panthers Party (Jammu and Kashmir), Samajwadi Party (Uttar Pradesh), Telugu Desam Party (Andhra Pradesh)
* Book – National People&#x27;s Party
* Bow and arrow – Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (Jharkhand), Shiv Sena (Maharashtra)
* Broom – Aam Aadmi Party
* Bungalow – Lok Janshakti Party (Bihar)
* Candles – People&#x27;s Democratic Front (Meghalaya)
* Car – Telangana Rashtra Samithi
* Ceiling fan – Rashtriya Lok Samta Party (Bihar), YSR Congress Party (Andhra Pradesh, Telangana)
* Clock – Nationalist Congress Party
* Coconut – Goa Forward Party (Goa)
* Conch – Biju Janata Dal (Odisha)
* Crown – People&#x27;s Democratic Alliance (Meghalaya)
* Dao – Indigenous People&#x27;s Front of Tripura (Tripura)
* Drum – United Democratic Party (Meghalaya) (Meghalaya)
* Ears of maize and sickle – Communist Party of India
* Elephant – Asom Gana Parishad (Assam), Bahujan Samaj Party (with the exception of the states of Assam and Sikkim where certain state parties use the elephant)
* Five-pointed star – Mizo National Front (Mizoram)
* Farmer ploughing (within square farm) – Janta Congress Chhattisgarh (Chhattisgarh)
* Flowers and grass – All India Trinamool Congress
* Glasses – Indian National Lok Dal (Haryana)
* Globe – Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party (Nagaland)
* Hammer, sickle and star – Communist Party of India (Marxist)
* Hand pump – Rashtriya Lok Dal (Uttar Pradesh)
* Hurricane lamp – Rashtriya Janata Dal (Bihar, Jharkhand)
* Ink pot and pen – People&#x27;s Democratic Party (Jammu and Kashmir)
* Jug – All India N.R. Congress (Puducherry)
* Key – Jannayak Janta Party (Haryana)
* Lightbulb – Mizoram People&#x27;s Conference (Mizoram)
* Locomotive – Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (Maharashtra)
* Maize – People&#x27;s Party of Arunachal (Arunachal Pradesh)
* Mango – Pattali Makkal Katchi (Puducherry)
* Kite – People&#x27;s Party of Punjab (Punjab), All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (Telangana)
* Ladder – Muslim League (Kerala)
* Lady farmer carrying paddy on her head – Janata Dal (Secular) (Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala)
* Lion – All India Forward Bloc (West Bengal), Hill State People&#x27;s Democratic Party (Meghalaya), Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (Goa)
* Lock and key – All India United Democratic Front (Assam)
* Lotus – Bharatiya Janata Party
* Nagara – Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam (Tamil Nadu)
* Palm (of hand) – Indian National Congress
* Plough – Jammu &amp; Kashmir National Conference (Jammu and Kashmir)
* Rooster – Naga People&#x27;s Front (Manipur, Nagaland)
* Spade and ashpan rake – Revolutionary Socialist Party (Kerala, West Bengal)
* Spectacles – Indian National Lok Dal (Haryana)
* Rising sun – Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (Tamil Nadu)
* Sun without rays – Zoram Nationalist Party (Mizoram)
* Table lamp – Sikkim Krantikari Morcha (Sikkim)
* Telephone – Himachal Vikas Congress (Himachal Pradesh)
* Two leaves – All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (Tamil Nadu), Kerala Congress (M) (Kerala)
* Umbrella – Sikkim Democratic Front (Sikkim)
* Water bottle – Rashtriya Loktantrik Party (Rajasthan)
* Weighing scale – Shiromani Akali Dal (Punjab)
=== Iran ===
* Slashed equal sign – Nation Party of Iran, Pan-Iranist Party

=== Ireland ===

* Starry Plough – Irish Citizen Army, Irish Republican Socialist Party, Irish National Liberation Army, Irish People&#x27;s Liberation Organisation, Labour Party
=== Israel ===

* Hand with two raised fingers – Lehi (militant group)
* Six-pointed Star and Fist – Kach (political party), Jewish Defense League
=== Italy ===

* Arrowed turtle - CasaPound
* Labrys - Ordine Nuovo, Movimento Politico Ordine Nuovo
* Tricolor Flame (Fiamma Tricolore) - Brothers of Italy, Social Movement Tricolour Flame, The Right – Tricolour Flame, Italian Social Movement
* Wolfsangel - Terza Posizione
=== Japan ===

* Rising Sun Flag - Zaitokukai
=== Lebanon ===
* Cedar tree split into three parts - Kataeb Party, Kataeb Regulatory Forces 
* Cross of Resistance (Salib al-Muqawama) - Lebanese Forces (militia)

=== Nepal ===

* Bus – Nepal Federal Socialist Party
* Khukuri – Sanghiya Loktantrik Rastriya Manch
* Madal – Nepal Majdoor Kisan Party
* Plough – Rastriya Prajatantra Party
* Smiley – Bibeksheel Nepali Dal
* Sun – Nepal Communist Party
* Tree – Nepali Congress
* Tumbler – Rastriya Janamorcha
* Umbrella – People&#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal
* Weighing scale – Sajha Party
=== The Netherlands ===

* Ancient Greek temple – Forum for Democracy
* Seagull – Party for Freedom
* Tomato – Socialist Party
* Red rose – Labour Party
=== Pakistan ===

* Arrow – Pakistan Peoples Party
* Book – Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI)
* Cricket bat – Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaaf
* Kite – Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM)
* Lantern - Awami National Party (ANP)
* Sunflower – Green Party of Pakistan
* Tiger – Pakistan Muslim League (N)
* Weighing scale – Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan (JI)
=== Poland ===

* Falanga symbol - National Radical Camp, Falanga (organisation)
* Toporzeł - Zadruga, Niklot
* Mieczyk Chrobrego - All-Polish Youth, National Party, Camp of Great Poland

=== Russia ===

* Bladed swastika – Russian National Unity
* Chi Rho – Great Russia
* Cross potent – People&#x27;s National Party, Russian National Union
* Symbol of Chaos – Eurasianism
=== Slovakia ===

* Christian cross – Christian Democratic Movement
* Blue cube – Slovak Democratic and Christian Union – Democratic Party
* Flying dove – Free Forum
* Eagle – Slovak National Party
* Red star – Communist Party of Slovakia
* letter S – People&#x27;s Party – Movement for a Democratic Slovakia
* Stork – Christian Democratic Movement
=== South Africa ===

* Triskele of three sevens – Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging
=== Sweden ===

* Black sail – Pirate Party
* Cornflower – Liberals &quot;(pre-2016)&quot;
* Dandelion – Green Party 
* Four-leaf clover – Centre Party
* Hepatica – Sweden Democrats
* Jēran – National Youth
* letter L – Liberals
* letter M – Moderate Party
* Tiwaz rune – Nordic Resistance Movement
* Red carnation – Left Party 
* Rose – Social Democrats
* Wolfsangel – Vitt Ariskt Motstånd
* Wood anemone – Christian Democrats &quot;(pre-2017)&quot;
=== Switzerland ===

* Phrygian cap with a Swiss cross – Swiss Party of Labour
=== Taiwan ===

* Blue Sky with a White Sun – Kuomintang
=== Turkey ===

* Bee – Motherland Party 
* Dolphin – Liberal Democratic Party
* Dove – Democratic Left Party
* Horse – Democrat Party
* Kayı tribe symbol – Good Party
* Lightbulb – Justice and Development Party
* Six arrows – Republican People&#x27;s Party
* Three crescents – Nationalist Movement Party 
* Wolf – Idealist Hearths
=== Ukraine ===
* At sign – Internet Party of Ukraine
* Hand with three fingers raised – Svoboda (political party)
* Tryzub with sword – OUN-M, Right Sector, Tryzub (organization) 
* Wolfsangel – Patriot of Ukraine, Azov Civil Corps, Social-National Assembly, Social-National Party of Ukraine, Karelian National Battalion

=== United Kingdom ===

* Bee – Co-operative Party
* Earth with sunflower petals – Green Party of England and Wales
* Flash and circle – British Union of Fascists, British fascism
* Griffin – Libertarian Party
* Liberty bird – Liberal Democrats
* Lion – Democratic Unionist Party, Britain First, UK Independence Party (2017-2018), Young Conservatives (UK)
* Pound sign – UK Independence Party (1993–2017)
* Red house – Aspire (political party)
* Red rose – Labour Party
* Thistle - Scottish Labour (since 2022)
* Saltire – the Scottish National Party and Scottish Conservative Party both use stylised saltires in their party logos
* Scribbled oak tree – Conservative Party
* Shovel – Labour Party (UK) until 1983
* Stylised P-shaped Flag – Pirate Party UK
* Sun cross – British Movement
* Sunflower – Scottish Green Party
* Torch – former logo of the Labour Party (1920s to 1983) and the Conservative Party (1980s to 2006).
* Union Flag – used in the logos of the Ulster Unionist Party, Democratic Unionist Party, British National Party, Conservative Party (traditional), amongst others
* Welsh Dragon – former logo of Plaid Cymru; also appeared alongside the thistle, daffodil and clover leaf on the post-war Tory logo
* Welsh poppy – Plaid Cymru
* White Rose – logo of the Yorkshire Party, symbol of Yorkshire as a whole
=== United States ===

* Abraham Lincoln – Republican Party, used on some paper ballots in the US; also used as a fundraising symbol (such as with the party&#x27;s annual &quot;Lincoln Dinner&quot; in many states).
* Bear – California National Party
* Benjamin Franklin – Democratic Party, used on some paper ballots in the US
* Black and white cockade – Federalist Party
* Camel – Prohibition Party
* Donkey – Democratic Party
* Eagle – Republican Party (used on ballots in New York State); Constitution Party, American Party
* Elephant – Republican Party
* Lady Justice – Justice Party
* Letter L – Silver Legion of America
* Lion – National Party
* Minute Man and Embattled Farmer are the symbols of American Patriot Party (2003 to present)
* Moose – Vermont Progressive Party; also used in 1912 for the Bull Moose Party
* Panther – Black Panther Party
* Pelican – American Solidarity Party. Used for its association with Christian democracy.
* Penguin – used in some states as a symbol of the Libertarian Party
* Porcupine – Libertarian Party. Used as a symbol of the Free State Project in New Hampshire and libertarian ideas and movements in general.
* Raccoon – Whig Party
* Red rose – Democratic Socialists of America
* Red, white and blue cockade – Democratic-Republican Party
* Star – Democratic Party (used on ballots in New York State)
* Statue of Liberty – Libertarian Party. Also a national symbol
* Sunflower – Green Party; also, Republican presidential candidate Alfred Landon of Kansas in 1936
* Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson – Democratic Party – used as a fundraising symbol (such as with the party&#x27;s annual &quot;Jefferson-Jackson Dinner&quot; in many states)
* Tiger – formerly, the New York City Democratic Party and the Tammany Hall political machine that controlled it for more than a century and a half.
* Torch – Conservative Party of New York; Libertarian Party
== Flags ==
* Black flag – Anarchism, Islamism, Jihadism, Rebellion
* Black Bauhinia flag – Pro-democracy camp (Hong Kong), Hong Kong nationalism, Hong Kong independence, opposition to Chinese state nationalism
* Black-yellow-white flag – Russian ultranationalism, Russian imperialism, Russian irredentism 
* Canadian Duality Flag – Canadian federalism, Quebec autonomism
* Canadian Red Ensign – Canadian Anglophila, Support for the Commonwealth of Nations, Far-right politics in Canada, Canadian nationalism, White nationalism/supremacism in Canada, Alt right movement of Canada
* Calcutta flag – Indian independence movement
* Bisected red-and-black flag – Anarchist communism
* Confederate battle flag — Culture of the Southern United States, Historical commemoration of the Civil War, Neo-Confederates, Southern heritage, Lost Cause of the Confederacy, White supremacy, Rebellion
* Doug flag – Cascadia movement
* Estelada – Catalan independence movement, Catalan nationalism
* Flag of China – Chinese socialism, Chinese communism, Pro-Beijing camp (Hong Kong)
* Flag of Israel – Zionism
* Flag of Nazi Germany – Nazism, neo-Nazism, White supremacy, Aryanism, Nazi chic, Shock value
* Flag of North Korea – Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism, Pro-DPRK, Juche, Songun, Shock value
* Flag of Rhodesia – Rhodesian exile movement, Nostalgia for Rhodesia, White nationalism, White supremacy, Alt-right politics
* Flag of South Vietnam – Vietnamese diaspora, Anti-communism, Vietnamese democracy movement, Vietnamese heritage, Vietnamese ethnic unity, American nationalism
* Flag of Ba&#x27;athist Syria – Assadism, Neo-Ba&#x27;athism, pro-Syrian Ba&#x27;ath movement 
* Flag of the Arab Revolt – Pan-Arabism, Arab nationalism
* Flag of the Soviet Union – Communism, Soviet patriotism, Nostalgia for the Soviet Union, Marxism–Leninism, Communist chic, Neo-Sovietism, Support for the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Shock value
* Flag of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army – Banderism, Ukrainian nationalism, Opposition to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Anti-Sovietism, Russophobia
* Flag of the United States – American conservatism, American libertarianism, American nationalism, American exceptionalism, Americanism, Trumpism, Radical right
* Gadsden flag – Right libertarianism, Classical liberalism, Liberty, Libertarian conservativism, Tea Party movement, Individualism, Americanism
* Green flag – Third International Theory, Gaddafi loyalism, Irish nationalism
* Jihadist flag – Islamism, Islamic fundamentalism, Jihadism, Islamic extremism, Shock value
* Kapok flag – Cantonese nationalism, Cantonia Independence Movement, Cantonese culture
* Morning Star flag – Free Papua Movement, Papuan nationalism 
* Oranje, Blanje, Blou – Afrikaner ethnonationalism, Support for Apartheid, White supremacy, Anti-Black racism, White separatism
* Pan-African flag – Pan-Africanism, Black nationalism, Black power, Garveyism, pro-UNIA 
* Pine Tree Flag – Christian nationalism, American Libertarianism, Christian Patriot movement, Culture of New England, Right-wing libertarianism, Americanism
* Prince&#x27;s Flag – Dutch patriotism, Greater Netherlands movement, Nostalgia for the Dutch Republic, Pan-Netherlands politics, Far-right politics in Holland
* Rainbow flag (LGBT) – LGBT pride, LGBT rights, LGBT movements 
* Red flag – Socialism, Communism, Marxism, Labour movement, Left-wing politics, Anarchism
* Rising Sun Flag – Japanese militarism, Japanese nationalism
* Senyera – Catalan identity, Catalan nationalism
* White-blue-white flag – Anti-Putinism, opposition to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Irpin Declaration, Russian opposition
* White-red-white flag – Belarusian democracy movement, Belarusian opposition, opposition to Alexander Lukashenko, Belarusian nationalism, anti-Union State

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="319" end="328" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="330" end="337" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664326" start="339" end="353" title="pirate parties" label="pirate parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="355" end="372" title="black nationalism" label="black nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="382" end="394" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="396" end="411" title="pro-Europeanism" label="pro-Europeanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="413" end="420" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="422" end="441" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="American liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050715" start="443" end="462" title="Liberalism in Japan" label="Japanese liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="473" end="480" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="482" end="488" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="490" end="508" title="far-right politics" label="far-right politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="519" end="529" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="531" end="551" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="553" end="573" title="right-libertarianism" label="right-libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="584" end="595" title="agrarianism" label="agrarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348185" start="597" end="611" title="anarcho-egoism" label="anarcho-egoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q667672" start="613" end="632" title="anarcho-primitivism" label="anarcho-primitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="634" end="644" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="646" end="662" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="664" end="672" title="Islamism" label="Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q294864" start="674" end="689" title="green anarchism" label="green anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="691" end="705" title="green politics" label="green politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="707" end="724" title="black nationalism" label="black nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="726" end="745" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="755" end="777" title="independent politician" label="independent politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="792" end="806" title="LGBT movements" label="LGBT movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q110404039" start="808" end="835" title="transgender rights movement" label="transgender rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="848" end="856" title="centrism" label="centrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="868" end="887" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="889" end="897" title="populism" label="populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="899" end="918" title="Mutualism (economic theory)" label="mutualist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="920" end="940" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="942" end="957" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Ulster unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="967" end="975" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="977" end="991" title="LGBT movements" label="LGBT movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q110404039" start="993" end="1020" title="transgender rights movement" label="transgender rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="1032" end="1042" title="monarchism" label="monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="1044" end="1052" title="royalism" label="royalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1061" end="1070" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="1072" end="1092" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="1094" end="1110" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1112" end="1121" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="1123" end="1144" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="American conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331440" start="1146" end="1167" title="Japanese nationalism" label="Japanese conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307223" start="1180" end="1197" title="Hindu nationalism" label="Hindu nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="1208" end="1222" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="1224" end="1246" title="independent politician" label="independent politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="1249" end="1259" title="monarchism" label="monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="1261" end="1269" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="1271" end="1288" title="white nationalism" label="white nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="1290" end="1297" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1309" end="1319" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q831192" start="1321" end="1340" title="left-libertarianism" label="left-libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124290240" start="1378" end="1384" title="Hosank" label="Hosank"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="1413" end="1430" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="The Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978511" start="1441" end="1478" title="National Socialist Party of Australia" label="National Socialist Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="1487" end="1502" title="Australian Labor Party" label="The Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q781486" start="1513" end="1523" title="Australian Greens" label="The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="1545" end="1563" title="National Party of Australia" label="The National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585274" start="1584" end="1616" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation" label="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958743" start="1642" end="1670" title="Brazilian Integralist Action" label="Brazilian Integralist Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453861" start="1705" end="1735" title="Brazilian Labour Renewal Party" label="Brazilian Labour Renewal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q496810" start="1780" end="1808" title="Bangladesh Nationalist Party" label="Bangladesh Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475664" start="1824" end="1848" title="Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami" label="Bangladesh Jamaat Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="1859" end="1882" title="Awami League" label="Bangladesh Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361491" start="1894" end="1906" title="Jatiya Party (Ershad)" label="Jatiyo Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="1932" end="1960" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q691730" start="1971" end="1992" title="Green Party of Canada" label="Green Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="2008" end="2022" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="2034" end="2054" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q56612740" start="2066" end="2095" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Canada" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="2105" end="2128" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088" start="2146" end="2150" title="Blue (color)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395049" start="2153" end="2179" title="Christian Democratic Party (Chile)" label="Christian Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q126425000" start="2205" end="2231" title="National Libertarian Party" label="National Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q27978402" start="2256" end="2275" title="La France Insoumise" label="La France Insoumise"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="2284" end="2309" title="Parti Communiste Français" label="Parti Communiste Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="2319" end="2335" title="Parti Socialiste (France)" label="Parti Socialiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q613786" start="2346" end="2371" title="Europe_Ecology_–_The_Greens" label="Europe Ecologie Les Verts"/>
<link wikidata="Q31400965" start="2382" end="2394" title="Génération.s" label="Génération.s"/>
<link wikidata="Q587370" start="2406" end="2425" title="Mouvement Démocrate" label="Mouvement Démocrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23731823" start="2472" end="2483" title="Renaissance (French political party)" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012759" start="2493" end="2509" title="Les Républicains" label="Les Républicains"/>
<link wikidata="Q205150" start="2524" end="2546" title="Rassemblement National" label="Rassemblement National"/>
<link wikidata="Q20102586" start="2583" end="2591" title="Victory (political party)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q277879" start="2628" end="2668" title="Christian Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party (Hungary)" label="Christian Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q387006" start="2680" end="2686" title="Fidesz" label="Fidesz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="2712" end="2729" title="Arrow Cross Party" label="Arrow Cross Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q606620" start="2763" end="2797" title="South Tyrolean People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="South Tyrolean People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q803681" start="2823" end="2842" title="Bahujan Samaj Party" label="Bahujan Samaj Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126393" start="2852" end="2871" title="Mizo National Front" label="Mizo National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q108829795" start="2930" end="2961" title="Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas)" label="Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046035" start="2989" end="3026" title="YSRCP" label="Yuvajana Sramika Rythu Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q912899" start="3044" end="3072" title="All India Trinamool Congress" label="All India Trinamool Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q859993" start="3088" end="3103" title="Biju Janata Dal" label="Biju Janata Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129844" start="3113" end="3128" title="Aam Aadmi Party" label="Aam Aadmi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q651141" start="3139" end="3179" title="All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam" label="All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837501" start="3190" end="3228" title="All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen" label="All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601619" start="3230" end="3250" title="Janata Dal (Secular)" label="Janata Dal (Secular)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273397" start="3261" end="3283" title="Jharkhand Mukti Morcha" label="Jharkhand Mukti Morcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974870" start="3294" end="3330" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Party (India)" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Party (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295306" start="3352" end="3378" title="Rashtriya Loktantrik Party" label="Rashtriya Loktantrik Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843568" start="3381" end="3386" title="Maize (color)" label="Maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534991" start="3399" end="3440" title="Indigenous People&amp;#x27;s Front of Tripura" label="Indigenous People&amp;#x27;s Front of Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="3466" end="3485" title="Shiromani Akali Dal" label="Shiromani Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q373058" start="3488" end="3500" title="Azure (color)" label="Pacific Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561861" start="3503" end="3529" title="Nationalist Congress Party" label="Nationalist Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313781" start="3539" end="3566" title="Janta Congress Chhattisgarh" label="Janta Congress Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518390" start="3568" end="3590" title="Bharat Rashtra Samithi" label="Bharat Rashtra Samithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452315" start="3599" end="3621" title="All India Forward Bloc" label="All India Forward Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q837159" start="3623" end="3647" title="Communist Party of India" label="Communist Party of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q234277" start="3649" end="3683" title="Communist Party of India (Marxist)" label="Communist Party of India (Marxist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455015" start="3685" end="3695" title="Left Front (West Bengal)" label="Left Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635587" start="3697" end="3734" title="Revolutionary Socialist Party (India)" label="Revolutionary Socialist Party (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801137" start="3743" end="3767" title="Sikkim Krantikari Morcha" label="Sikkim Krantikari Morcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255973" start="3786" end="3811" title="Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam" label="Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546941" start="3830" end="3845" title="Samajwadi Party" label="Samajwadi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733786" start="3864" end="3904" title="Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party" label="Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="3927" end="3949" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="3963" end="3987" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279320" start="4073" end="4091" title="Telugu Desam Party" label="Telugu Desam Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q63715544" start="4113" end="4133" title="Jannayak Janta Party" label="Jannayak Janta Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="4160" end="4169" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="4185" end="4194" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195250" start="4220" end="4238" title="National Party (Ireland, 2016)" label="The National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="4249" end="4260" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q831015" start="4280" end="4291" title="Green Party (Ireland)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q21218940" start="4303" end="4334" title="Solidarity–People Before Profit" label="Solidarity–People Before Profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682633" start="4346" end="4362" title="Social Democrats (Ireland)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="4371" end="4383" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q99233271" start="4408" end="4439" title="Constitutional Democratic Party of Japan" label="Constitutional Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061354" start="4458" end="4465" title="Komeito" label="Komeito"/>
<link wikidata="Q232595" start="4474" end="4498" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)" label="Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q641600" start="4500" end="4515" title="Japanese Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="4560" end="4572" title="Kataeb Party" label="Kataeb Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663245" start="4598" end="4640" title="Syrian Social Nationalist Party in Lebanon" label="Syrian Social Nationalist Party in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323027" start="4675" end="4688" title="Camisas Rojas" label="Camisas Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236662" start="4714" end="4739" title="National Synarchist Union" label="National Synarchist Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053031" start="4766" end="4793" title="Nationalist Front of Mexico" label="Nationalist Front of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q239539" start="4838" end="4853" title="Christian Union (Netherlands)" label="Christian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="4864" end="4891" title="Christian Democratic Appeal" label="Christian Democratic Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q747910" start="4902" end="4914" title="Democrats 66" label="Democrats 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q101083924" start="4925" end="4948" title="Farmer–Citizen Movement" label="Farmer–Citizen Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q663535" start="4959" end="4980" title="Party for the Animals" label="Party for the Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q667680" start="4999" end="5008" title="GroenLinks" label="GreenLeft"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163962" start="5020" end="5039" title="Forum for Democracy" label="Forum for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104244010" start="5057" end="5061" title="JA21" label="JA21"/>
<link wikidata="Q60172" start="5073" end="5097" title="Reformed Political Party" label="Reformed Political Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q239333" start="5118" end="5163" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105412880" start="5175" end="5179" title="Volt Netherlands" label="Volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q275441" start="5188" end="5200" title="Labour Party (Netherlands)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q849580" start="5209" end="5224" title="Socialist Party (Netherlands)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q332739" start="5250" end="5267" title="Party for Freedom" label="Party for Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28147283" start="5282" end="5286" title="DENK (political party)" label="DENK"/>
<link wikidata="Q288838" start="5310" end="5325" title="ACT New Zealand" label="ACT New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327761" start="5328" end="5363" title="Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand" label="Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="5366" end="5390" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="New Zealand Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="5393" end="5419" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="5422" end="5439" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375170" start="5442" end="5455" title="Te Pāti Māori" label="Te Pāti Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851550" start="5483" end="5513" title="People&amp;#x27;s Monarchist Party (Portugal)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Monarchist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q63645885" start="5528" end="5533" title="Chega (political party)" label="Chega"/>
<link wikidata="Q978086" start="5544" end="5582" title="Ecologist Party &amp;quot;The Greens&amp;quot;" label="Ecologist Party &amp;quot;The Greens&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546030" start="5593" end="5604" title="Earth Party" label="Earth Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19694667" start="5615" end="5638" title="Together for the People" label="Together for the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947563" start="5649" end="5654" title="LIVRE" label="LIVRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q595575" start="5666" end="5689" title="Social Democratic Party (Portugal)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q769829" start="5698" end="5724" title="Portuguese Communist Party" label="Portuguese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054628" start="5733" end="5773" title="Portuguese Workers&amp;#x27; Communist Party" label="Portuguese Workers&amp;#x27; Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q884840" start="5816" end="5825" title="Left Bloc (Portugal)" label="Left Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q847263" start="5866" end="5881" title="Socialist Party (Portugal)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054298" start="5895" end="5920" title="CDS – People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="CDS – People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q46122950" start="5934" end="5952" title="Liberal Initiative (Portugal)" label="Liberal Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054840" start="5962" end="5983" title="People Animals Nature" label="People Animals Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="6023" end="6036" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="6045" end="6060" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q210692" start="6083" end="6108" title="A Just Russia – For Truth" label="A Just Russia – For Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q212115" start="6164" end="6168" title="Liberal Democratic Party of Russia" label="LDPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q98842815" start="6193" end="6203" title="New People (political party)" label="New People"/>
<link wikidata="Q690240" start="6233" end="6256" title="Rwandan Patriotic Front" label="Rwandan Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278959" start="6282" end="6304" title="Party of Serbian Unity" label="Party of Serbian Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487067" start="6347" end="6366" title="Slovak Togetherness" label="Slovak Togetherness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532168" start="6377" end="6409" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party Our Slovakia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party Our Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693985" start="6434" end="6460" title="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826190" start="6517" end="6537" title="Afrikaner Volksfront" label="Afrikaner Volksfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q385873" start="6563" end="6591" title="Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging" label="Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging"/>
<link wikidata="Q925910" start="6619" end="6644" title="Herstigte Nasionale Party" label="Herstigte Nasionale Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q305317" start="6672" end="6701" title="South African Communist Party" label="South African Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q110843" start="6728" end="6742" title="Moderate Party" label="Moderate Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q213654" start="6762" end="6781" title="Christian Democrats (Sweden)" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q110857" start="6801" end="6809" title="Liberals (Sweden)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q110832" start="6820" end="6832" title="Centre Party (Sweden)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q213451" start="6843" end="6854" title="Green Party (Sweden)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q39338" start="6857" end="6863" title="Orange (colour)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088" start="6868" end="6872" title="blue" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324668" start="6875" end="6883" title="Alliance (Sweden)" label="Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q388981" start="6893" end="6912" title="Feminist Initiative (Sweden)" label="Feminist Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q208602" start="6924" end="6936" title="Pirate Party (Sweden)" label="Pirate Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q110837" start="6945" end="6955" title="Left Party (Sweden)" label="Left Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112" start="6964" end="6995" title="Swedish Social Democratic Party" label="Swedish Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526927" start="7014" end="7024" title="Red-Greens (Sweden)" label="Red-Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q504069" start="7051" end="7067" title="Sweden Democrats" label="Sweden Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q767681" start="7108" end="7139" title="Syrian Social Nationalist Party" label="Syrian Social Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42313794" start="7165" end="7175" title="Good Party" label="Good Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15123187" start="7187" end="7217" title="Peoples&amp;#x27; Democratic Party (Turkey)" label="Peoples&amp;#x27; Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q251077" start="7226" end="7252" title="Nationalist Movement Party" label="Nationalist Movement Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="7261" end="7291" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="7303" end="7332" title="Justice and Development Party (Turkey)" label="Justice and Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="7366" end="7384" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="7395" end="7406" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="7428" end="7439" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="7451" end="7468" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="7491" end="7495" title="UK Independence Party" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="7504" end="7516" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="7542" end="7545" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="DUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="7570" end="7579" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="7601" end="7604" title="Scottish National Party" label="SNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="7662" end="7686" title="American Indian Movement" label="American Indian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7696" end="7712" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085487" start="7724" end="7728" title="Buff (colour)" label="buff"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="7731" end="7757" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="7818" end="7835" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="7846" end="7857" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263796" start="7869" end="7894" title="American Solidarity Party" label="American Solidarity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="7896" end="7915" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128321" start="7967" end="7985" title="Constitution Party (United States)" label="Constitution Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8021" end="8037" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317052" start="8057" end="8070" title="Justice Party (United States)" label="Justice Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="8089" end="8104" title="senior citizens" label="senior citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853488" start="8244" end="8275" title="Tupamaro (Venezuela)" label="Revolutionary Movement Tupamaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q197864" start="8284" end="8319" title="United Socialist Party of Venezuela" label="United Socialist Party of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110509" start="8377" end="8384" title="Agorism" label="Agorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q905151" start="8387" end="8393" title="Ballot" label="Ballot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8408" end="8415" title="Beehive#Symbolism" label="Beehive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="8418" end="8439" title="Cooperative" label="co-operative movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="8459" end="8479" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="8481" end="8501" title="right-libertarianism" label="right-libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q261200" start="8504" end="8514" title="Black rose symbolism" label="Black rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="8517" end="8526" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q457195" start="8530" end="8541" title="Arrow Cross" label="Arrow Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="8544" end="8553" title="Hungarism" label="Hungarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664326" start="8569" end="8583" title="Pirate Party" label="pirate parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q69264" start="8586" end="8595" title="Black Sun (symbol)" label="Black sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002560" start="8598" end="8613" title="esoteric Nazism" label="esoteric Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="8615" end="8625" title="neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="8627" end="8644" title="white nationalism" label="white nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207817" start="8654" end="8662" title="Putinism" label="Putinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q67358148" start="8664" end="8684" title="Conservatism in Russia" label="Russian conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q158984" start="8687" end="8696" title="Carnation" label="Carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="8699" end="8715" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="8720" end="8740" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20980826" start="8748" end="8755" title="wildcat" label="wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046722" start="8789" end="8820" title="Industrial Workers of the World" label="Industrial Workers of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="8822" end="8830" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q229788" start="8833" end="8845" title="Celtic cross" label="Celtic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="8848" end="8865" title="white nationalism" label="white nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="8867" end="8877" title="neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072279" start="8879" end="8890" title="white pride" label="white pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="8892" end="8909" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q502673" start="8911" end="8929" title="Celtic neopaganism" label="Celtic neopaganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="8934" end="8949" title="Christian cross" label="Christian cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q625559" start="8986" end="9005" title="Christian communism" label="Christian communism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9010" end="9025" title="Anarchist symbolism#Circle-A" label="Circumscribed A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="9028" end="9037" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="9042" end="9050" title="Cogwheel" label="Cogwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="9053" end="9068" title="Labour movement" label="Labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="9070" end="9083" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196535" start="9085" end="9100" title="agriculturalism" label="agriculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="9103" end="9115" title="Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323754" start="9130" end="9147" title="Cross of Burgundy" label="Cross of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q948731" start="9150" end="9169" title="Spanish nationalism" label="Spanish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q679189" start="9171" end="9178" title="Carlism" label="Carlism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166208" start="9217" end="9234" title="Cross of Lorraine" label="Cross of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="9237" end="9245" title="Gaullism" label="Gaullism"/>
<link wikidata="Q611126" start="9248" end="9268" title="Cross of Saint Peter" label="Cross of Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="9271" end="9279" title="Satanism" label="Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139611" start="9281" end="9307" title="Opposition to Christianity" label="Opposition to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="9309" end="9333" title="Anti-Christian sentiment" label="Anti-Christian sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q701211" start="9336" end="9348" title="Cross potent" label="Cross potent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9351" end="9368" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q695482" start="9370" end="9383" title="Austrofascism" label="Austrofascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="9388" end="9393" title="Crown" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="9396" end="9406" title="monarchism" label="monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367208" start="9411" end="9415" title="Doves as symbols" label="Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="9451" end="9459" title="Pacifism" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9470" end="9475" title="Eagle#In culture" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="9478" end="9489" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="9491" end="9501" title="patriotism" label="patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="9503" end="9515" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329893" start="9518" end="9529" title="Easter Lily (badge)" label="Easter lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="9545" end="9564" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="9566" end="9583" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q328712" start="9586" end="9592" title="Fasces" label="Fasces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="9595" end="9602" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="9604" end="9615" title="neo-fascism" label="neo-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="9617" end="9632" title="Italian fascism" label="Italian fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="9634" end="9651" title="Magistrate" label="magisterial power"/>
<link wikidata="Q174834" start="9653" end="9662" title="authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827721" start="9665" end="9678" title="Fist and rose" label="Fist and rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="9681" end="9690" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="9692" end="9708" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="9710" end="9728" title="left-wing politics" label="left-wing politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="9730" end="9750" title="center-left politics" label="center-left politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563649" start="9753" end="9769" title="Flash and circle" label="Flash and circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969961" start="9772" end="9787" title="British fascism" label="British fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q756314" start="9792" end="9808" title="Four-leaf clover" label="Four-leaf clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="9811" end="9822" title="agrarianism" label="agrarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750756" start="9824" end="9836" title="Hibernophile" label="Hibernophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="9838" end="9855" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970348" start="9857" end="9866" title="good luck" label="good luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q133792" start="9870" end="9875" title="Globe" label="Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167348" start="9878" end="9887" title="globalism" label="globalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="9889" end="9902" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="9904" end="9920" title="Internationalism (politics)" label="Internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170266" start="9925" end="9942" title="Hammer and sickle" label="Hammer and sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="9945" end="9954" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="9956" end="9972" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9975" end="9999" title="Hammer and sickle#Variations" label="Hammer, sickle and brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="10002" end="10007" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q113649307" start="10009" end="10034" title="Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism" label="Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14188375" start="10037" end="10052" title="Hawk of Quraish" label="Hawk of Quraish"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="10055" end="10071" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="10073" end="10084" title="Pan-Arabism" label="Pan-Arabism"/>
<link wikidata="Q592832" start="10147" end="10158" title="Integralism" label="Integralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q837381" start="10161" end="10167" title="Labrys" label="Labrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q18299" start="10170" end="10186" title="Lesbian feminism" label="Lesbian feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075264" start="10188" end="10196" title="Metaxism" label="Metaxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185681" start="10198" end="10208" title="Matriarchy" label="Matriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q695868" start="10210" end="10227" title="Third Positionism" label="Third Positionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q386196" start="10229" end="10249" title="Révolution nationale" label="Révolution nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873489" start="10251" end="10262" title="Nazi-Maoism" label="Nazi-Maoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10897" start="10265" end="10271" title="Lambda" label="Lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q654863" start="10274" end="10289" title="Identitarianism" label="Identitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339423" start="10291" end="10306" title="Nouvelle Droite" label="Nouvelle Droite"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="10309" end="10313" title="Lion" label="Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="10316" end="10324" title="Nobility" label="Nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359782" start="10326" end="10344" title="Judeo Christianity" label="Judeo Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="10346" end="10355" title="Rastafari" label="Rastafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763792" start="10377" end="10389" title="Angolanidade" label="Angolanidade"/>
<link wikidata="Q28043612" start="10394" end="10405" title="Mars symbol" label="Mars symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="10424" end="10433" title="Newspaper" label="Newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="10447" end="10460" title="press freedom" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208324" start="10463" end="10475" title="Nordic cross" label="Nordic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q921098" start="10478" end="10490" title="Nordic model" label="Nordic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="10491" end="10507" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="10510" end="10520" title="Olive tree" label="Olive tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q454" start="10523" end="10528" title="peace" label="peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="10530" end="10539" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="10541" end="10547" title="health" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="10550" end="10559" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q510345" start="10576" end="10586" title="Peace sign" label="Peace sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q454" start="10589" end="10594" title="peace" label="peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="10596" end="10604" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="10606" end="10625" title="nuclear disarmament" label="nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="10627" end="10636" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10639" end="10645" title="Communist symbolism#Plough" label="Plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981930" start="10659" end="10677" title="agrarian socialism" label="agrarian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q811242" start="10679" end="10695" title="peasant movement" label="peasant movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q59915946" start="10697" end="10712" title="Peasants Rights" label="peasants rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q967457" start="10715" end="10720" title="Poppy" label="Poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27631" start="10723" end="10734" title="Remembrance Day" label="remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10736" end="10739" title="WW1" label="WW1"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10744" end="10747" title="WW2" label="WW2"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="10750" end="10757" title="Protest" label="Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676378" start="10814" end="10826" title="rainbow flag" label="rainbow flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="10829" end="10840" title="LGBT rights" label="LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543966" start="10843" end="10854" title="Raised fist" label="Raised fist"/>
<link wikidata="Q815726" start="10857" end="10867" title="solidarity" label="solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353993" start="10869" end="10880" title="syndicalism" label="syndicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="10901" end="10910" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q97570923" start="10912" end="10922" title="radical politics" label="radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="10937" end="10951" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q517327" start="10994" end="11002" title="Red flag (politics)" label="Red flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="11005" end="11014" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="11016" end="11025" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="11027" end="11039" title="anti-fascism" label="anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q117037" start="11042" end="11060" title="Red Hand of Ulster" label="Red Hand of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="11063" end="11078" title="Ulster loyalism" label="Ulster loyalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="11080" end="11095" title="Ulster unionism" label="Ulster unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334187" start="11097" end="11115" title="Ulster nationalism" label="Ulster nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208578" start="11120" end="11128" title="Red star" label="Red star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="11131" end="11140" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="11142" end="11149" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="11151" end="11160" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309660" start="11162" end="11174" title="Neozapatismo" label="Neozapatismo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11208" end="11233" title="Syrian Social Nationalist Party#Social nationalism" label="Syrian Social Nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790496" start="11236" end="11258" title="Ribbon of Saint George" label="Ribbon of Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696118" start="11261" end="11272" title="Anti-Maidan" label="Anti-Maidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975478" start="11274" end="11281" title="Ruscism" label="Ruscism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121356999" start="11283" end="11331" title="Pro-war nationalist opposition to Vladimir Putin" label="Pro-war nationalist opposition to Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11379" end="11383" title="Rose symbolism#Socialism" label="Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="11386" end="11402" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="11407" end="11427" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="11430" end="11443" title="Runes" label="Runic letters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11446" end="11461" title="Nazi symbolism#Runic letters" label="various letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328812" start="11503" end="11508" title="Algiz" label="Algiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398023" start="11510" end="11516" title="Eihwaz" label="Eihwaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401643" start="11518" end="11522" title="Odal (rune)" label="Odal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398029" start="11524" end="11530" title="Sowilō" label="Sowilō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398014" start="11536" end="11541" title="Tiwaz (rune)" label="Tiwaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="11576" end="11584" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="11589" end="11606" title="white supremacist" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q285441" start="11690" end="11698" title="Heathenry (new religious movement)" label="Heathens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41831" start="11765" end="11772" title="Shahada" label="Shahada"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="11775" end="11784" title="Wahhabism" label="Wahhabism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="11786" end="11794" title="Islamism" label="Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14413" start="11798" end="11803" title="Sigma" label="Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q899306" start="11806" end="11827" title="Brazilian integralism" label="Brazilian integralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068342" start="11829" end="11839" title="Manosphere" label="Manosphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11841" end="11848" title="Andrew Tate#Views and influence" label="Tateism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721153" start="11879" end="11887" title="Kahanism" label="Kahanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030041" start="11890" end="11900" title="The Six Arrows" label="Six Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q269443" start="11903" end="11911" title="Kemalism" label="Kemalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q757620" start="11914" end="11925" title="Smiling Sun" label="Smiling Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q574580" start="11928" end="11949" title="anti-nuclear movement" label="anti-nuclear movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11952" end="11976" title="Iron Guard#Style" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="12005" end="12016" title="Legionarism" label="Legionarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110132273" start="12018" end="12033" title="Neo-Legionarism" label="Neo-Legionarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="12038" end="12051" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="12054" end="12061" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602280" start="12064" end="12077" title="Starry Plough (flag)" label="Starry Plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="12080" end="12106" title="Irish republican socialism" label="Irish republican socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="12111" end="12128" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="12131" end="12138" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q330963" start="12151" end="12169" title="American democracy" label="American democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="12174" end="12183" title="Sunflower" label="Sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="12186" end="12200" title="green politics" label="green politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="12203" end="12211" title="Swastika" label="Swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="12214" end="12220" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="12222" end="12229" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="12231" end="12241" title="neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3665054" start="12294" end="12306" title="Three Arrows" label="Three Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="12335" end="12351" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="12374" end="12386" title="anti-fascism" label="anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="12388" end="12402" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186811" start="12408" end="12423" title="anti-monarchism" label="anti-monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106179839" start="12426" end="12461" title="Three-finger salute (pro-democracy)" label="Three-finger salute (pro-democracy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="12551" end="12571" title="right-libertarianism" label="right-libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="12573" end="12585" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="12587" end="12597" title="patriotism" label="patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="12599" end="12619" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="12622" end="12632" title="Triskelion" label="Triskelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191950" start="12635" end="12665" title="Polytheistic reconstructionism" label="Polytheistic reconstructionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q502673" start="12667" end="12685" title="Celtic neopaganism" label="Celtic neopaganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="12709" end="12722" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186811" start="12724" end="12739" title="anti-monarchism" label="anti-monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28043612" start="12744" end="12756" title="Venus symbol" label="Venus symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="12759" end="12767" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914207" start="12810" end="12826" title="radical feminism" label="radical feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q534644" start="12831" end="12837" title="V sign" label="V sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q552590" start="12840" end="12851" title="Voluntaryism" label="voluntarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="12869" end="12877" title="veganism" label="veganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134566" start="12882" end="12896" title="Weighing scale" label="Weighing scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q116467884" start="12914" end="12925" title="Wolf salute" label="Wolf salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q83280" start="12928" end="12939" title="Pan-Turkism" label="Pan-Turkism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753856" start="12942" end="12952" title="Wolfsangel" label="Wolfsangel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12955" end="12968" title="Azov Brigade#Azov movement" label="Azov movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048429" start="12970" end="12991" title="Ukrainian nationalism" label="Ukrainian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q695868" start="12993" end="13010" title="Third Positionism" label="Third Positionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="13012" end="13022" title="neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="13024" end="13033" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054548" start="13037" end="13052" title="Yoke and arrows" label="Yoke and arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431652" start="13055" end="13064" title="Falangism" label="Falangism"/>
<link wikidata="Q111103866" start="13067" end="13086" title="Z (military symbol)" label="Z (military symbol)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207817" start="13089" end="13097" title="Putinism" label="Putinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975478" start="13099" end="13106" title="Ruscism" label="Ruscism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680807" start="13108" end="13127" title="Russian irredentism" label="Russian irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128214076" start="13151" end="13155" title="Boat (politics)" label="Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="13158" end="13181" title="Bangladesh Awami League" label="Bangladesh Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035339" start="13184" end="13198" title="Sheaf of Paddy (politics)" label="Sheaf of Paddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q496810" start="13201" end="13229" title="Bangladesh Nationalist Party" label="Bangladesh Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q128214241" start="13232" end="13238" title="Plough (politics)" label="Plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361491" start="13241" end="13253" title="Jatiya Party (Ershad)" label="Jatiya Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337095" start="13300" end="13326" title="Vlaamsch Nationaal Verbond" label="Vlaamsch Nationaal Verbond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366454" start="13353" end="13387" title="French National-Collectivist Party" label="French National-Collectivist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q617649" start="13390" end="13402" title="Flag of Wallonia" label="Bold rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815012" start="13417" end="13433" title="Walloon Movement" label="Walloon Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q762051" start="13435" end="13464" title="Rassemblement Wallonie France" label="Rassemblement Wallonie France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700490" start="13466" end="13480" title="Wallonie Libre" label="Wallonie Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612679" start="13482" end="13495" title="Walloon Rally" label="Walloon Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135095" start="13524" end="13533" title="Verdinaso" label="Verdinaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054789" start="13576" end="13601" title="Brazilian Socialist Party" label="Brazilian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414708" start="13620" end="13652" title="Democratic Labour Party (Brazil)" label="Democratic Labour Party (Brazil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q926973" start="13666" end="13686" title="Republicans (Brazil)" label="Republicans (Brazil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q657089" start="13700" end="13728" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Brazil)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Brazil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325045" start="13731" end="13737" title="Toucan" label="Toucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322897" start="13740" end="13772" title="Brazilian Social Democracy Party" label="Brazilian Social Democracy Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q14413" start="13775" end="13780" title="Sigma" label="Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958743" start="13783" end="13811" title="Brazilian Integralist Action" label="Brazilian Integralist Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q18479464" start="13813" end="13840" title="Brazilian Integralist Front" label="Brazilian Integralist Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488414" start="13861" end="13867" title="Devata" label="Devata"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="13870" end="13899" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456730" start="13902" end="13919" title="Flag of Democratic Kampuchea" label="Golden Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="13922" end="13933" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068978" start="13956" end="13966" title="maple leaf" label="maple leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="13969" end="13992" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="14032" end="14060" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="14083" end="14103" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366157" start="14121" end="14151" title="National Unity Party of Canada" label="National Unity Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q747333" start="14183" end="14211" title="Colombian Conservative Party" label="Colombian Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q939021" start="14225" end="14248" title="Colombian Liberal Party" label="Colombian Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q973542" start="14262" end="14289" title="Social National Unity Party" label="Social National Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665255" start="14356" end="14384" title="People&amp;#x27;s Vanguard Party (Costa Rica)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Vanguard Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="14415" end="14455" title="Ustaša – Croatian Revolutionary Movement" label="Ustaša – Croatian Revolutionary Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q212101" start="14486" end="14502" title="Social Democrats (Denmark)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q212101" start="14512" end="14528" title="Social Democrats (Denmark)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q916161" start="14542" end="14562" title="Danish Social Liberal Party" label="Social Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q902619" start="14576" end="14608" title="Conservative People&amp;#x27;s Party (Denmark)" label="Conservative People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q615603" start="14622" end="14651" title="Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Party (Denmark)" label="Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q478180" start="14665" end="14681" title="Liberal Alliance (Denmark)" label="Liberal Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789199" start="14695" end="14714" title="Christian Democrats (Denmark)" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435460" start="14728" end="14765" title="People&amp;#x27;s Movement against the EU" label="People&amp;#x27;s Movement against the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q507170" start="14779" end="14805" title="Danish People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Danish People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28827" start="14815" end="14816" title="Ø" label="Ø"/>
<link wikidata="Q25785" start="14819" end="14837" title="Red-Green Alliance (Denmark)" label="Red-Green Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q217321" start="14851" end="14884" title="Venstre (Denmark)" label="Venstre, Liberal Party of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398014" start="14887" end="14897" title="Tiwaz (rune)" label="Tiwaz rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359231" start="14900" end="14926" title="Nordic Resistance Movement" label="Nordic Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398014" start="14946" end="14956" title="Tiwaz (rune)" label="Tiwaz rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359231" start="14959" end="14985" title="Nordic Resistance Movement" label="Nordic Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="15016" end="15046" title="Panhellenic Socialist Movement" label="Panhellenic Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q50736163" start="15059" end="15073" title="Greek Solution" label="Greek Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q898879" start="15076" end="15084" title="Meandros" label="Meandros"/>
<link wikidata="Q82256" start="15087" end="15098" title="Golden Dawn (Greece)" label="Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q82256" start="15112" end="15132" title="Golden Dawn (Greece)" label="Golden Dawn (Greece)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="15158" end="15172" title="Nea Dimokratia" label="Nea Dimokratia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18145420" start="15247" end="15270" title="2014 Hong Kong protests" label="2014 Hong Kong protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q457195" start="15288" end="15299" title="Arrow Cross" label="Arrow Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="15302" end="15319" title="Arrow Cross Party" label="Arrow Cross Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398014" start="15339" end="15349" title="Tiwaz (rune)" label="Tiwaz rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359231" start="15352" end="15378" title="Nordic Resistance Movement" label="Nordic Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196338" start="15396" end="15399" title="Ard (plough)" label="Ard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936721" start="15402" end="15430" title="Bodoland People&amp;#x27;s Front" label="Bodoland People&amp;#x27;s Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="15432" end="15441" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q904827" start="15453" end="15472" title="Janata Dal (United)" label="Janata Dal (United)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="15474" end="15479" title="Bihar (India)" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="15481" end="15490" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="15492" end="15501" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599" start="15503" end="15511" title="Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729039" start="15524" end="15552" title="All Jharkhand Students Union" label="All Jharkhand Students Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="15554" end="15563" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744995" start="15577" end="15618" title="Jammu and Kashmir National Panthers Party" label="Jammu and Kashmir National Panthers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="15620" end="15637" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546941" start="15640" end="15655" title="Samajwadi Party" label="Samajwadi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="15657" end="15670" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279320" start="15673" end="15691" title="Telugu Desam Party" label="Telugu Desam Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="15693" end="15707" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974870" start="15718" end="15746" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Party (India)" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273397" start="15765" end="15787" title="Jharkhand Mukti Morcha" label="Jharkhand Mukti Morcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="15789" end="15798" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q59177" start="15801" end="15810" title="Shiv Sena (1966–2022)" label="Shiv Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="15812" end="15823" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q129844" start="15835" end="15850" title="Aam Aadmi Party" label="Aam Aadmi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q850107" start="15853" end="15861" title="Bungalow" label="Bungalow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634933" start="15864" end="15883" title="Lok Janshakti Party" label="Lok Janshakti Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="15885" end="15890" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733798" start="15904" end="15934" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Front (Meghalaya)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="15936" end="15945" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518390" start="15955" end="15980" title="Telangana Rashtra Samithi" label="Telangana Rashtra Samithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354685" start="15997" end="16022" title="Rashtriya Lok Samta Party" label="Rashtriya Lok Samta Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="16024" end="16029" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046035" start="16032" end="16050" title="YSR Congress Party" label="YSR Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="16052" end="16066" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="16068" end="16077" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561861" start="16089" end="16115" title="Nationalist Congress Party" label="Nationalist Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458548" start="16128" end="16145" title="Goa Forward Party" label="Goa Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="16147" end="16150" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q859993" start="16162" end="16177" title="Biju Janata Dal" label="Biju Janata Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="16179" end="16185" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748164" start="16197" end="16230" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Alliance (Manipur)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="16232" end="16241" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q43276387" start="16245" end="16248" title="Dao (Naga sword)" label="Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534991" start="16251" end="16292" title="Indigenous People&amp;#x27;s Front of Tripura" label="Indigenous People&amp;#x27;s Front of Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="16294" end="16301" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887699" start="16312" end="16347" title="United Democratic Party (Meghalaya)" label="United Democratic Party (Meghalaya)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="16349" end="16358" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q837159" start="16389" end="16413" title="Communist Party of India" label="Communist Party of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740234" start="16427" end="16445" title="Asom Gana Parishad" label="Asom Gana Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="16447" end="16452" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q803681" start="16455" end="16474" title="Bahujan Samaj Party" label="Bahujan Samaj Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="16512" end="16517" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="16522" end="16528" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q379860" start="16577" end="16594" title="Five-pointed star" label="Five-pointed star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126393" start="16597" end="16616" title="Mizo National Front" label="Mizo National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="16618" end="16625" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313781" start="16669" end="16696" title="Janta Congress Chhattisgarh" label="Janta Congress Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="16698" end="16710" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q912899" start="16734" end="16762" title="All India Trinamool Congress" label="All India Trinamool Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534955" start="16775" end="16798" title="Indian National Lok Dal" label="Indian National Lok Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="16800" end="16807" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733786" start="16819" end="16859" title="Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party" label="Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599" start="16861" end="16869" title="Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q234277" start="16899" end="16933" title="Communist Party of India (Marxist)" label="Communist Party of India (Marxist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961363" start="16948" end="16965" title="Rashtriya Lok Dal" label="Rashtriya Lok Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="16967" end="16980" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16984" end="16998" title="Kerosene lamp#Kerosene lantern" label="Hurricane lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176919" start="17001" end="17021" title="Rashtriya Janata Dal" label="Rashtriya Janata Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="17023" end="17028" title="Bihar (India)" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="17030" end="17039" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781724" start="17061" end="17091" title="Jammu and Kashmir People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="17093" end="17110" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166149" start="17120" end="17143" title="All India N.R. Congress" label="All India N.R. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q66743" start="17145" end="17155" title="Puducherry (union territory)" label="Puducherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q63715544" start="17165" end="17185" title="Jannayak Janta Party" label="Jannayak Janta Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="17187" end="17194" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884697" start="17210" end="17242" title="Mizoram People&amp;#x27;s Conference" label="Mizoram People&amp;#x27;s Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="17244" end="17251" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140347" start="17268" end="17294" title="Maharashtra Navnirman Sena" label="Maharashtra Navnirman Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="17296" end="17307" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165680" start="17319" end="17351" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Arunachal" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Arunachal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162" start="17353" end="17370" title="Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887353" start="17382" end="17403" title="Pattali Makkal Katchi" label="Pattali Makkal Katchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66743" start="17405" end="17415" title="Puducherry (union territory)" label="Puducherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15971588" start="17426" end="17455" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Punjab" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="17457" end="17463" title="Punjab (India)" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837501" start="17466" end="17504" title="All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen" label="All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="17506" end="17515" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196786" start="17528" end="17541" title="Indian Union Muslim League" label="Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="17543" end="17549" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="17574" end="17579" title="rice" label="paddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601619" start="17594" end="17614" title="Janata Dal (Secular)" label="Janata Dal (Secular)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162" start="17616" end="17633" title="Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="17635" end="17644" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="17646" end="17652" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452315" start="17663" end="17685" title="All India Forward Bloc" label="All India Forward Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="17687" end="17698" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762307" start="17701" end="17742" title="Hill State People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party" label="Hill State People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="17744" end="17753" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733389" start="17756" end="17786" title="Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party" label="Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="17788" end="17791" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542705" start="17810" end="17843" title="All India United Democratic Front" label="All India United Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="17845" end="17850" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207427" start="17854" end="17859" title="Nelumbo" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="17862" end="17884" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510552" start="17887" end="17893" title="Nagara (drum)" label="Nagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200751" start="17896" end="17928" title="Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam" label="Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="17930" end="17940" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="17961" end="17985" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626979" start="17997" end="18036" title="Jammu &amp;amp; Kashmir National Conference" label="Jammu &amp;amp; Kashmir National Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="18038" end="18055" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277586" start="18069" end="18093" title="Naga People&amp;#x27;s Front" label="Naga People&amp;#x27;s Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="18095" end="18102" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599" start="18104" end="18112" title="Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q892774" start="18126" end="18137" title="Fire iron" label="ashpan rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635587" start="18140" end="18169" title="Revolutionary Socialist Party (India)" label="Revolutionary Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="18171" end="18177" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="18179" end="18190" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534955" start="18207" end="18230" title="Indian National Lok Dal" label="Indian National Lok Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="18232" end="18239" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255973" start="18256" end="18281" title="Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam" label="Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="18283" end="18293" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074317" start="18316" end="18339" title="Zoram Nationalist Party" label="Zoram Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="18341" end="18348" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801137" start="18365" end="18389" title="Sikkim Krantikari Morcha" label="Sikkim Krantikari Morcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="18391" end="18397" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764926" start="18413" end="18436" title="Himachal Vikas Congress" label="Himachal Vikas Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="18438" end="18454" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q651141" start="18471" end="18511" title="All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam" label="All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="18513" end="18523" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3690757" start="18526" end="18545" title="Kerala Congress (M)" label="Kerala Congress (M)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="18547" end="18553" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285614" start="18568" end="18591" title="Sikkim Democratic Front" label="Sikkim Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="18593" end="18599" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295306" start="18618" end="18644" title="Rashtriya Loktantrik Party" label="Rashtriya Loktantrik Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="18646" end="18655" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="18676" end="18695" title="Shiromani Akali Dal" label="Shiromani Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="18697" end="18703" title="Punjab (India)" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366308" start="18741" end="18761" title="Nation Party of Iran" label="Nation Party of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366577" start="18763" end="18780" title="Pan-Iranist Party" label="Pan-Iranist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602280" start="18801" end="18814" title="Starry Plough (flag)" label="Starry Plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190570" start="18817" end="18835" title="Irish Citizen Army" label="Irish Citizen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116865" start="18837" end="18869" title="Irish Republican Socialist Party" label="Irish Republican Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146230" start="18871" end="18901" title="Irish National Liberation Army" label="Irish National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701081" start="18903" end="18946" title="Irish People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Organisation" label="Irish People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="18948" end="18960" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q293332" start="19010" end="19031" title="Lehi (militant group)" label="Lehi (militant group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q331852" start="19062" end="19084" title="Kach (political party)" label="Kach (political party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q275445" start="19086" end="19107" title="Jewish Defense League" label="Jewish Defense League"/>
<link wikidata="Q25648673" start="19142" end="19151" title="CasaPound" label="CasaPound"/>
<link wikidata="Q837381" start="19154" end="19160" title="Labrys" label="Labrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664761" start="19163" end="19175" title="Ordine Nuovo" label="Ordine Nuovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757843" start="19247" end="19264" title="Brothers of Italy" label="Brothers of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q937319" start="19266" end="19297" title="Tricolour Flame" label="Social Movement Tricolour Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547133" start="19299" end="19326" title="The Right – Tricolour Flame" label="The Right – Tricolour Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="19328" end="19351" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753856" start="19354" end="19364" title="Wolfsangel" label="Wolfsangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984889" start="19367" end="19382" title="Terza Posizione" label="Terza Posizione"/>
<link wikidata="Q702031" start="19400" end="19415" title="Rising Sun Flag" label="Rising Sun Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q844159" start="19418" end="19428" title="Zaitokukai" label="Zaitokukai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056949" start="19447" end="19457" title="Cedar tree" label="Cedar tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="19483" end="19495" title="Kataeb Party" label="Kataeb Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374989" start="19497" end="19521" title="Kataeb Regulatory Forces" label="Kataeb Regulatory Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007878" start="19567" end="19592" title="Lebanese Forces (militia)" label="Lebanese Forces (militia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55394498" start="19617" end="19646" title="Nepal Federal Socialist Party" label="Nepal Federal Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q740429" start="19649" end="19656" title="Khukuri" label="Khukuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417989" start="19659" end="19693" title="Sanghiya Loktantrik Rastriya Manch" label="Sanghiya Loktantrik Rastriya Manch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726202" start="19696" end="19701" title="Madal" label="Madal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800560" start="19704" end="19729" title="Nepal Majdoor Kisan Party" label="Nepal Majdoor Kisan Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632719" start="19741" end="19767" title="Rastriya Prajatantra Party" label="Rastriya Prajatantra Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241" start="19770" end="19776" title="Smiley" label="Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683801" start="19779" end="19800" title="Bibeksheel Nepali" label="Bibeksheel Nepali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700514" start="19809" end="19830" title="Nepal Communist Party" label="Nepal Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="19840" end="19855" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16180001" start="19858" end="19865" title="Tumbler (glass)" label="Tumbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589354" start="19868" end="19887" title="Rastriya Janamorcha" label="Rastriya Janamorcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q92259330" start="19901" end="19937" title="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal (2020)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28913757" start="19957" end="19968" title="Sajha Party" label="Sajha Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q267596" start="19996" end="20016" title="Ancient Greek temple" label="Ancient Greek temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163962" start="20019" end="20038" title="Forum for Democracy" label="Forum for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332739" start="20051" end="20068" title="Party for Freedom" label="Party for Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q849580" start="20080" end="20095" title="Socialist Party (Netherlands)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q275441" start="20109" end="20121" title="Labour Party (Netherlands)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q186591" start="20150" end="20172" title="Pakistan Peoples Party" label="Pakistan Peoples Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133587" start="20182" end="20202" title="Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam" label="Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q284454" start="20225" end="20250" title="Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaaf" label="Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129076" start="20260" end="20284" title="Muttahida Qaumi Movement – Pakistan" label="Muttahida Qaumi Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q659854" start="20303" end="20323" title="Awami National Party" label="Awami National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603033" start="20344" end="20367" title="Green Party of Pakistan" label="Green Party of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q799577" start="20378" end="20404" title="Pakistan Muslim League (N)" label="Pakistan Muslim League (N)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475103" start="20424" end="20448" title="Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan" label="Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210671" start="20489" end="20510" title="National Radical Camp" label="National Radical Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q86670729" start="20512" end="20534" title="Falanga (organisation)" label="Falanga (organisation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035181" start="20548" end="20555" title="Zadruga (movement)" label="Zadruga"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20557" end="20563" title=":pl:Stowarzyszenie_na_rzecz_Tradycji_i_Kultury_„Niklot”" label="Niklot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461181" start="20586" end="20602" title="All-Polish Youth" label="All-Polish Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q944312" start="20604" end="20618" title="National Party (Poland)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027717" start="20620" end="20640" title="Camp of Great Poland" label="Camp of Great Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401018" start="20678" end="20700" title="Russian National Unity" label="Russian National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q151970" start="20703" end="20710" title="Chi Rho" label="Chi Rho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394353" start="20713" end="20725" title="Great Russia (political party)" label="Great Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q701211" start="20728" end="20740" title="Cross potent" label="Cross potent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313240" start="20743" end="20771" title="People&amp;#x27;s National Party (Russia)" label="People&amp;#x27;s National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382091" start="20773" end="20795" title="Russian National Union" label="Russian National Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403026" start="20798" end="20813" title="Symbol of Chaos" label="Symbol of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324222" start="20816" end="20827" title="Eurasianism" label="Eurasianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q837296" start="20910" end="20966" title="Slovak Democratic and Christian Union – Democratic Party" label="Slovak Democratic and Christian Union – Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078673" start="20983" end="20993" title="Free Forum" label="Free Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q221480" start="21004" end="21025" title="Slovak National Party" label="Slovak National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154447" start="21039" end="21066" title="Communist Party of Slovakia – 91" label="Communist Party of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828392" start="21080" end="21136" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party – Movement for a Democratic Slovakia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party – Movement for a Democratic Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q904070" start="21147" end="21176" title="Christian Democratic Movement" label="Christian Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21201" end="21209" title="Triskelion#Modern usage" label="Triskele"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21210" end="21225" title="Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging#Logo" label="of three sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q385873" start="21228" end="21256" title="Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging" label="Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging"/>
<link wikidata="Q208602" start="21288" end="21300" title="Pirate Party (Sweden)" label="Pirate Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q110857" start="21316" end="21324" title="Liberals (Sweden)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q213451" start="21362" end="21373" title="Green Party (Sweden)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q110832" start="21396" end="21408" title="Centre Party (Sweden)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q157505" start="21411" end="21419" title="Hepatica" label="Hepatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q504069" start="21422" end="21438" title="Sweden Democrats" label="Sweden Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q178392" start="21441" end="21446" title="Jēran" label="Jēran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979476" start="21449" end="21463" title="National Youth" label="National Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q110857" start="21477" end="21485" title="Liberals (Sweden)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q110843" start="21499" end="21513" title="Moderate Party" label="Moderate Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398014" start="21516" end="21526" title="Tiwaz (rune)" label="Tiwaz rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359231" start="21529" end="21555" title="Nordic Resistance Movement" label="Nordic Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q158984" start="21558" end="21571" title="Carnation" label="Red carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110837" start="21574" end="21584" title="Left Party (Sweden)" label="Left Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112" start="21595" end="21611" title="Swedish Social Democratic Party" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753856" start="21614" end="21624" title="Wolfsangel" label="Wolfsangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994446" start="21627" end="21647" title="Vitt Ariskt Motstånd" label="Vitt Ariskt Motstånd"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813553" start="21650" end="21662" title="Anemone nemorosa" label="Wood anemone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213654" start="21665" end="21684" title="Christian Democrats (Sweden)" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q213240" start="21731" end="21743" title="Phrygian cap" label="Phrygian cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q124020" start="21751" end="21762" title="Swiss cross" label="Swiss cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q661771" start="21765" end="21786" title="Swiss Party of Labour" label="Swiss Party of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q28418517" start="21805" end="21830" title="Blue Sky with a White Sun" label="Blue Sky with a White Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="21833" end="21843" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q488511" start="21868" end="21884" title="Motherland Party (Turkey)" label="Motherland Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509049" start="21898" end="21922" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Turkey)" label="Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q942515" start="21932" end="21953" title="Democratic Left Party (Turkey)" label="Democratic Left Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067217" start="21964" end="21978" title="Democrat Party (Turkey, current)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417344" start="21981" end="21998" title="Kayı (tribe)" label="Kayı tribe symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42313794" start="22001" end="22011" title="Good Party" label="Good Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="22014" end="22023" title="Electric light" label="Lightbulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="22026" end="22055" title="Justice and Development Party (Turkey)" label="Justice and Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030041" start="22058" end="22068" title="The Six Arrows" label="Six arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="22071" end="22101" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488888" start="22104" end="22119" title="Crescent" label="Three crescents"/>
<link wikidata="Q251077" start="22122" end="22148" title="Nationalist Movement Party" label="Nationalist Movement Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="22152" end="22156" title="Wolf" label="Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142831" start="22159" end="22175" title="Grey Wolves (organization)" label="Idealist Hearths"/>
<link wikidata="Q10714" start="22194" end="22201" title="At sign" label="At sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076329" start="22204" end="22229" title="Internet Party of Ukraine" label="Internet Party of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396" start="22265" end="22290" title="Svoboda (political party)" label="Svoboda (political party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q844787" start="22313" end="22318" title="Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists" label="OUN-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q15361249" start="22320" end="22332" title="Right Sector" label="Right Sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q9378767" start="22334" end="22355" title="Tryzub (organization)" label="Tryzub (organization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753856" start="22359" end="22369" title="Wolfsangel" label="Wolfsangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289626" start="22372" end="22390" title="Patriot of Ukraine" label="Patriot of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22392" end="22408" title="Azov Brigade#Azov Civil Corps" label="Azov Civil Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154770" start="22410" end="22434" title="Social-National Assembly" label="Social-National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964034" start="22436" end="22468" title="Social-National Party of Ukraine" label="Social-National Party of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q117161946" start="22470" end="22497" title="Karelian National Battalion" label="Karelian National Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q211931" start="22531" end="22549" title="Co-operative Party" label="Co-operative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="22582" end="22614" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563649" start="22617" end="22633" title="Flash and circle" label="Flash and circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q920343" start="22636" end="22661" title="British Union of Fascists" label="British Union of Fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969961" start="22663" end="22678" title="British fascism" label="British fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997368" start="22691" end="22708" title="Libertarian Party (UK)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="22726" end="22743" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="22753" end="22778" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953846" start="22780" end="22793" title="Britain First" label="Britain First"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="22795" end="22816" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173260" start="22830" end="22854" title="Young Conservatives (UK)" label="Young Conservatives (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="22857" end="22867" title="Pound Sterling" label="Pound sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="22870" end="22891" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q52701679" start="22918" end="22942" title="Aspire (political party)" label="Aspire (political party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="22956" end="22968" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="22981" end="22996" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q201960" start="23012" end="23019" title="Saltire" label="Saltire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="23026" end="23049" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243587" start="23054" end="23081" title="Scottish Conservative Party" label="Scottish Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="23153" end="23171" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574974" start="23239" end="23254" title="Pirate Party UK" label="Pirate Party UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q166571" start="23269" end="23285" title="British Movement" label="British Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="23300" end="23320" title="Scottish Green Party" label="Scottish Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="23425" end="23435" title="Union Jack" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="23463" end="23484" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="23486" end="23511" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161269" start="23513" end="23535" title="British National Party" label="British National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745280" start="23588" end="23600" title="Welsh Dragon" label="Welsh Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="23618" end="23629" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q21876094" start="23721" end="23732" title="Papaver cambricum" label="Welsh poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="23735" end="23746" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915262" start="23749" end="23759" title="White Rose of York" label="White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059489" start="23774" end="23789" title="Yorkshire Party" label="Yorkshire Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="23847" end="23862" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="23865" end="23881" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908120" start="24046" end="24071" title="California National Party" label="California National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="24074" end="24091" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="24094" end="24110" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q285272" start="24167" end="24174" title="cockade" label="cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="24177" end="24193" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q515856" start="24204" end="24221" title="Prohibition Party" label="Prohibition Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24224" end="24230" title="Donkey#Politics" label="Donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="24233" end="24249" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="24260" end="24276" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128321" start="24314" end="24332" title="Constitution Party (United States)" label="Constitution Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744654" start="24334" end="24348" title="American Party (1969)" label="American Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24351" end="24359" title="Elephant#Politics and secular symbolism" label="Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="24362" end="24378" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102307" start="24381" end="24393" title="Lady Justice" label="Lady Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317052" start="24396" end="24409" title="Justice Party (United States)" label="Justice Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9927" start="24412" end="24420" title="L" label="Letter L"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753311" start="24423" end="24447" title="Silver Legion of America" label="Silver Legion of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974802" start="24457" end="24471" title="National Party (United States)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q130967162" start="24474" end="24484" title="Minute Man" label="Minute Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120957" start="24576" end="24601" title="Vermont Progressive Party" label="Vermont Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363538" start="24629" end="24645" title="Bull Moose Party" label="Bull Moose Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="24658" end="24677" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263796" start="24690" end="24715" title="American Solidarity Party" label="American Solidarity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="24747" end="24766" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="24819" end="24836" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="24851" end="24868" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453448" start="24894" end="24912" title="Free State Project" label="Free State Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="24916" end="24929" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="24990" end="25000" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q164182" start="25014" end="25046" title="Democratic Socialists of America" label="Democratic Socialists of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="25079" end="25106" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="25116" end="25132" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="25171" end="25188" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="25191" end="25208" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="25247" end="25258" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q665416" start="25300" end="25313" title="Alfred Landon" label="Alfred Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="25334" end="25350" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="25355" end="25369" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="25372" end="25388" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175744" start="25464" end="25488" title="Jefferson-Jackson Dinner" label="Jefferson-Jackson Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="25535" end="25548" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="25549" end="25565" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="25574" end="25586" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163079" start="25670" end="25700" title="Conservative Party of New York" label="Conservative Party of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="25702" end="25719" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436739" start="25734" end="25744" title="List of black flags" label="Black flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="25747" end="25756" title="Anarchism" label="Anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="25758" end="25766" title="Islamism" label="Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757343" start="25768" end="25776" title="Jihadism" label="Jihadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="25778" end="25787" title="Rebellion" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q67934208" start="25790" end="25809" title="Black Bauhinia flag" label="Black Bauhinia flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129523" start="25812" end="25842" title="Pro-democracy camp (Hong Kong)" label="Pro-democracy camp (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19847386" start="25844" end="25865" title="Hong Kong nationalism" label="Hong Kong nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q113301" start="25867" end="25889" title="Hong Kong independence" label="Hong Kong independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="25905" end="25930" title="Chinese state nationalism" label="Chinese state nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4518702" start="25933" end="25956" title="Black-yellow-white flag of the Russian Empire" label="Black-yellow-white flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354258" start="25959" end="25983" title="Russian ultranationalism" label="Russian ultranationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q114240134" start="25985" end="26004" title="Russian imperialism" label="Russian imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680807" start="26006" end="26025" title="Russian irredentism" label="Russian irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029959" start="26029" end="26050" title="Canadian Duality Flag" label="Canadian Duality Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088188" start="26053" end="26072" title="Canadian federalism" label="Canadian federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872697" start="26074" end="26091" title="Quebec autonomism" label="Quebec autonomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q326826" start="26094" end="26113" title="Canadian Red Ensign" label="Canadian Red Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q541557" start="26116" end="26135" title="Anglophile" label="Canadian Anglophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="26153" end="26176" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="26178" end="26196" title="Far-right politics" label="Far-right politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q641794" start="26208" end="26228" title="Canadian nationalism" label="Canadian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018230" start="26271" end="26280" title="Alt right" label="Alt right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985812" start="26302" end="26315" title="Calcutta flag" label="Calcutta flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="26318" end="26346" title="Indian independence movement" label="Indian independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26349" end="26376" title="Communist symbolism#Red and black flag" label="Bisected red-and-black flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="26379" end="26398" title="Anarchist communism" label="Anarchist communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q913583" start="26401" end="26424" title="Confederate battle flag" label="Confederate battle flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193678" start="26427" end="26464" title="Culture of the Southern United States" label="Culture of the Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159760" start="26466" end="26507" title="Confederate monuments and memorials" label="Historical commemoration of the Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991715" start="26509" end="26525" title="Neo-Confederates" label="Neo-Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="26546" end="26575" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Lost Cause of the Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="26577" end="26592" title="White supremacy" label="White supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="26594" end="26603" title="Rebellion" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300474" start="26606" end="26615" title="Doug flag" label="Doug flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128483" start="26618" end="26635" title="Cascadia movement" label="Cascadia movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q148002" start="26638" end="26646" title="Estelada" label="Estelada"/>
<link wikidata="Q893331" start="26649" end="26678" title="Catalan independence movement" label="Catalan independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735599" start="26680" end="26699" title="Catalan nationalism" label="Catalan nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131147" start="26702" end="26715" title="Flag of China" label="Flag of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301091" start="26718" end="26735" title="Socialism with Chinese characteristics" label="Chinese socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924561" start="26737" end="26754" title="Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246577" start="26756" end="26784" title="Pro-Beijing camp (Hong Kong)" label="Pro-Beijing camp (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128480" start="26787" end="26801" title="Flag of Israel" label="Flag of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="26804" end="26811" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073388" start="26814" end="26834" title="Flag of Nazi Germany" label="Flag of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="26837" end="26843" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="26845" end="26855" title="neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="26857" end="26872" title="White supremacy" label="White supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85743247" start="26874" end="26882" title="Aryanism" label="Aryanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983401" start="26884" end="26893" title="Nazi chic" label="Nazi chic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920937" start="26895" end="26906" title="Shock value" label="Shock value"/>
<link wikidata="Q103064" start="26909" end="26928" title="Flag of North Korea" label="Flag of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q113649307" start="26931" end="26956" title="Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism" label="Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="26968" end="26973" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="26975" end="26981" title="Songun" label="Songun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920937" start="26983" end="26994" title="Shock value" label="Shock value"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039133" start="26997" end="27013" title="Flag of Rhodesia" label="Flag of Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="27066" end="27083" title="White nationalism" label="White nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="27085" end="27100" title="White supremacy" label="White supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018230" start="27102" end="27120" title="Alt-right" label="Alt-right politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740429" start="27123" end="27144" title="Flag of South Vietnam" label="Flag of South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233666" start="27147" end="27166" title="Overseas Vietnamese" label="Vietnamese diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="27168" end="27182" title="Anti-communism" label="Anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10757362" start="27184" end="27213" title="Vietnamese democracy movement" label="Vietnamese democracy movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q381255" start="27261" end="27281" title="American nationalism" label="American nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131404661" start="27292" end="27312" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Syria" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131399596" start="27315" end="27323" title="Assadism" label="Assadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131399596" start="27325" end="27343" title="Neo-Ba&amp;#x27;athism" label="Neo-Ba&amp;#x27;athism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389568" start="27380" end="27403" title="Flag of the Arab Revolt" label="Flag of the Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="27406" end="27417" title="Pan-Arabism" label="Pan-Arabism"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="27419" end="27435" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165230" start="27438" end="27462" title="Flag of the Soviet Union" label="Flag of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="27465" end="27474" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571792" start="27476" end="27493" title="Soviet patriotism" label="Soviet patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q621761" start="27495" end="27525" title="Nostalgia for the Soviet Union" label="Nostalgia for the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="27527" end="27543" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60463402" start="27545" end="27559" title="Communist chic" label="Communist chic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932762" start="27561" end="27574" title="Neo-Sovietism" label="Neo-Sovietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q111843857" start="27576" end="27619" title="Soviet imagery during the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Support for the Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920937" start="27621" end="27632" title="Shock value" label="Shock value"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147203" start="27635" end="27671" title="Flag of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army" label="Flag of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077250" start="27674" end="27683" title="Banderite" label="Banderism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048429" start="27685" end="27706" title="Ukrainian nationalism" label="Ukrainian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83834" start="27755" end="27769" title="Anti-Sovietism" label="Anti-Sovietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q512990" start="27771" end="27782" title="Russophobia" label="Russophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="27785" end="27810" title="Flag of the United States" label="Flag of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="27813" end="27834" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="American conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="27836" end="27859" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="American libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q381255" start="27861" end="27881" title="American nationalism" label="American nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="27883" end="27906" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614115" start="27908" end="27919" title="Americanism (ideology)" label="Americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q31838499" start="27921" end="27929" title="Trumpism" label="Trumpism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280496" start="27931" end="27944" title="Radical right (United States)" label="Radical right"/>
<link wikidata="Q917652" start="27947" end="27959" title="Gadsden flag" label="Gadsden flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="27962" end="27982" title="Right libertarianism" label="Right libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="27984" end="28004" title="Classical liberalism" label="Classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="28006" end="28013" title="Liberty" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="28015" end="28041" title="Libertarian conservativism" label="Libertarian conservativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19042" start="28043" end="28061" title="Tea Party movement" label="Tea Party movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="28063" end="28076" title="Individualism" label="Individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614115" start="28078" end="28089" title="Americanism (ideology)" label="Americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603516" start="28092" end="28102" title="Green flag" label="Green flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995403" start="28105" end="28131" title="Third International Theory" label="Third International Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305401" start="28133" end="28149" title="Gaddafi loyalism" label="Gaddafi loyalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="28151" end="28168" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27979339" start="28171" end="28184" title="Jihadist flag" label="Jihadist flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="28187" end="28195" title="Islamism" label="Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140370" start="28197" end="28219" title="Islamic fundamentalism" label="Islamic fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757343" start="28221" end="28229" title="Jihadism" label="Jihadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082705" start="28231" end="28248" title="Islamic extremism" label="Islamic extremism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920937" start="28250" end="28261" title="Shock value" label="Shock value"/>
<link wikidata="Q48898160" start="28264" end="28274" title="Kapok flag" label="Kapok flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q48898160" start="28277" end="28298" title="Cantonese nationalism" label="Cantonese nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48898160" start="28300" end="28330" title="Cantonia Independence Movement" label="Cantonia Independence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038134" start="28332" end="28349" title="Cantonese culture" label="Cantonese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366349" start="28352" end="28369" title="Morning Star flag" label="Morning Star flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q559673" start="28372" end="28391" title="Free Papua Movement" label="Free Papua Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q559673" start="28393" end="28411" title="Papuan nationalism" label="Papuan nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23321558" start="28415" end="28435" title="Oranje, Blanje, Blou" label="Oranje, Blanje, Blou"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="28478" end="28487" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="28489" end="28504" title="White supremacy" label="White supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071541" start="28506" end="28523" title="Anti-Black racism" label="Anti-Black racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="28525" end="28541" title="White separatism" label="White separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029729" start="28544" end="28560" title="Pan-African flag" label="Pan-African flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="28563" end="28577" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="28579" end="28596" title="Black nationalism" label="Black nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q880483" start="28598" end="28609" title="Black power" label="Black power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524522" start="28611" end="28620" title="Garveyism" label="Garveyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="28626" end="28630" title="UNIA" label="UNIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195389" start="28634" end="28648" title="Pine Tree Flag" label="Pine Tree Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905525" start="28651" end="28672" title="Christian nationalism" label="Christian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="28674" end="28697" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="American Libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110011" start="28699" end="28725" title="Christian Patriot movement" label="Christian Patriot movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191216" start="28727" end="28749" title="Culture of New England" label="Culture of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="28751" end="28776" title="Right-wing libertarianism" label="Right-wing libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614115" start="28778" end="28789" title="Americanism (ideology)" label="Americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q872603" start="28792" end="28810" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Flag" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603219" start="28831" end="28850" title="Greater Netherlands" label="Greater Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="28879" end="28893" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15876117" start="28895" end="28919" title="Pan-Netherlands" label="Pan-Netherlands politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q51401" start="28953" end="28972" title="Rainbow flag (LGBT)" label="Rainbow flag (LGBT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="28975" end="28985" title="LGBT pride" label="LGBT pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="29000" end="29014" title="LGBT movements" label="LGBT movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q517327" start="29018" end="29026" title="Red flag (politics)" label="Red flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="29029" end="29038" title="Socialism" label="Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="29040" end="29049" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="29051" end="29058" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="29060" end="29075" title="Labour movement" label="Labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="29077" end="29095" title="Left-wing politics" label="Left-wing politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="29097" end="29106" title="Anarchism" label="Anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q702031" start="29109" end="29124" title="Rising Sun Flag" label="Rising Sun Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q702868" start="29127" end="29146" title="Japanese militarism" label="Japanese militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331440" start="29148" end="29168" title="Japanese nationalism" label="Japanese nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16630951" start="29171" end="29178" title="Senyera" label="Senyera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735599" start="29199" end="29218" title="Catalan nationalism" label="Catalan nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q111141592" start="29221" end="29242" title="White-blue-white flag" label="White-blue-white flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023172" start="29245" end="29258" title="Anti-Putinism" label="Anti-Putinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q113661143" start="29307" end="29324" title="Irpin Declaration" label="Irpin Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376574" start="29347" end="29367" title="White-red-white flag" label="White-red-white flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881953" start="29401" end="29422" title="Belarusian opposition" label="Belarusian opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920007" start="29460" end="29482" title="Belarusian nationalism" label="Belarusian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166110" start="29489" end="29500" title="Union State" label="Union State"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962548" wikidata="Q7857863" url="?curid=962548" title="Twice (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Twice]] is a South Korean girl group.

Twice may also refer to: 
==Literature==
* &quot;Twice&quot; (magazine), a consumer electronics trade magazine
* &quot;Twice&quot; (novel), a novel by Lisa Miscione

==Music==
* &quot;Twice&quot; (Hollie Cook album) (2014)
* &quot;Twice&quot; (The Tyde album) (2003)
* &quot;Twice&quot;, a 2009 EP by Yeti Lane
* &quot;Twice&quot;, a 2015 song by Ludovico Einaudi and the Amsterdam Sinfonietta from &quot;Elements&quot;
* &quot;Twice&quot; (song), a 2018 song by Christina Aguilera
* &quot;Twice&quot;, a 2016 song by Catfish and the Bottlemen from &quot;The Ride&quot;
* &quot;Twice&quot;, a 2022 song by Charli XCX from &quot;Crash&quot;
* &quot;Twice&quot;, a 2023 song by Romy from &quot;Mid Air&quot;

==Other uses==
* Twice (adverb), multiplicative indicating &#x27;two times&#x27;
* Twice (online retailer), an American online marketplace
* Twice (&quot;My Hero Academia&quot;), a character in &quot;My Hero Academia&quot;

==See also==
* &quot;#Twice&quot; and &quot;&amp;Twice&quot;, albums by Twice</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7857863" start="0" end="9" title="Twice (disambiguation)" label="[[Twice]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857863" start="41" end="46" title="Twice (disambiguation)" label="Twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672542" start="84" end="112" title="Twice (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Twice&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965361" start="154" end="179" title="Twice (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Twice&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151532" start="219" end="256" title="Twice (Hollie Cook album)" label="&amp;quot;Twice&amp;quot; (Hollie Cook album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857864" start="266" end="300" title="Twice (The Tyde album)" label="&amp;quot;Twice&amp;quot; (The Tyde album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q45461" start="342" end="351" title="Yeti Lane" label="Yeti Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q83182" start="388" end="404" title="Ludovico Einaudi" label="Ludovico Einaudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53275895" start="463" end="487" title="Twice (song)" label="&amp;quot;Twice&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24463138" start="596" end="604" title="The Ride (Catfish and the Bottlemen album)" label="The Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q109419978" start="669" end="674" title="Crash (Charli XCX album)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q121461524" start="733" end="740" title="Mid Air (Romy album)" label="Mid Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q38890985" start="765" end="779" title="Twice (adverb)" label="Twice (adverb)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881573" start="831" end="854" title="Twice (online retailer)" label="Twice (online retailer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915557" start="889" end="925" title="Twice (My Hero Academia)" label="Twice (&amp;quot;My Hero Academia&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30106748" start="993" end="999" title="Twice (Twice album)" label="#Twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q67514684" start="1016" end="1026" title="&amp;amp;Twice" label="&amp;amp;Twice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962549" wikidata="Q7118712" url="?curid=962549" title="PC Party">
<text>PC Party may refer to:

* Progressive Conservative Party of Canada, a former federal party which merged into the Conservative Party of Canada in 2003
** Progressive Conservative Party (disambiguation), various other Canadian political parties
* Progressive Canadian Party, a minor party formed 2004 after the dissolution of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="26" end="66" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248650" start="153" end="200" title="Progressive Conservative Party (disambiguation)" label="Progressive Conservative Party (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366635" start="245" end="271" title="Progressive Canadian Party" label="Progressive Canadian Party"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962552" wikidata="Q1706858" url="?curid=962552" title="Whisker (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[whisker]] is a type of mammalian hair.

Whisker or Whiskers may also refer to:
== Arts and entertainment ==
* Whiskers, the main family group in the British television show &quot;Meerkat Manor&quot; 
* Whiskers, a fictional winged cat in Michael Moorcock&#x27;s &quot;Multiverse&quot;
* Whiskers, a fictional villain in &quot;The Tale of Samuel Whiskers or The Roly-Poly Pudding&quot; by Beatrix Potter
* Captain Whiskers, villain of the video game &quot;Sonic Rush Adventure&quot;
* Mr. Whiskers, a character in the American animated television series &quot;Brandy &amp; Mr. Whiskers&quot;

== People ==
* Alexander Whisker (1819–1907), New Zealand soldier and diarist
* Andrew Mowatt Whisker (1907–1992), Canadian lumberman and politician

== Other uses ==
* Whisker (horse) (1812–1832), a thoroughbred racehorse and winner of the 1815 Epsom Derby
* Whisker (metallurgy), a strong hair-shaped protrusion on a metal&#x27;s surface
* Whisker, in statistics an element of a box plot
* Whisker, a project of the Cult of the Dead Cow which checked for security vulnerabilities in web servers
* &quot;Whiskers&quot;, slang for human facial hair on the chin or cheeks
* Lake Whisker, a lake of Wisconsin

== See also ==
* Whiskas, a brand of cat food
* Whiskering, an operation in category theory between a functor and a natural transformation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1706858" start="2" end="13" title="Whisker (disambiguation)" label="[[whisker]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706858" start="44" end="51" title="Whisker (disambiguation)" label="Whisker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706858" start="55" end="63" title="Whisker (disambiguation)" label="Whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="183" end="196" title="Meerkat Manor#Whiskers" label="Meerkat Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327734" start="272" end="282" title="Multiverse (Moorcock)" label="Multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068209" start="330" end="382" title="The Tale of Samuel Whiskers or The Roly-Poly Pudding" label="The Tale of Samuel Whiskers or The Roly-Poly Pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444897" start="459" end="479" title="Sonic Rush Adventure" label="Sonic Rush Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q592347" start="563" end="588" title="Brandy &amp;amp; Mr. Whiskers" label="Brandy &amp;amp; Mr. Whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720357" start="611" end="628" title="Alexander Whisker" label="Alexander Whisker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758074" start="676" end="697" title="Andrew Mowatt Whisker" label="Andrew Mowatt Whisker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993846" start="765" end="780" title="Whisker (horse)" label="Whisker (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q901525" start="856" end="876" title="Whisker (metallurgy)" label="Whisker (metallurgy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q895726" start="977" end="985" title="box plot" label="box plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143522" start="1014" end="1034" title="Cult of the Dead Cow" label="Cult of the Dead Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847641" start="1133" end="1144" title="facial hair" label="facial hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624858" start="1185" end="1202" title="List of lakes of Wisconsin" label="lake of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163355" start="1221" end="1228" title="Whiskas" label="Whiskas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1320" end="1342" title="Natural_transformation#Whiskering" label="natural transformation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962554" wikidata="Q208648" url="?curid=962554" title="Smooth snake">
<text>The smooth snake (Coronella austriaca) is a species of non-venomous snake in the family Colubridae. The species is found in northern and central Europe, but also as far east as northern Iran. The Reptile Database recognizes two subspecies as being valid, including the nominotypical subspecies described here.

==Description==

Both sexes of &quot;C. austriaca&quot; grow to an average total length (including tail) of about to . Two specimens measuring have been recorded in Sweden, as well as one in Russia that was .

The head has a rostral scale that is at least as deep as it is wide, creating a triangular indentation between the internasal scales (rarely separating them). The top of the head is covered with nine large plates. The nasal scale is often divided. There is one (rarely two) preoculars and two postoculars. The temporals number 2+2 or 2+3 (rarely 1+2) . There are seven (rarely eight) upper labials, of which the third and fourth or fourth and fifth border the eye.

In the middle part of the body there are 19 (rarely 17 or 21) rows of dorsal scales. In contrast with many other snakes found in the region, these scales are flat (not keeled). This gives the snake a smooth texture to the touch, from which it gets its common name. The ventral scales number 150-164 in males and 162–200 in females. The anal scale is divided (rarely single) and the subcaudal scales are paired. Males have 54–70 subcaudal scales and females 40–76.

The colour pattern consists of a brown, grey or reddish ground colour with two rows of small, rather indistinct dark spots running down the back towards the tail. In some cases, each pair of spots may be united toward the neck area, forming a series of cross-bars over the back. There is also a very indistinct series of dark spots running along each of the flanks. These four series of spots along the body overlay four parallel, rather shadowy stripes that also run down the back and flanks.

On the top of the head is a dark marking which is often in the shape of a crown, giving rise to the generic name &quot;Coronella&quot; (which means coronet). A relatively thick dark stripe extends from each nostril, through the eye, and along the side of the head to a little beyond the neck. The upper labials are whitish, greyish-white or light brown, sometimes with darker spots. The tongue is reddish brown or dark red.

==Biology==
The smooth snake feeds on smaller animals, especially other reptiles. It subdues larger prey by constriction, although unlike true constrictors it does not kill by this method. Smooth snakes are ovoviviparous. The juveniles hatch out of eggs internally and are born live.

In Britain it is restricted to heathland habitats.

==Geographic range==
&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot; is found from the south of England through France and the Low Countries to northern Spain and Portugal, Germany, Norway and Sweden (as far north as latitude 63°), Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Switzerland, Austria, Italy and Sicily (but not in Corsica or Sardinia), the western Balkans and Greece, and European Russia as far north as latitude 57°. In Asia, it is found from Turkey to Azerbaijan, Georgia, Armenia and northern Iran. It is absent in Denmark despite the species being found just south of the German border as well as in southern Sweden. The species is only known from Denmark from 6 specimens, all found between 1870 and 1914.

In Finland, the species is found only in Åland, and it is not common there.

==Subspecies==
==See also==
*List of reptiles of Europe

==References==
==Further reading==
*Arnold EN, Burton JA (1978). &quot;A Field Guide to the Reptiles and Amphibians of Britain and Europe&quot;. (With 351 illustrations, 257 in colour by D.W. Ovenden). London: Collins. 272 pp. + Plates 1-40. . (&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot;, pp. 204–205 + Plate 38, figure 1 + Map 117).
*Boulenger GA (1894). &quot;Catalogue of the Snakes in the British Museum (Natural History). Volume II., Containing the Conclusion of the Colubridæ Aglyphæ.&quot; London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, printers). xi + 382 pp. + Plates I-XX. (&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot;, pp. 191–193).
*Laurenti JN (1768). &quot;Specimen medicum, exhibens synopsin reptilium emendatam cum experimentis circa venena et antidota reptilium austriacorum.&quot; Vienna: &quot;Joan. Thom. Nob. de Trattnern&quot;. 214 pp. + Plates I-V. (&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot;, new species, p. 84 + Plate V, figure 1). (in Latin).
*Malkmus R (1995). &quot;Coronella austriaca acutirostris &quot;subspec. nov. aus dem Nordwesten der Iberischen Halbinsel (Reptilia: Serpentes: Colubridae)&quot; &quot;. &quot;Zoologische Abhandlungen, Museum für Tierkunde Dresden&quot; 48 (3): 265-278. (&quot;Coronella austriaca acutirostris&quot;, new subspecies). (in German).

==Gallery==
==External links==

*Smooth snake (&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot;) at Surrey Amphibian and Reptile Group (SARG). Accessed 5 June 2008.
*&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot; at Amphibians and Reptiles of Europe. Accessed 7 October 2006.
*Smooth snake (&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot;) at ARKive. Accessed 7 October 2006.
*Smooth Snake – &quot;Coronella austriaca&quot; at Reptiles and Amphibians of the UK. Accessed 7 October 2006.
*Smooth snake, &quot;Coronella austriaca&quot; at Reptiles &amp; Amphibians of France. Accessed 30 October 2006.
*&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot; at Checklist of Armenia&#x27;s Amphibians and Reptiles, Tadevosyan&#x27;s Herpetological Resources. Accessed 30 March 2007.
*Smooth Snake at Blog posting with two pictures of &quot;Coronella austriaca&quot;. Accessed 18 July 2007.
*Smooth snake (&quot;Coronella austriaca&quot;) at Dissertation abstract about smooth snakes mimicry of vipers being a protective behavior, scaring off some predators. Accessed 15 July 2014
*IUCN Red List</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208648" start="4" end="16" title="Smooth snake" label="smooth snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="44" end="51" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q847312" start="59" end="73" title="venomous snake" label="venomous snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="81" end="87" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q182751" start="88" end="98" title="Colubridae" label="Colubridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644501" start="196" end="212" title="Reptile Database" label="Reptile Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="228" end="238" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="269" end="293" title="nominotypical subspecies" label="nominotypical subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790170" start="536" end="549" title="rostral scale" label="rostral scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681568" start="636" end="653" title="internasal scales" label="internasal scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282271" start="739" end="750" title="nasal scale" label="nasal scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077146" start="795" end="805" title="preoculars" label="preoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077146" start="814" end="825" title="postoculars" label="postoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698936" start="831" end="840" title="Temporal scales" label="temporals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261806" start="905" end="918" title="upper labials" label="upper labials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298805" start="1057" end="1070" title="dorsal scales" label="dorsal scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q583141" start="1256" end="1270" title="ventral scales" label="ventral scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261802" start="1323" end="1333" title="anal scale" label="anal scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q653077" start="1369" end="1385" title="subcaudal scales" label="subcaudal scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="2047" end="2054" title="Genus" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294983" start="2095" end="2102" title="coronet" label="coronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q495626" start="2515" end="2527" title="Constriction" label="constrictors"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="2579" end="2592" title="Ovoviviparity" label="ovoviviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="2688" end="2697" title="heathland" label="heathland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134643" start="2780" end="2796" title="Southern England" label="south of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="2820" end="2833" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="2985" end="2991" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="3004" end="3011" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="3015" end="3023" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="3038" end="3045" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q875134" start="3062" end="3077" title="European Russia" label="European Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="3144" end="3154" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="3156" end="3163" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="3165" end="3172" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="3443" end="3448" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474783" start="3508" end="3534" title="List of reptiles of Europe" label="List of reptiles of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3572" end="3581" title=":fr:Edwin Nicholas Arnold" label="Arnold EN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089681" start="3723" end="3735" title="Denys Ovenden" label="D.W. Ovenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q435731" start="3860" end="3872" title="George Albert Boulenger" label="Boulenger GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q45120" start="4189" end="4200" title="Josephus Nicolaus Laurenti" label="Laurenti JN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4504" end="4513" title="Rudolf Malkmus" label="Malkmus R"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962556" wikidata="Q13129493" url="?curid=962556" title="Laura Anne Jones">
<text>Laura Anne Jones (born 21 February 1979) is a Conservative politician who has been the Member of the Senedd (MS) for the South Wales East electoral region since July 2020, having previously held the same seat as an Assembly Member (AM) in the National Assembly for Wales between 2003 and 2007. Jones also served as a county councillor for the Wyesham ward in Monmouthshire County Council from 2017 to 2022.

==Background==
The daughter of a farmer and a lecturer, Jones was born in Newport and brought up in Monmouthshire. She attended the University of Plymouth, where she studied politics. 

==Political career==
She joined the Conservatives in 1996 and was involved in Conservative Future, the party&#x27;s youth wing. 

In December 2002 she was banned from driving for a year and fined £75, for drunk driving.

=== First Senedd period (2003-2007) ===
Jones contested the South Wales East list and the Caerphilly constituency at the 2003 Welsh Assembly elections. She came third in Caerphilly, with 10.1% of the vote, but was elected to represent South Wales East, as the second Conservative on the list. She was the youngest member of the Second Assembly, and the joint-first Welsh Conservative female AM. She said to the BBC at the time that she was &quot;completely shocked&quot; to have been elected. She was appointed as the Conservative spokeswoman on sport, and sat on the Culture, Sport and Welsh Language, and Local Government and Public Services committees.

During her time as Welsh Conservative Sports Spokesperson she criticised the Welsh Government&#x27;s plans to provide free summertime swimming in 2003, arguing that free swimming lessons would have been a better use of money. 

Her profile was increased when she appeared on the BBC television programme &quot;Question Time&quot; in February 2004.

Jones attempted to gain the nomination to replace David TC Davies as candidate for the Monmouth constituency, after Davies was elected to the UK Parliament. She did not receive the seat, with Nick Ramsay, then a party staffer in the Assembly, being selected. Jones lost her seat in the Assembly in the 2007 Assembly election when Plaid Cymru gained one seat in the South Wales East region at the expense of the Conservatives.

In January 2007, Jones claimed for a £1,109.94 television on her expenses.

=== Between Senedd terms ===
At the 2015 general election she contested the safe Labour seat of Islwyn for the Conservatives and finished third with 5,366 votes. At the 2019 general election she contested the Labour seat of Blaenau Gwent for the Conservatives and finished third with 5,749 votes.

In the 2017 Welsh local elections she was elected to the Wyesham ward on Monmouthshire County Council winning 42% of the vote and defeating Welsh Labour&#x27;s Catherine Fookes. She did not contest the 2022 Monmouthshire County Council elections. Her previous ward, Wyesham, elected an independent candidate.

=== Second Senedd period (2020-) ===
Following the death of Mohammad Asghar in June 2020, it was confirmed in July 2020 that Jones would become the MS for South Wales East, having been the next Conservative candidate on the regional list in the Assembly&#x27;s 2016 election. She was appointed as Shadow Minister for Equalities, Children and Young People by Paul Davies shortly after. In January 2021, after Paul Davies stood down as leader and was replaced by Andrew RT Davies, when her role was expanded to include Housing and Local Government. These roles ceased to be shadow ministries in March 2021, after Nick Ramsay stood down to contest the 2021 Senedd Elections as an independent.

She was re-elected at the 2021 Senedd election. After the elections, she was appointed as Shadow Minister for Education. She held this role until the April 2024 reshuffle, where she was moved to the Shadow Culture portfolio, which she held for just under 2 months. 

In 2021, past Facebook posts from Jones surfaced in which she said &quot;I would like to do a spot of Chav shooting&quot; and &quot;a shame that isn&#x27;t legal.&quot; Jones apologised for the comments.

In May 2024 it was reported that Jones was being investigated by both South Wales Police and the Senedd’s Standards Commissioner for allegedly falsifying expenses claims. In June 2024, messages were released which appeared to show Jones instructing staff to claim expenses for more petrol than she used. Jones was asked to stand down from her role in Welsh Conservative Shadow Cabinet shortly after the release of the messages. In October 2024, the investigation into this matter was re-opened, having been apparently dropped at an unknown earlier point in time. In December 2024, she was cleared by the South Wales Police, with the investigation being handed back to the Senedd Standards Commissioner, Douglas Bain.

In August 2024, further messages were released that showed Jones using a racial slur, saying &quot;No chinky spies for me!&quot;, in the context of discussion about use of the social media app TikTok within the Welsh Conservative group. Her use of the term was condemned by Welsh Conservative colleague Natasha Asghar, who said she was &quot;positively livid&quot; and that &quot;language like this is unacceptable at every level&quot;.

In September 2024, former AM and Wales Secretary David T. C. Davies joined Jones&#x27; staff.

Shortly after Andrew RT Davies announced his resignation as leader of the Welsh Conservatives, he told the BBC that Jones had been re-admitted into the Shadow Cabinet as Shadow Minister for Culture, Tourism and Sport. Jones voted that she had confidence in Davies, and seconded a motion requiring the vote to be held as a show of hands, rather than as a secret ballot as had initially been expected.

==References==
==Footnotes==
==External links==
*Laura Anne Jones MS Website

==Offices held==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13129493" start="0" end="16" title="Laura Anne Jones" label="Laura Anne Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="46" end="58" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406079" start="87" end="107" title="Member of the Senedd" label="Member of the Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568768" start="121" end="137" title="South Wales East (Senedd Cymru electoral region)" label="South Wales East"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="243" end="270" title="National Assembly For Wales" label="National Assembly for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901162" start="359" end="387" title="Monmouthshire County Council" label="Monmouthshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q101254" start="482" end="489" title="Newport, Wales" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q207176" start="508" end="521" title="Monmouthshire" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711558" start="540" end="562" title="University of Plymouth" label="University of Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="582" end="590" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163043" start="672" end="691" title="Conservative Future" label="Conservative Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568768" start="875" end="891" title="South Wales East (Senedd electoral region)" label="South Wales East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016924" start="905" end="915" title="Caerphilly (Senedd constituency)" label="Caerphilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655536" start="936" end="965" title="2003 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2003 Welsh Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568768" start="1050" end="1066" title="South Wales East (Senedd electoral region)" label="South Wales East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838448" start="1120" end="1135" title="Baby of the House" label="youngest member"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1751" end="1754" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581397" start="1782" end="1795" title="Question Time (TV series)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q296797" start="1871" end="1886" title="David TC Davies" label="David TC Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901044" start="1908" end="1916" title="Monmouth (Senedd constituency)" label="Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027777" start="2013" end="2024" title="Nick Ramsay" label="Nick Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q111715" start="2123" end="2145" title="2007 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2007 Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="2151" end="2162" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="2360" end="2381" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077338" start="2420" end="2426" title="Islwyn (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Islwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="2493" end="2514" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137641" start="2548" end="2561" title="Blaenau Gwent (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Blaenau Gwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128360" start="2629" end="2655" title="2017 Welsh local elections" label="2017 Welsh local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901162" start="2695" end="2723" title="Monmouthshire County Council" label="Monmouthshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q126850932" start="2782" end="2798" title="Catherine Fookes" label="Catherine Fookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q112108655" start="2824" end="2867" title="2022 Monmouthshire County Council election" label="2022 Monmouthshire County Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404581" start="2992" end="3007" title="Mohammad Asghar" label="Mohammad Asghar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258007" start="3177" end="3206" title="2016 National Assembly for Wales election" label="Assembly&amp;#x27;s 2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150146" start="3290" end="3301" title="Paul Davies (Conservative politician)" label="Paul Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758350" start="3393" end="3409" title="Andrew RT Davies" label="Andrew RT Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027777" start="3543" end="3554" title="Nick Ramsay" label="Nick Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403875" start="3649" end="3669" title="2021 Senedd election" label="2021 Senedd election"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="3904" end="3912" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432214" start="3992" end="3996" title="Chav" label="Chav"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="5006" end="5012" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q98968495" start="5116" end="5130" title="Natasha Asghar" label="Natasha Asghar"/>
<link wikidata="Q296797" start="5300" end="5318" title="David T. C. Davies" label="David T. C. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758350" start="5360" end="5376" title="Andrew RT Davies" label="Andrew RT Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="5700" end="5713" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962557" wikidata="Q16461303" url="?curid=962557" title="Mottville">
<text>Mottville may refer to:
*Mottville, New York (a hamlet in the Town of Skaneateles)
*Mottville Township, Michigan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6918709" start="25" end="44" title="Mottville, New York" label="Mottville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918714" start="84" end="112" title="Mottville Township, Michigan" label="Mottville Township, Michigan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962558" wikidata="Q1927639" url="?curid=962558" title="Elstead">
<text>Elstead is a civil parish in Surrey, England with shops, houses and cottages spanning the north and south sides of the River Wey; development is concentrated on two roads that meet at a central green. It includes Pot Common its southern neighbourhood. Hamlets in the parish, marginally separated from the village centre, are Charleshill and Elstead Common, both rich in woodland. Elstead lies between Farnham and Godalming on the B3001 road about west of the A3 Milford interchange.

==History==
Elstead&#x27;s relative prosperity over the centuries can be partly attributed to the existence of the availability of a site for a watermill and a bridge over the river; parts of the bridge are dated to around 1300.

The first known reference to Elstead is in the 1128 foundation charter for Waverley Abbey (sometimes spelt Waverly), where it was called &quot;Helestede&quot;. The church of St James was built around ten years later. It still contains 13th-century windows and some 14th-century timbers and is a Grade II* listed building.

In the 14th century, the Scheduled ancient monument bridge was built over the River Wey. Today this old bridge, strengthened by Surrey County Council in 1993, takes the westward traffic; eastward traffic takes the new bridge alongside.

Elstead had a forge built in 1686 which is now an office.

Elstead Mill, now a pub restaurant, was occupied by Oliver Cromwell’s ‘roundhead’ army during the English Civil War but subsequently burnt down. The present structure is described in its listing as being the result of several re-buildings from the 16th century.

There were two other pub restaurants in 2021, The Woolpack and The Golden Fleece, reflecting the early dependence on the local wool trade, also in 2021 three cafe&#x27;s and a fish &amp; chip shop.

During the 18th and 19th centuries, Elstead was known for the quality and quantity of carrots grown there, with daily shipments by train from nearby Milford Station up to London&#x27;s Covent Garden market during the growing season. This is attributed to the light sandy soils in the village which are excellent for carrot growing.

In 1997 a millennium oak was planted at the southern apex of the village green under the auspices of the afternoon WI.

==Geography==


Elstead is surrounded by woods and heathland, including Royal Common, Ockley Common, Elstead Common and Hankley Common, which is used by the British Army for training purposes and by others as a filming location. Much of the heathland area has environmental protection for rare birds, insects and reptiles.

Thundry Meadow, close to Elstead, is a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSI) and is an important breeding area for the dragonfly and damselfly.

The area around the village has several large farms and much of the land is used for grazing for horses and cattle.

Elstead is within the Green Belt and is in an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. It is a popular destination for walkers and cyclists.

===Charleshill===
The western hamlet Charleshill, is on the opposite (left) bank of the River Wey on the B3001 to Farnham, half of the hamlet being in Tilford. Its public house is &quot;The Donkey&quot; originally called &quot;The Half-way House&quot;. The pub was converted from two small cottages in 1850, which at that time were owned by Farnham United Brewery. It acquired the nickname of &quot;The Donkey&quot;, as before the days of motor traffic, donkeys were kept tethered outside the Inn to help horses and carts up the hill; it officially became named this in 1947.

==Demography and housing==

The average level of accommodation in the region composed of detached houses was 28%, the average for apartments was 22.6%.
The proportion of households in the civil parish who owned their home outright compares to the regional average of 35.1%. The proportion who owned their home with a loan compares to the regional average of 32.5%. The remaining % is made up of rented dwellings (plus a negligible % of households living rent-free).

==Sports and facilities==
The Elstead Village Tennis Club was formed in 1989 and now has five floodlit all weather courts and a clubhouse with parking.

Elstead Cricket Club, founded in the 1880s, are based in the self-built pavilion on the Thursley Road recreation ground.

Elstead Royal British Legion has a club house. There is a bowling green, an activity hall, and an outbuilding used as a commercial cafe.

The village hall plays host to the Elstead Badminton Club every Tuesday evening.

Elstead Sharks are the junior football club and the Elstead Marathon has been held for over 100 years.

Elstead pancake race is held on a convenient day, near to Shrove Tuesday.

The Elstead Paper Boat Race is held every year in early July. Boats built to hold children and adults race on The Moat, a pond on Elstead Common.

==Notable residents==
*John Black Atkins, journalist
*Sir Francis Fogarty, RAF Air Chief Marshal
*William Fraser, 3rd Baron Strathalmond
*Michael Gove, Conservative Party politician
*Austin Playfoot, who carried the Olympic torch in 1948 and 2012
*Toby Roberts, British Olympic climber
*Sir John Sunderland, former President of the CBI
*Peter Thomas, Baron Thomas of Gwydir, former Secretary of State for Wales

==References==
==External links==

*Elstead Village Website
*Elstead Parish Council
*Elstead Independent News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1927639" start="0" end="7" title="Elstead" label="Elstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="13" end="25" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="29" end="35" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783996" start="68" end="75" title="cottage" label="cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096427" start="119" end="128" title="River Wey" label="River Wey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927639" start="213" end="223" title="Elstead" label="Pot Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927639" start="325" end="336" title="Elstead" label="Charleshill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927639" start="341" end="355" title="Elstead" label="Elstead Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q643160" start="401" end="408" title="Farnham" label="Farnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q909146" start="413" end="422" title="Godalming" label="Godalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577223" start="459" end="461" title="A3 road" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295286" start="789" end="803" title="Waverley Abbey" label="Waverley Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="888" end="896" title="James, son of Zebedee" label="St James"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1019" end="1034" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="1062" end="1088" title="Scheduled monument" label="Scheduled ancient monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096427" start="1115" end="1124" title="River Wey" label="River Wey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386325" start="1165" end="1186" title="Surrey County Council" label="Surrey County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q40558" start="1288" end="1293" title="forge" label="forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="1385" end="1400" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="1404" end="1413" title="roundhead" label="roundhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1431" end="1448" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973052" start="1520" end="1527" title="National Heritage List for England" label="listing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708340" start="1944" end="1959" title="Milford railway station" label="Milford Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="1980" end="1993" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="2060" end="2064" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648547" start="2368" end="2382" title="Hankley Common" label="Hankley Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="2405" end="2417" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="2611" end="2646" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="2695" end="2704" title="dragonfly" label="dragonfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q230502" start="2709" end="2718" title="damselfly" label="damselfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096427" start="3063" end="3072" title="River Wey" label="River Wey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971901" start="3126" end="3133" title="Tilford" label="Tilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="3139" end="3151" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712768" start="4863" end="4880" title="John Black Atkins" label="John Black Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480960" start="4894" end="4913" title="Sir Francis Fogarty" label="Sir Francis Fogarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25927633" start="4938" end="4976" title="William Fraser, 3rd Baron Strathalmond" label="William Fraser, 3rd Baron Strathalmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q333937" start="4978" end="4990" title="Michael Gove" label="Michael Gove"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4992" end="5010" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="5056" end="5069" title="Olympic torch" label="Olympic torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q113881015" start="5088" end="5100" title="Toby Roberts" label="Toby Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259671" start="5127" end="5146" title="Sir John Sunderland" label="Sir John Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q333616" start="5177" end="5213" title="Peter Thomas, Baron Thomas of Gwydir" label="Peter Thomas, Baron Thomas of Gwydir"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962559" wikidata="Q830766" url="?curid=962559" title="Bezymianny">
<text>Bezymianny ( &quot;Bezymyannyyi&quot;, meaning &quot;unnamed&quot;) is an active stratovolcano in Kamchatka, Russia. Bezymianny volcano had been considered extinct until 1955. Activity started in 1955, culminating in a dramatic eruption on 30 March 1956. This eruption, similar to that of 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens, produced a large horseshoe-shaped crater that was formed by collapse of the summit and an associated lateral blast. Subsequent episodic but ongoing lava dome growth, accompanied by intermittent explosive activity and pyroclastic flows, has largely filled the 1956 crater. The most recent eruption of lava flows occurred in February 2013. An explosive eruption on 20 December 2017 released an ash plume rising to a height of above sea level, which drifted for NE. The volcano erupted similarly on 28 May 2022, again spewing an ash plume over high. On April 7, 2023, Russia reported Bezymianny had erupted explosively again and the Federal Agency for Air Transport, Rosaviatsiya, issued a Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) and raised the aviation Color Code Red. The eruption formed a column of ash that rose to a height of and was drifting to the southeast slowly. The ash plume stretched out across a distance of .

The modern Bezymianny volcano, much smaller than its massive neighbors Kamen and Kliuchevskoi, was formed about 4700 years ago over a late-Pleistocene lava-dome complex and an ancestral volcano that was built between about 11,000–7000 years ago. There have been three periods of intensified activity in the past 3000 years.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*List of volcanoes in Russia
*Kamchatka Volcanic Eruption Response Team

== References ==
==External links==
* Bezymianny Volcano live webcam
* Holocene Volcanoes in Kamchatka / Bezymianny
* Google Maps satellite image
* Information about Bezymyanny 
* For its eruptive history, go to http://www.volcano.si.edu/volcano.cfm?vn=300250 and click on its tab marked &quot;Eruptive History&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q830766" start="0" end="10" title="Bezymianny" label="Bezymianny"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="81" end="94" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="98" end="107" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="109" end="115" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q778218" start="289" end="322" title="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens" label="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387245" start="425" end="438" title="Lateral eruption" label="lateral blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q534282" start="472" end="481" title="lava dome" label="lava dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="541" end="557" title="pyroclastic flow" label="pyroclastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q999585" start="1302" end="1307" title="Kamen (volcano)" label="Kamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q210252" start="1312" end="1324" title="Kliuchevskoi" label="Kliuchevskoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="1370" end="1381" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864713" start="1582" end="1609" title="List of volcanoes in Russia" label="List of volcanoes in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115959810" start="1611" end="1652" title="Kamchatka Volcanic Eruption Response Team" label="Kamchatka Volcanic Eruption Response Team"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962565" wikidata="Q1192466" url="?curid=962565" title="Campsis grandiflora">
<text>Campsis grandiflora, commonly known as the Chinese trumpet vine, is a fast-growing, deciduous creeper with large, orange, trumpet-shaped flowers in summer. It can grow to a height of 10 meters. A native of East Asia, it is less hardy than its relative &quot;Campsis radicans&quot;.

&quot;Campsis grandiflora&quot; prefers moist, nutrient-rich soil and a position with full sun and support to climb. The dark green leaves have serrated edges.

==Name==
The scientific Latin generic name campsis is derived from the Greek verb kampe - to bend, to bend and is given by the shape of the curved stamen filaments.

The specific epithet grandiflora is formed from the roots of the Latin words grandis - large, large and flos (in Gen. Pad. floris) - flower, or from the stem of the verb floreo - to bloom.
==Botanical description==
The shoots are woody vines that reach 6-10 meters in length. They attach to vertical surfaces with the help of sparsely spaced aerial roots that grow into porous materials - the bark of supporting trees, stone, building bricks, etc.

The leaves are 4–13 cm long, compound imparipinnate with 7–9 leaflets. Petioles of leaflets 5(-10) mm, shape from oval-ovate to oval-lanceolate, 3-6(-9) x 1.5-3(-5) cm. Surface smooth, base broadly wedge-shaped, edge serrated, tip extended pointed. The venation is palmate, 6-7 secondary veins on each side of the central one. The plant is deciduous.
Inflorescences are short panicles at the ends of shoots. The inflorescence axis is 15–20 cm long.
The calyx is bell-shaped, about 3 cm, dissected to half its height. The lobes are lanceolate, about 1.5 cm.

The corolla is red outside and orange-red inside, about 5 cm long, the limb lobes are rounded. The flowering period is May–August with the first most active wave of flowering at the beginning of the period and the sporadic appearance of individual inflorescences later.

The stamens are shorter than the limb of the petals, the filaments are 2–2.5 cm long, the stamens are perpendicular to the filaments, yellow. The pistil is linear, about 3 cm, the stigma is compressed, divided into two lobes.

The fruit is a capsule-pod, rounded end, 7-12 cm long.

The seeds are flat with two membranous wings.

Number of chromosomes 2n=36, 38, 40.
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1192466" start="43" end="63" title="Campsis grandiflora" label="Chinese trumpet vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="84" end="93" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="137" end="143" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q468778" start="258" end="274" title="Campsis radicans" label="Campsis radicans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962570" wikidata="Q11784516" url="?curid=962570" title="Modlin">
<text>Modlin may refer to:

* Modlin, Nowy Dwór Mazowiecki County, a village until 1961, now a district of Nowy Dwór Mazowiecki, Poland
* Modlin Army, a Polish army during the invasion of Poland in 1939
* Battle of Modlin, a battle during the Polish September Campaign
* Modlin Fortress, a fortress in Nowy Dwór Mazowiecki, Poland, constructed in the 19th century
* Modlin Airport, an airport serving the Warsaw area
* ORP &quot;Wilia&quot;, from 1940 a merchant ship SS &quot;Modlin&quot;, a ship of the Polish Merchant Navy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q995207" start="24" end="59" title="Modlin, Nowy Dwór Mazowiecki County" label="Modlin, Nowy Dwór Mazowiecki County"/>
<link wikidata="Q258916" start="132" end="143" title="Modlin Army" label="Modlin Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q668634" start="199" end="215" title="Battle of Modlin" label="Battle of Modlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47796" start="265" end="280" title="Modlin Fortress" label="Modlin Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401995" start="360" end="374" title="Modlin Airport" label="Modlin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072946" start="413" end="434" title="ORP Wilia" label="ORP &amp;quot;Wilia&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962571" wikidata="Q413305" url="?curid=962571" title="Mound City">
<text>Mound City may refer to:

==Places==
* Mound City, Arkansas
* Mound City, Illinois
** Mound City National Cemetery
* Mound City, Kansas
* Mound City, Missouri
* Mound City, South Dakota
* Big Mound City, near Canal Point, Florida

==Other uses==
* Hopewell Culture National Historical Park, formerly designated &quot;Mound City Group National Monument&quot;
* The &quot;Mound City&quot; (train), operated by the Illinois Terminal Railroad between St. Louis, Missouri and Peoria, Illinois
* Mound City and Eastern Railway, in McPherson County, South Dakota
* St. Louis, Missouri, nicknamed Mound City due to the presence of several ceremonial mounds
* USS &quot;Mound City&quot;, a gunboat used by the Union in the American Civil War</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413305" start="0" end="10" title="Mound City" label="Mound City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919106" start="39" end="59" title="Mound City, Arkansas" label="Mound City, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q576386" start="62" end="82" title="Mound City, Illinois" label="Mound City, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919111" start="86" end="114" title="Mound City National Cemetery" label="Mound City National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232819" start="117" end="135" title="Mound City, Kansas" label="Mound City, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q964543" start="138" end="158" title="Mound City, Missouri" label="Mound City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189383" start="161" end="185" title="Mound City, South Dakota" label="Mound City, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906035" start="188" end="202" title="Big Mound City" label="Big Mound City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315010" start="248" end="289" title="Hopewell Culture National Historical Park" label="Hopewell Culture National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157141" start="364" end="394" title="Mound City (train)" label="&amp;quot;Mound City&amp;quot; (train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919113" start="490" end="520" title="Mound City and Eastern Railway" label="Mound City and Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="558" end="577" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548346" start="651" end="677" title="USS Mound City" label="USS &amp;quot;Mound City&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962579" wikidata="Q16461308" url="?curid=962579" title="Mound Valley">
<text>Mound Valley may refer to:

*Mound Valley, Kansas
*Mound Valley Township, Labette County, Kansas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2387578" start="29" end="49" title="Mound Valley, Kansas" label="Mound Valley, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9042619" start="51" end="96" title="Mound Valley Township, Labette County, Kansas" label="Mound Valley Township, Labette County, Kansas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962581" wikidata="Q1130465" url="?curid=962581" title="Scintigraphy">
<text>Scintigraphy (from Latin &quot;scintilla&quot;, &quot;spark&quot;), also known as a gamma scan, is a diagnostic test in nuclear medicine, where radioisotopes attached to drugs that travel to a specific organ or tissue (radiopharmaceuticals) are taken internally and the emitted gamma radiation is captured by gamma cameras, which are external detectors that form two-dimensional images in a process similar to the capture of x-ray images. In contrast, SPECT and positron emission tomography (PET) form 3-dimensional images and are therefore classified as separate techniques from scintigraphy, although they also use gamma cameras to detect internal radiation. Scintigraphy is unlike a diagnostic X-ray where external radiation is passed through the body to form an image.

==Process==
Scintillography is an imaging method of nuclear events provoked by collisions or charged current interactions among nuclear particles or ionizing radiation and atoms which result in a brief, localised pulse of electromagnetic radiation, usually in the visible light range (Cherenkov radiation). This pulse (scintillation) is usually detected and amplified by a photomultiplier or charge-coupled device elements, and its resulting electrical waveform is processed by computers to provide two- and three-dimensional images of a subject or region of interest.


Scintillography is mainly used in scintillation cameras in experimental physics. For example, huge neutrino detection underground tanks filled with tetrachloroethylene are surrounded by arrays of photo detectors in order to capture the extremely rare event of a collision between the fluid&#x27;s atoms and a neutrino.

Another extensive use of scintillography is in medical imaging techniques which use gamma ray detectors called gamma cameras. Detectors coated with materials which scintillate when subjected to gamma rays are scanned with optical photon detectors and scintillation counters. The subjects are injected with special radionuclides which irradiate in the gamma range inside the region of interest, such as the heart or the brain. A special type of gamma camera is the SPECT (Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography). Another medical scintillography technique, the Positron-emission tomography (PET), which uses the scintillations provoked by electron-positron annihilation phenomena.

==By organ or organ system==

===Biliary system (cholescintigraphy)===

Scintigraphy of the biliary system is called &quot;cholescintigraphy&quot; and is done to diagnose obstruction of the bile ducts by a gallstone (cholelithiasis), a tumor, or another cause. It can also diagnose gallbladder diseases, e.g. bile leaks of biliary fistulas. In cholescintigraphy, the injected radioactive chemical is taken up by the liver and secreted into the bile. The radiopharmaceutical then goes into the bile ducts, the gallbladder, and the intestines. The gamma camera is placed on the abdomen to picture these perfused organs. Other scintigraphic tests are done similarly.

===Lung scintigraphy===

The most common indication for lung scintigraphy is to diagnose pulmonary embolism, e.g. with a ventilation/perfusion scan and may be appropriate for excluding PE in pregnancy. Less common indications include evaluation of lung transplantation, preoperative evaluation, evaluation of right-to-left shunts.

In the ventilation phase of a ventilation/perfusion scan, a gaseous radionuclide xenon or technetium DTPA in an aerosol form (or ideally using Technegas, a radioaerosol invented in Australia by Dr Bill Burch and Dr Richard Fawdry) is inhaled by the patient through a mouthpiece or mask that covers the nose and mouth. The perfusion phase of the test involves the intravenous injection of radioactive technetium macro aggregated albumin (Tc99m-MAA). A gamma camera acquires the images for both phases of the study.

===Bone===

For example, the ligand methylene-diphosphonate (MDP) can be preferentially taken up by bone. By chemically attaching technetium-99m to MDP, radioactivity can be transported and attached to bone via the hydroxyapatite for imaging. Any increased physiological function, such as a fracture in the bone, will usually mean increased concentration of the tracer.

===Heart===
A &quot;thallium stress test&quot; is a form of scintigraphy, where the amount of thallium-201 detected in cardiac tissues correlates with tissue blood supply. Viable cardiac cells have normal Na+/K+ ion exchange pumps. Thallium binds the K+ pumps and is transported into the cells. Exercise or dipyridamole induces widening (vasodilation) of normal coronary arteries. This produces coronary steal from areas of ischemia where arteries are already maximally dilated. Areas of infarct or ischemic tissue will remain &quot;cold&quot;. Pre- and post-stress thallium may indicate areas that will benefit from myocardial revascularization. Redistribution indicates the existence of coronary steal and the presence of ischemic coronary artery disease.

===Parathyroid===

Tc99m-sestamibi is used to detect parathyroid adenomas.

===Thyroid===

To detect metastases/function of thyroid, the isotopes technetium-99m or iodine-123 are generally used, and for this purpose the iodide isotope does not need to be attached to another protein or molecule, because thyroid tissue takes up free iodide actively.

===Renal and urinary systems===
===Full body===
Examples are gallium scans, indium white blood cell scans, iobenguane scan (MIBG) and octreotide scans. The MIBG scan detects adrenergic tissue and thus can be used to identify the location of tumors such as pheochromocytomas and neuroblastomas.

==Function tests==
Certain tests, such as the Schilling test and urea breath test, use radioisotopes but are not used to produce a specific image.

==History==
Scintigraphic scanning was invented and proven by Neurologist and Radiologist professor Bernard George Ziedses des Plantes. He presented the results in 1950 under the name &#x27;indirect Autoradiograph’. In 1970, the Physikalisch-Medizinische Gesellschaft für Neuroradiologie (The Physics and Medical Society for Neuroradiology) instituted the ‘Ziedses des Plantes Medal&#x27;. It was first awarded to W. Oldendorf en G. Hounsfield in 1974 for Computer Tomography (CT). Later, in 1985, the medal was awarded to Ziedses des Plantes himself. In 1977 he received The Roentgen Medal.

== See also ==
*Gamma camera
*Medical imaging
*Nuclear medicine

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1130465" start="0" end="12" title="Scintigraphy" label="Scintigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130465" start="84" end="94" title="Scintigraphy" label="gamma scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="120" end="136" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="144" end="156" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9178218" start="219" end="239" title="radiopharmaceuticals" label="radiopharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="278" end="293" title="gamma ray" label="gamma radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q612082" start="309" end="321" title="gamma camera" label="gamma camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="425" end="437" title="radiography" label="x-ray images"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="452" end="457" title="Single photon emission computed tomography" label="SPECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="462" end="490" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q612082" start="617" end="629" title="gamma camera" label="gamma camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142297" start="808" end="815" title="Molecular imaging" label="imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q185657" start="826" end="839" title="nuclear event" label="nuclear event"/>
<link wikidata="Q238053" start="853" end="862" title="collision" label="collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115391" start="867" end="894" title="charged current interaction" label="charged current interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="923" end="941" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="946" end="950" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="996" end="1021" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1038" end="1051" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q192457" start="1059" end="1078" title="Cherenkov radiation" label="Cherenkov radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078889" start="1093" end="1106" title="scintillation (physics)" label="scintillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="1147" end="1162" title="photomultiplier" label="photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="1166" end="1187" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="1252" end="1260" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138203" start="1323" end="1341" title="region of interest" label="region of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q612082" start="1379" end="1399" title="scintillation camera" label="scintillation camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18366" start="1404" end="1424" title="experimental physics" label="experimental physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q583152" start="1444" end="1462" title="neutrino detection" label="neutrino detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q410772" start="1493" end="1512" title="tetrachloroethylene" label="tetrachloroethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="1654" end="1662" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="1712" end="1727" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="1749" end="1758" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q612082" start="1776" end="1788" title="gamma camera" label="gamma camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q718145" start="1916" end="1937" title="scintillation counter" label="scintillation counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="1979" end="1991" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="2071" end="2076" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="2084" end="2089" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="2129" end="2134" title="SPECT" label="SPECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="2228" end="2256" title="Positron-emission tomography" label="Positron-emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206668" start="2306" end="2336" title="electron-positron annihilation" label="electron-positron annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562150" start="2441" end="2455" title="biliary system" label="biliary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q851111" start="2539" end="2549" title="bile ducts" label="bile ducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272714" start="2566" end="2580" title="cholelithiasis" label="cholelithiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518905" start="2631" end="2651" title="gallbladder diseases" label="gallbladder diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907743" start="2672" end="2687" title="biliary fistula" label="biliary fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="3103" end="3121" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475894" start="3135" end="3161" title="ventilation/perfusion scan" label="ventilation/perfusion scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637912" start="3262" end="3282" title="lung transplantation" label="lung transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333459" start="3323" end="3342" title="right-to-left shunt" label="right-to-left shunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="3427" end="3432" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="3436" end="3446" title="technetium" label="technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q416487" start="3447" end="3451" title="DTPA" label="DTPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q169219" start="3757" end="3781" title="Albumin" label="macro aggregated albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823283" start="3897" end="3920" title="Methylene diphosphonate" label="methylene-diphosphonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373354" start="3991" end="4005" title="technetium-99m" label="technetium-99m"/>
<link wikidata="Q413478" start="4076" end="4090" title="hydroxyapatite" label="hydroxyapatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="4326" end="4334" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q59143" start="4437" end="4462" title="Na+/K+-ATPase" label="Na+/K+ ion exchange pumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q419374" start="4539" end="4551" title="dipyridamole" label="dipyridamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="4570" end="4582" title="vasodilation" label="vasodilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188151" start="4731" end="4746" title="Ischemia" label="ischemic tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317735" start="4860" end="4877" title="revascularization" label="revascularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172195" start="4921" end="4935" title="coronary steal" label="coronary steal"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="4965" end="4988" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917126" start="5016" end="5025" title="sestamibi" label="sestamibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057495" start="5044" end="5063" title="parathyroid adenoma" label="parathyroid adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373354" start="5137" end="5151" title="technetium-99m" label="technetium-99m"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801335" start="5155" end="5165" title="iodine-123" label="iodine-123"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519107" start="5403" end="5415" title="gallium scan" label="gallium scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025174" start="5418" end="5446" title="indium white blood cell scan" label="indium white blood cell scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27286979" start="5449" end="5459" title="iobenguane" label="iobenguane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374086" start="5476" end="5491" title="octreotide scan" label="octreotide scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="5583" end="5588" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q536269" start="5598" end="5614" title="pheochromocytoma" label="pheochromocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q938205" start="5620" end="5633" title="neuroblastoma" label="neuroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q941607" start="5683" end="5697" title="Schilling test" label="Schilling test"/>
<link wikidata="Q186604" start="5702" end="5718" title="urea breath test" label="urea breath test"/>
<link wikidata="Q788461" start="5984" end="5998" title="autoradiography" label="Autoradiograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="6241" end="6265" title="CT scan" label="Computer Tomography (CT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q612082" start="6394" end="6406" title="Gamma camera" label="Gamma camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="6408" end="6423" title="Medical imaging" label="Medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="6425" end="6441" title="Nuclear medicine" label="Nuclear medicine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962583" wikidata="Q323582" url="?curid=962583" title="Mutara II Rwogera">
<text>Mutara II Rwogera was the King of Rwanda from 1845 to his death in 1867. Under his rule and that of his successor Kigeli IV Rwabugiri, the kingdom reached its pinnacle of power.

In 1867, King Mutara II Rwogera died of an illness, but a non-governmental organization prevented Abiru from informing Queen Nyiramavugo Nyiramongi about his death, a non-governmental organization because he had refused to drink and should not stay after the king. 

The Mutara dynasty completed the planned conquest of , a struggling country. Rwabugili, who inherited his father&#x27;s kingdom, did a great job of restoring it.

== See also ==

* List of kings of Rwanda

==References==
== External links ==
* List of Kings of Rwanda</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q323582" start="0" end="17" title="Mutara II Rwogera" label="Mutara II Rwogera"/>
<link wikidata="Q888072" start="26" end="40" title="King of Rwanda" label="King of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q327452" start="114" end="123" title="Kigeli IV" label="Kigeli IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q888072" start="627" end="650" title="List of kings of Rwanda" label="List of kings of Rwanda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962584" wikidata="Q419514" url="?curid=962584" title="Moundville">
<text>Moundville is the name of several places in the United States:

*Moundville, Alabama
*Moundville Archaeological Site, a prehistoric chiefdom center near Tuscaloosa, Alabama
*Moundville, Missouri
*Moundville, Wisconsin

==See also==
*Moundsville, Ohio
*Moundsville, West Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q419514" start="0" end="10" title="Moundville" label="Moundville"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="48" end="61" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q984454" start="65" end="84" title="Moundville, Alabama" label="Moundville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320821" start="86" end="116" title="Moundville Archaeological Site" label="Moundville Archaeological Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q962906" start="174" end="194" title="Moundville, Missouri" label="Moundville, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885265" start="196" end="217" title="Moundville, Wisconsin" label="Moundville, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22134005" start="233" end="250" title="Moundsville, Ohio" label="Moundsville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361821" start="252" end="278" title="Moundsville, West Virginia" label="Moundsville, West Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962586" wikidata="Q702883" url="?curid=962586" title="Rheumatoid factor">
<text>Rheumatoid factor (RF) is the autoantibody that was first found in rheumatoid arthritis. It is defined as an antibody against the Fc portion of IgG and different RFs can recognize different parts of the IgG-Fc. RF and IgG join to form immune complexes that contribute to the disease process such as chronic inflammation and joint destruction at the synovium and cartilage.

Rheumatoid factor can also be a cryoglobulin (antibody that precipitates on cooling of a blood sample); it can be either type 2 (monoclonal IgM to polyclonal IgG) or type 3 (polyclonal IgM to polyclonal IgG) cryoglobulin.

Although &quot;predominantly&quot; encountered as IgM, rheumatoid factor can be of any isotype of immunoglobulins; i.e., IgA, IgG, IgM, IgE, IgD.

==Testing==
RF is tested by collecting blood in a plain tube (5 mL is often enough). The serum is tested for the presence of RF. There are different methods available, which include nephelometry, turbidimetry, agglutination of gamma globulin-coated latex particles or erythrocytes. RF is often evaluated in patients suspected of having any form of arthritis, even though positive results can be due to other causes and negative results do not rule out disease. In combination with signs and symptoms, it can play a role in both diagnosis and disease prognosis. It is part of the usual disease criteria of rheumatoid arthritis.

The presence of rheumatoid factor in serum can also indicate the occurrence of suspected autoimmune activity unrelated to rheumatoid arthritis, such as that associated with tissue or organ rejection. In such instances, RF may serve as one of several serological markers for autoimmunity. The sensitivity of RF for established rheumatoid arthritis is only 60 to 70 percent with a specificity of 78 percent.

Rheumatoid factor is part of the 2010 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for rheumatoid arthritis. RF positivity combines well with anti-CCP and/or 14-3-3η (YWHAH) to inform diagnosis. RF positivity at baseline has also been described as a good prognostic marker for future radiographic damage.

==Interpretation==
High levels of rheumatoid factor (in general, above 20 IU/mL, 1:40, or over the 95th percentile; there is some variation among labs) occur in rheumatoid arthritis (present in 80%) and Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome (present in 50-70% of primary forms of disease). The higher the level of RF the greater the probability of destructive articular disease. It is also found in Epstein–Barr virus or Parvovirus infection and in 5–10% of healthy persons, especially the elderly.

There is an association between rheumatoid factor and more persistently active synovitis, more joint damage, greater eventual disability and arthritis.

Other than in rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatoid factor may also be elevated in other conditions, including:
* Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
* Sjögren syndrome
* Hepatitis B and C, herpes, HIV, and other viral infections
* Primary biliary cirrhosis
* Infectious mononucleosis and any chronic viral infection
* Leprosy
* Sarcoidosis
* Tuberculosis, syphilis and other chronic bacterial infections
* Visceral leishmaniasis
* Malaria and other parasitic infections
* Cancer

==History==
The test was first described by Norwegian Dr Erik Waaler in 1940 and redescribed by Dr Harry M. Rose and colleagues in 1948. Redescription is said to be due to the uncertainties due to World War II. It is still referred to as the Waaler–Rose test.

==References==
==External links==
* RF on MedlinePlus
* &quot;Rheumatoid Factor&quot; on Lab Tests Online
* Rheumatoid Factor on WebMD</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q702883" start="0" end="17" title="Rheumatoid factor" label="Rheumatoid factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q702883" start="19" end="21" title="Rheumatoid factor" label="RF"/>
<link wikidata="Q785022" start="30" end="42" title="autoantibody" label="autoantibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="67" end="87" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="109" end="117" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616930" start="130" end="132" title="Fragment crystallizable region" label="Fc"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="144" end="147" title="IgG" label="IgG"/>
<link wikidata="Q575241" start="235" end="249" title="immune complex" label="immune complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="275" end="282" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q575064" start="349" end="357" title="Synovial membrane" label="synovium"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="362" end="371" title="cartilage" label="cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606543" start="406" end="418" title="cryoglobulin" label="cryoglobulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901461" start="503" end="513" title="monoclonal" label="monoclonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79451" start="514" end="517" title="IgM" label="IgM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226238" start="521" end="531" title="polyclonal" label="polyclonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396793" start="684" end="691" title="isotype (immunology)" label="isotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="695" end="710" title="immunoglobulins" label="immunoglobulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133588" start="926" end="938" title="nephelometry" label="nephelometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q782796" start="940" end="952" title="turbidimetry" label="turbidimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="1012" end="1023" title="erythrocyte" label="erythrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="1092" end="1101" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="1235" end="1242" title="symptom" label="symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q592442" start="1294" end="1303" title="prognosis" label="prognosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="1349" end="1369" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q502159" start="1622" end="1633" title="serology" label="serological"/>
<link wikidata="Q262881" start="1910" end="1918" title="anti-CCP" label="anti-CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032409" start="1935" end="1940" title="YWHAH" label="YWHAH"/>
<link wikidata="Q835916" start="2148" end="2150" title="International unit" label="IU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913954" start="2178" end="2188" title="percentile" label="percentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="2277" end="2300" title="Sjögren&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Sjögren&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="2459" end="2477" title="Epstein–Barr virus" label="Epstein–Barr virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13210344" start="2481" end="2491" title="Parvovirus" label="Parvovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="2701" end="2710" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="2727" end="2747" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="2822" end="2850" title="Systemic lupus erythematosus" label="Systemic lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="2859" end="2875" title="Sjögren syndrome" label="Sjögren syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="2878" end="2889" title="Hepatitis B" label="Hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="2894" end="2895" title="Hepatitis C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="2897" end="2903" title="herpes" label="herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="2905" end="2908" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072420" start="2939" end="2964" title="Primary biliary cirrhosis" label="Primary biliary cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207367" start="2967" end="2991" title="Infectious mononucleosis" label="Infectious mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="3026" end="3033" title="Leprosy" label="Leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193894" start="3036" end="3047" title="Sarcoidosis" label="Sarcoidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3050" end="3062" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="3064" end="3072" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046113" start="3114" end="3136" title="Visceral leishmaniasis" label="Visceral leishmaniasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="3139" end="3146" title="Malaria" label="Malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="3180" end="3186" title="Cancer" label="Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378688" start="3245" end="3256" title="Erik Waaler" label="Erik Waaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739543" start="3287" end="3300" title="Harry M. Rose" label="Harry M. Rose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962591" wikidata="Q532627" url="?curid=962591" title="Blair Castle">
<text>Blair Castle (in Scottish Gaelic: &quot;Caisteil Bhlàir&quot;) stands in its grounds near the village of Blair Atholl in Perthshire in Scotland. It is the ancestral home of the Clan Murray, and was historically the seat of their chief, the Duke of Atholl, though the current chief, the 12th Duke of Atholl, lives in South Africa, where he was born and raised. The castle stands in Glen Garry, and commands a strategic position on the main route (now the A9 road) through the central Scottish Highlands.

The castle is a category A listed building, and the grounds are included in the Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes in Scotland, the national listing of significant gardens.

==History==

Blair Castle is said to have been started in 1269 by John I Comyn, Lord of Badenoch (died c. 1275), a northern neighbour of David I Strathbogie, Earl of Atholl (died 1270), who started building on the Earl&#x27;s land while he was away on crusade. Upon his return, the Earl complained about the interloper to King Alexander III, won back his land, and incorporated the tower that had been built into his own castle. David II Strathbogie, Earl of Atholl (died 1326), forfeited the titles and estates after rebelling against King Robert the Bruce in 1308, and the King granted them to Niall mac Cailein. The earldom was granted to a number of individuals over the years until 1457 when James II granted it to his half-brother John Stewart (1440–1512). John Murray, son of the second Earl of Tullibardine, was created Earl of Atholl in 1629, and the title has since remained in the Murray family.

During the Wars of the Three Kingdoms of the 17th century, the Murrays supported the Royalist cause, which led to Blair Castle being taken by Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s army following his invasion of 1650. The restored Charles II created the title Marquess of Atholl for John Murray, 2nd Earl of Atholl (1631–1703). The title Duke of Atholl was granted to the 2nd Marquess in 1703.

When Viscount Dundee launched the first Jacobite rising in April 1689, Atholl decided to remain loyal to the Government (although two of his sons joined the Jacobites). Atholl&#x27;s factor, Patrick Stewart of Ballechin, held Blair Castle for King James, and Dundee visited in May. In July Ballechin refused entry to Atholl&#x27;s whiggish son and heir, Lord John Murray. Murray laid siege to the castle, and General Mackay was approaching to join him and to seize it for the Williamites. Viscount Dundee relieved the castle, and the crucial Battle of Killiecrankie was fought because Dundee did not want to retreat and surrender the castle to Mackay. Dundee and his officers and clan chiefs held a Council of War at the castle on the eve of the battle, on 26 July. The next day, the Jacobites won the battle but Dundee was killed.

After the battle, Blair Castle remained in Jacobite hands for some time. It continued to play an important role: for example, the Jacobite Highland chiefs swore a bond there together in August, to continue the rising.

In the Forty-Five, Blair Castle was occupied twice by Prince Charles Edward Stuart and his Jacobite army: in early September 1745, for several days, and then in early February 1746, again for several days. However, the Jacobites then unwisely abandoned it and Government forces, including Lowland Clan Agnew then occupied it. They held Blair Castle against the Jacobites, who laid siege to the castle during the last stages of the rising, in March 1746 they were besieged to near starvation until the Jacobite forces withdrew to fight the British Government forces at the Battle of Culloden.
In 1844 Queen Victoria and her consort, Prince Albert, visited and stayed at Blair Castle. It was after this she gave permission to establish the Atholl Highlanders.

Part of the castle was converted to a hospital during the First World War; poet Hamish Henderson&#x27;s mother had worked there as a nurse on her return from France.

Before his death in February 1996, the 10th Duke of Atholl placed Blair Castle and most of his estates in a charitable trust, shielding them from inheritance taxes and leaving them under Scottish control, as his heir John Murray, the 11th Duke, had indicated he had no desire to leave his native South Africa. His half-nephew Robert Troughton was the heir to the remaining estate.

On the night of 10 March 2011 a fire broke out at the clock tower of castle (not part of the medieval fabric), causing the tower&#x27;s roof and second floor to collapse into the first floor. The clock tower was restored in 2012, with restoration work on the clock mechanisms performed by Smith of Derby Group.

==The castle and gardens==
The oldest part of the castle is the six-storey Cummings or Comyn&#x27;s Tower, which may retain some 13th-century fabric, though it was largely built in the 15th century. The extensions which now form the central part of the castle were first added in the 16th century. The apartments to the south were added in the mid-18th century to designs by architects John Douglas and James Winter. The south-east range, incorporating the clock tower, was rebuilt by Archibald Elliot after a fire in 1814. Finally, the castle arrived at its present form in the 1870s, when David Bryce remodelled the whole building for the 7th Duke of Atholl in a Scots Baronial style, and added the ballroom. It was further remodelled in 1885 when a new ballroom wing was added by James Campbell Walker.

During the Great War the castle was used as an auxiliary hospital and after 1922 the family found it more convenient to live in the private apartments. The castle has been open to the public since 1936. Its many rooms feature important collections of weapons, hunting trophies, souvenirs of the Murray clan, ethnographica, paintings, furniture, and needlework collected by the Murray family over many generations. Angela Murray who was a director of the Pearson Group was involved in helping to manage the estate and her portrait is at the castle. Her daughter, Sarah Troughton, in 2024 was the chair of the trustees.

The castle also provides the garrison for the Atholl Highlanders, the private army of the Duke of Atholl, noted as the only legal private army in Europe. The Castle and the Atholl Estates were used in the 2008 reality television series &quot;Conquer the Castle&quot;.

Most Dukes of Atholl are buried in the family burial ground (photo) next to the ruins of St Bride&#x27;s Kirk in the grounds of Blair Castle. St Bride&#x27;s was the village church of Old Blair but fell into disuse after 1823 when the estate village was relocated to its current location.

In 2009, a Grand Fir (&quot;Abies grandis&quot;) in Diana&#x27;s Grove in the grounds of the castle, was measured at , and declared the second-tallest tree in Britain.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==

* Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q532627" start="0" end="12" title="Blair Castle" label="Blair Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="17" end="32" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q881156" start="105" end="117" title="Blair Atholl" label="Blair Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="121" end="131" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q247791" start="177" end="188" title="Clan Murray" label="Clan Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669851" start="229" end="234" title="clan chief" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q331292" start="240" end="254" title="Duke of Atholl" label="Duke of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978048" start="282" end="305" title="Bruce Murray, 12th Duke of Atholl" label="the 12th Duke of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="316" end="328" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494502" start="381" end="391" title="River Garry, Perthshire" label="Glen Garry"/>
<link wikidata="Q280508" start="454" end="461" title="A9 road (Scotland)" label="A9 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="483" end="501" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646203" start="520" end="546" title="category A listed building" label="category A listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059930" start="584" end="640" title="Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes in Scotland" label="Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850504" start="754" end="784" title="John I Comyn, Lord of Badenoch" label="John I Comyn, Lord of Badenoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174809" start="825" end="860" title="David I Strathbogie, Earl of Atholl" label="David I Strathbogie, Earl of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="940" end="947" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="1010" end="1028" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="King Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088902" start="1117" end="1153" title="David II Strathbogie, Earl of Atholl" label="David II Strathbogie, Earl of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="1229" end="1245" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202302" start="1284" end="1301" title="Niall mac Cailein" label="Niall mac Cailein"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="1385" end="1393" title="james II of Scotland" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240207" start="1425" end="1437" title="John Stewart, 1st Earl of Atholl" label="John Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q331292" start="1482" end="1502" title="Earl of Tullibardine" label="Earl of Tullibardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="1607" end="1633" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="1738" end="1753" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1811" end="1821" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q331124" start="1863" end="1894" title="John Murray, 1st Marquess of Atholl" label="John Murray, 2nd Earl of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q331292" start="1918" end="1932" title="Duke of Atholl" label="Duke of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q892818" start="1980" end="1995" title="John Graham, 1st Viscount Dundee" label="Viscount Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785102" start="2009" end="2030" title="Jacobite rising of 1689" label="first Jacobite rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888946" start="2517" end="2540" title="Battle of Killiecrankie" label="Battle of Killiecrankie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="3030" end="3044" title="the Forty-Five" label="the Forty-Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="3081" end="3109" title="Prince Charles Edward Stuart" label="Prince Charles Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q606739" start="3324" end="3334" title="Clan Agnew" label="Clan Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509878" start="3403" end="3427" title="Siege of Blair Castle" label="laid siege to the castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="3599" end="3617" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="3627" end="3641" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329104" start="3650" end="3657" title="Prince consort" label="consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="3659" end="3672" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q251856" start="3765" end="3783" title="Atholl Highlanders" label="Atholl Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3844" end="3859" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349386" start="3866" end="3882" title="Hamish Henderson" label="Hamish Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101659" start="3988" end="4011" title="Iain Murray, 10th Duke of Atholl" label="the 10th Duke of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074440" start="4061" end="4077" title="charitable trust" label="charitable trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483178" start="4170" end="4196" title="John Murray, 11th Duke of Atholl" label="John Murray, the 11th Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="4249" end="4261" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545386" start="4624" end="4644" title="Smith of Derby Group" label="Smith of Derby Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786305" start="5132" end="5148" title="Archibald Elliot" label="Archibald Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231854" start="5238" end="5249" title="David Bryce" label="David Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q390569" start="5284" end="5306" title="John Stewart-Murray, 7th Duke of Atholl" label="the 7th Duke of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476363" start="5312" end="5326" title="Scots Baronial" label="Scots Baronial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17423821" start="5430" end="5451" title="James Campbell Walker" label="James Campbell Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q75261261" start="5868" end="5881" title="Angela Pearson" label="Angela Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q251856" start="6119" end="6137" title="Atholl Highlanders" label="Atholl Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="6219" end="6225" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827781" start="6315" end="6333" title="Conquer the Castle" label="Conquer the Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q147434" start="6643" end="6680" title="Abies grandis" label="Grand Fir (&amp;quot;Abies grandis&amp;quot;)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962592" wikidata="Q412632" url="?curid=962592" title="Many">
<text>Many (/ˈmɛni/) may refer to:

* grammatically plural in number
*an English quantifier used with count nouns indicating a large but indefinite number of; at any rate, more than a few

;Place names
* Many, Moselle, a commune of the Moselle department in France
* Mány, a village in Hungary
* Many, Louisiana, a town in the United States
* Many, Masovian Voivodeship, east-central Poland

==Surname==
* Moshe Many, Israeli urologist; President of Tel Aviv University, and President of Ashkelon Academic College.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q412632" start="0" end="4" title="Many" label="Many"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="46" end="52" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532504" start="75" end="85" title="Quantifier (linguistics)" label="quantifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q21827" start="198" end="211" title="Many, Moselle" label="Many, Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185341" start="261" end="265" title="Mány" label="Mány"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455620" start="290" end="305" title="Many, Louisiana" label="Many, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753324" start="337" end="363" title="Many, Masovian Voivodeship" label="Many, Masovian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q21178600" start="400" end="410" title="Moshe Many" label="Moshe Many"/>
<link wikidata="Q105650" start="420" end="429" title="urologist" label="urologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q319239" start="444" end="463" title="Tel Aviv University" label="Tel Aviv University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584790" start="482" end="507" title="Ashkelon Academic College" label="Ashkelon Academic College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962596" wikidata="Q563641" url="?curid=962596" title="Few">
<text>A few means one or more, but not many. Few or FEW may also refer to:

==People ==
* Bobby Few (1935–2021), an American musician
* Francis E. Walter, an American politician from Pennsylvania
* Ignatius Alphonso Few (1789–1845), an American preacher and academic, first president of Emory College (now Emory University)
* Mark Few (born 1962), an American basketball coach
* Robyn Few (1958–2012), an American rights activist
* William Few (1748–1828), an American founding father from Georgia
* William Preston Few (1867–1940), the first president of Duke University

== Other uses ==
* The Few, British aviators in the Battle of Britain
* &quot;Few&quot; (album), fifth studio album by rock band He Is Legend
* Francis E. Walter Dam, a dam, recreational area, and disc golf course in Pennsylvania
* French Engineering Works, a South African tool manufacturer
* FEW, Französisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch (German: French Etymological Dictionary)

== See also ==
* Chosen Few (disambiguation)
* Quantity
* Fue (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q563641" start="2" end="5" title="Few" label="few"/>
<link wikidata="Q563641" start="39" end="42" title="Few" label="Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q563641" start="46" end="49" title="Few" label="FEW"/>
<link wikidata="Q888532" start="84" end="93" title="Bobby Few" label="Bobby Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480815" start="130" end="147" title="Francis E. Walter" label="Francis E. Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992692" start="192" end="213" title="Ignatius Alphonso Few" label="Ignatius Alphonso Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767597" start="320" end="328" title="Mark Few" label="Mark Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947968" start="373" end="382" title="Robyn Few" label="Robyn Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q664099" start="426" end="437" title="William Few" label="William Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017069" start="494" end="513" title="William Preston Few" label="William Preston Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673260" start="586" end="593" title="The Few" label="The Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599363" start="639" end="662" title="Few (album)" label="&amp;quot;Few&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35187730" start="711" end="732" title="Francis E. Walter Dam" label="Francis E. Walter Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501750" start="799" end="823" title="French Engineering Works" label="French Engineering Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139979" start="866" end="905" title="Französisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch" label="Französisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105337" start="965" end="992" title="Chosen Few (disambiguation)" label="Chosen Few (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q309314" start="995" end="1003" title="Quantity" label="Quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q243993" start="1006" end="1026" title="Fue (disambiguation)" label="Fue (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962599" wikidata="Q1216681" url="?curid=962599" title="Much">
<text>Much may refer to:

*Much (TV channel), a cable network in Canada and its domestic and international spin-offs
*Much TV, a satellite cable channel in Taiwan
*&quot;Much&quot; (album), a 2001 album by Ten Shekel Shirt
*Much the Miller&#x27;s Son, one of Robin Hood&#x27;s Merry Men from the earliest tales
* Much, North Rhine-Westphalia, a municipality in Germany
* Hans Much (1880–1932), a German author and physician
* Rudolf Much (1862–1936), an Austrian philologist and historian

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1216681" start="0" end="4" title="Much" label="Much"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="21" end="38" title="Much (TV channel)" label="Much (TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930971" start="112" end="119" title="Much TV" label="Much TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930943" start="158" end="182" title="Much (album)" label="&amp;quot;Much&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497514" start="218" end="244" title="Much the Miller&amp;#x27;s Son" label="Much the Miller&amp;#x27;s Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q254458" start="307" end="335" title="Much, North Rhine-Westphalia" label="Much, North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q73915" start="365" end="374" title="Hans Much" label="Hans Much"/>
<link wikidata="Q88197" start="420" end="431" title="Rudolf Much" label="Rudolf Much"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962604" wikidata="Q6943061" url="?curid=962604" title="Musquash">
<text>Musquash may refer to:

==Animals==
* Muskrat

==Places==
* Musquash Parish, New Brunswick, Canada
** Musquash, New Brunswick, an unincorporated community therein
* Musquash River (Ontario), a river in Ontario, Canada
* Musquash River (New Brunswick), a river in New Brunswick, Canada
* Musquash Island (Minnesota/Wisconsin border), a small island in Pool 8 of the Mississippi River</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6943061" start="0" end="8" title="Musquash" label="Musquash"/>
<link wikidata="Q26283" start="38" end="45" title="Muskrat" label="Muskrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365852" start="60" end="90" title="Musquash Parish, New Brunswick" label="Musquash Parish, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875622" start="102" end="125" title="Musquash, New Brunswick" label="Musquash, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955437" start="165" end="189" title="Musquash River (Ontario)" label="Musquash River (Ontario)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="220" end="250" title="Musquash River (New Brunswick)" label="Musquash River (New Brunswick)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="287" end="331" title="Musquash Island (Minnesota/Wisconsin border)" label="Musquash Island (Minnesota/Wisconsin border)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962608" wikidata="Q359803" url="?curid=962608" title="Old">
<text>Old or OLD may refer to:
== Places ==
*Old, Baranya, Hungary
*Old, Northamptonshire, England
*Old Street station, a railway and tube station in London (station code OLD)
*OLD, IATA code for Old Town Municipal Airport and Seaplane Base, Old Town, Maine, United States

== People ==
*Old (surname)

==Music==
*OLD (band), a grindcore/industrial metal group
*&quot;Old&quot; (Danny Brown album), a 2013 album by Danny Brown
*&quot;Old&quot; (Starflyer 59 album), a 2003 album by Starflyer 59
*&quot;Old&quot; (song), a 1995 song by Machine Head
*&quot;Old&quot;, a 1982 song by Dexys Midnight Runners from &quot;Too-Rye-Ay&quot;

== Other uses==
*&quot;Old&quot; (film), a 2021 American thriller film
*&quot;Oxford Latin Dictionary&quot;
*Online dating
*Over-Locknut Distance (or Dimension), a measurement of a bicycle wheel and frame

==See also==
*Old age
*List of people known as the Old
*&quot;Old LP&quot;, a 2019 album by That Dog
*
*Olde, a list of people with the surname
*Olds (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q359803" start="0" end="3" title="Old" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q359803" start="7" end="10" title="Old" label="OLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q736318" start="39" end="51" title="Old, Baranya" label="Old, Baranya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570944" start="62" end="83" title="Old, Northamptonshire" label="Old, Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q801299" start="94" end="112" title="Old Street station" label="Old Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085299" start="190" end="234" title="Old Town Municipal Airport and Seaplane Base" label="Old Town Municipal Airport and Seaplane Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q37527651" start="282" end="295" title="Old (surname)" label="Old (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698585" start="308" end="318" title="OLD (band)" label="OLD (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943742" start="356" end="391" title="Old (Danny Brown album)" label="&amp;quot;Old&amp;quot; (Danny Brown album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083348" start="422" end="458" title="Old (Starflyer 59 album)" label="&amp;quot;Old&amp;quot; (Starflyer 59 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083352" start="490" end="512" title="Old (song)" label="&amp;quot;Old&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q762918" start="609" end="619" title="Too-Rye-Ay" label="Too-Rye-Ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q99688807" start="644" end="666" title="Old (film)" label="&amp;quot;Old&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q822282" start="705" end="728" title="Oxford Latin Dictionary" label="Oxford Latin Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q612825" start="736" end="749" title="Online dating" label="Online dating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="808" end="831" title="Bicycle wheel#Construction" label="bicycle wheel and frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="847" end="854" title="Old age" label="Old age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632946" start="856" end="887" title="List of people known as the Old" label="List of people known as the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q69619391" start="895" end="901" title="Old LP" label="Old LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q45083482" start="937" end="941" title="Olde" label="Olde"/>
<link wikidata="Q243687" start="978" end="999" title="Olds (disambiguation)" label="Olds (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962610" wikidata="Q7357593" url="?curid=962610" title="Roelof Botha">
<text>Roelof Frederik Botha (born 19 September 1973) is a South African-American actuary, venture capitalist and company director.

Botha is a partner at Sequoia Capital and as of 2022 sits on the boards of MongoDB, Evernote, Bird, Natera, Square, Unity, and Xoom. He also worked with AssureRX, FutureAdvisor, Instagram, Mixpanel and Mu Sigma. He previously sat on the board of directors of Meebo and YouTube before they were each acquired by Google, Weebly before they were acquired by Square, and Tumblr before they were acquired by Yahoo!. He previously sat on the boards of 23andMe, Eventbrite, Jawbone, Mahalo, Nimbula, Tokbox, and Whisper.

On &quot;Forbes&quot;″ Midas List, an annual ranking of venture capital professionals, he ranked 22nd in 2008, 9th in 2021, and 36th in 2022.

==Education and career==
Botha was born in Pretoria, South Africa, and at the age of six he moved to Cape Town with his parents. He was raised in Hout Bay, a suburb of Cape Town, and attended Hoërskool Jan van Riebeeck. Botha earned a BSc in Actuarial Science, Economics, and Statistics from the University of Cape Town, graduating in 1996. He worked as a business analyst at McKinsey &amp; Co. in Johannesburg from 1996 through 1998. He then moved to the United States, where he received an MBA from the Stanford University Graduate School of Business.

In 2000, prior to his graduation from Stanford, Botha became director of corporate development for PayPal. He moved on to vice-president of finance and was named CFO in September 2001. PayPal went public in February 2002, and was purchased by eBay in October 2002. Meg Whitman offered Botha the opportunity to stay on as CFO post-acquisition, but he left to join Sequoia Capital in January 2003.

At Sequoia, Botha oversaw the firm&#x27;s investment in YouTube, Instagram, and Square, among others. He also helped to plan the acquisition of Xoom by PayPal. In 2017, Botha took over lead responsibility for Sequoia&#x27;s US operations from Jim Goetz. In April 2022, Sequoia announced that, starting in July 2022, Botha would replace Doug Leone as Senior Steward of Sequoia&#x27;s global brand and operations.

Botha has led or co-led Sequoia&#x27;s investments in several early and growth stage companies. As of 2022, his active investments include Ethos, Evernote, GenEdit, Landis, mmhmm, Pendulum, Skiff, Temporal Technologies, and The Org.

On October 9, 2023, Botha became chairman of the board of directors at Unity Technologies.

==Family==
Botha&#x27;s father, also named Roelof, is an economist. His uncle was the rock musician Piet Botha. His grandfather was Roelof Frederik &quot;Pik&quot; Botha, a South African politician who served as the country&#x27;s last foreign minister under the Apartheid government, and the first minister of Mineral and Energy Affairs under Nelson Mandela. Roelof is married to Huifen Chan and they have a daughter named Saskia Botha and a son named Bosman Botha. 

==References==
==External links==
*Roelof Botha Bio, Sequoia.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7357593" start="0" end="21" title="Roelof Botha" label="Roelof Frederik Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q179985" start="75" end="82" title="actuary" label="actuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="84" end="102" title="venture capitalist" label="venture capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="107" end="123" title="company director" label="company director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852025" start="148" end="163" title="Sequoia Capital" label="Sequoia Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165204" start="201" end="208" title="MongoDB" label="MongoDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q430526" start="210" end="218" title="Evernote" label="Evernote"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639320" start="220" end="224" title="Bird Global" label="Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968762" start="226" end="232" title="Natera" label="Natera"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933691" start="234" end="240" title="Square (payment service)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893816" start="242" end="247" title="Unity Technologies" label="Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044926" start="253" end="257" title="Xoom Corporation" label="Xoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q219635" start="289" end="302" title="FutureAdvisor" label="FutureAdvisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="304" end="313" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048114" start="315" end="323" title="Mixpanel" label="Mixpanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104245" start="328" end="336" title="Mu Sigma" label="Mu Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q58508" start="385" end="390" title="Meebo" label="Meebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="395" end="402" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="437" end="443" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705110" start="445" end="451" title="Weebly" label="Weebly"/>
<link wikidata="Q110778747" start="481" end="487" title="Square, Inc." label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="493" end="499" title="Tumblr" label="Tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="529" end="535" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q216272" start="572" end="579" title="23andMe" label="23andMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416738" start="581" end="591" title="Eventbrite" label="Eventbrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166067" start="593" end="600" title="Jawbone (company)" label="Jawbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171228" start="602" end="608" title="Mahalo.com" label="Mahalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037632" start="610" end="617" title="Nimbula" label="Nimbula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813437" start="619" end="625" title="TokBox" label="Tokbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927887" start="631" end="638" title="Whisper (app)" label="Whisper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="650" end="656" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841110" start="664" end="674" title="Midas List" label="Midas List"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="827" end="835" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="885" end="894" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013375" start="930" end="938" title="Hout Bay" label="Hout Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966631" start="976" end="1002" title="Hoërskool Jan van Riebeeck" label="Hoërskool Jan van Riebeeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128453" start="1026" end="1043" title="Actuarial Science" label="Actuarial Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q951305" start="1080" end="1103" title="University of Cape Town" label="University of Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="1160" end="1178" title="McKinsey &amp;amp; Co." label="McKinsey &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="1182" end="1194" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413558" start="1289" end="1336" title="Stanford University Graduate School of Business" label="Stanford University Graduate School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q483959" start="1438" end="1444" title="PayPal" label="PayPal"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="1501" end="1504" title="Chief financial officer" label="CFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="1582" end="1586" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55174" start="1604" end="1615" title="Meg Whitman" label="Meg Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852025" start="1702" end="1717" title="Sequoia Capital" label="Sequoia Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="1792" end="1799" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="1801" end="1810" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q110778747" start="1816" end="1822" title="Square, Inc." label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044926" start="1880" end="1884" title="Xoom Corporation" label="Xoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q483959" start="1888" end="1894" title="PayPal" label="PayPal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195257" start="1979" end="1988" title="Jim Goetz" label="Jim Goetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q430526" start="2295" end="2303" title="Evernote" label="Evernote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893816" start="2454" end="2472" title="Unity Technologies" label="Unity Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993629" start="2575" end="2585" title="Piet Botha" label="Piet Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q561494" start="2607" end="2644" title="Pik Botha" label="Roelof Frederik &amp;quot;Pik&amp;quot; Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294929" start="2711" end="2727" title="Minister of International Relations and Cooperation" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2738" end="2747" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981735" start="2774" end="2812" title="Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy" label="minister of Mineral and Energy Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="2819" end="2833" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962618" wikidata="Q1456325" url="?curid=962618" title="Fridtjof Nansen-class frigate">
<text>The &quot;Fridtjof Nansen&quot;-class frigates are a class of frigates that are the main surface combatant units of the Royal Norwegian Navy. The ships are named after famous Norwegian explorers, with the lead ship of the class bearing the name of Fridtjof Nansen. Five ships were ordered from Spanish shipbuilder Bazan (now Navantia).

The total projected cost for all five ships in 2009 was (about ). 
As of November 2018, four are in active service and one has sunk and was subsequently scrapped.

==Design==
The frigates were originally intended as a replacement for the aging s, with a primary focus on anti-submarine warfare (ASW). Eventually, the need for a robust anti-aircraft defense as well as the possibility of incorporating the Naval Strike Missile surface-to-surface missile produced by Norwegian company Kongsberg Defence &amp; Aerospace led to a more multi-role design. The selection of Navantia as prime contractor led to the design being very similar to the Spanish Navy&#x27;s s, including the incorporation of Lockheed Martin&#x27;s AEGIS combat system.

==Improvements==
The &quot;Fridtjof Nansen&quot;-class frigates are larger, and have more personnel and equipment than the &quot;Oslo&quot;-class frigates. Compared to the &quot;Oslo&quot;-class vessels, the new vessels are 35 meters longer, nine meters taller and two meters deeper below water. They are also five meters broader and have three times the water displacement of the old ships. The frigates operated six NFH NH90 helicopters, with the role as an extended &quot;arm&quot; of the frigates&#x27; anti-submarine and anti-surface capabilities but these will be taken out of services (2022) and returned to NH Industries. In 2023, Norway announced the acquisition of 6 MH-60R helicopters. While the helicopters would be prepared to be equipped for anti-submarine operations, they were initially to be deployed with the Norwegian Coast Guard. This meant that the replacement of helicopters specifically to operate off the &quot;Fridtjof Nansen&quot;-class remained outstanding.

The 2023 defence acquisitions plan indicated that the frigates would undergo technical upgrades beginning in 2025 in order to maintain their operational capabilities.

==Service history==
On 26 February 2009, the Norwegian government decided to deploy &quot;Fridtjof Nansen&quot; to the Gulf of Aden, thereby participating in the ongoing Operation Atalanta, the European Union&#x27;s counter-piracy campaign in Somalia. &quot;Fridtjof Nansen&quot; joined the campaign in August 2009.

&quot;Fridtjof Nansen&quot;″s engagement in Operation Atalanta was carried out without a permanently stationed helicopter. Mainly due to delays in delivery of the new NH-90, the ship was equipped with two fast RHIBs for its onboard contingent of maritime special operations forces (Marinejegerkommandoen).

In November 2009 she became involved in a firefight with suspected pirates after being attacked while inspecting a fishing vessel.

In December 2013 HNoMS &quot;Helge Ingstad&quot; and the Danish support ship were sent to the Syrian port of Latakia to escort the Norwegian registered RoRo cargo ship and the Danish cargo ship , which transported Syrian chemical weapons to Italy where they were handed over to a United States Navy ship for destruction in international waters.

On 8 November 2018, while returning from participation in Exercise &quot;Trident Juncture&quot;, &quot;Helge Ingstad&quot; was involved in a collision with a Maltese-registered oil tanker, &quot;Sola TS&quot;, that severely damaged the frigate and caused a severe list that placed it in serious danger of sinking in spite of its position. The frigate first ran aground and then was successfully beached and tethered with wire cable to prevent it sinking and allow the crew to be evacuated. In the early hours of 13 November the vessel partially sank with only smaller sections of the superstructure remaining above water. The vessel was recovered but with the cost of repair prohibitive it has been decommissioned and was scrapped.

==Ships in class==
The ships are named after explorers Fridtjof Nansen, Roald Amundsen, Otto Sverdrup, Helge Ingstad and Thor Heyerdahl.

== Future replacement of the &quot;Fridtjof Nansen&quot; class ==
In June 2023, the Norwegian Ministry of Defence published &quot;The Military Advice of the Chief of Defence 2023&quot;, in which General Eirik Kristoffersen (Chief of Defence) recommended that Norway replace the RNoN&#x27;s in-service &quot;Fridtjof Nansen&quot;-class frigates and increase the force level to six ships. Delivering a new frigate likely will be central to the government’s long-term plan to build a new surface force structure within a wider fleet renewal programme. The government likely will emphasize the need to deliver the future frigate through partnership with close allies.

In the New Norwegian Long Term Plan on Defence from April 2024, it is proposed to replace the class with five new frigates with the same focus (ASW) as the Nansen class.

== Images ==
==See also==
* (Singapore)
* (Russia)
* (Brazil)
*Frégate de Défense et d&#x27;Intervention (France)
*Type 31 frigates (United Kingdom)
*Aegis Combat System
*List of naval ship classes in service
*List of active Royal Norwegian Navy ships

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Official Royal Norwegian Navy website on the class 
* Official Royal Norwegian Navy website on the class 
* Lockheedmartin:Spy-1F makes waves during debut, makes the furthest ESSM intercept ever, outstanding sea skimmer detection
* Norway order Sting Ray mod 1 torpedo for frigates
* Sea Protector remote weapon systems ordered (March 2009) for Nansen frigates
* Norway ordering the AN/SSQ-62E DICASS sonobuoy acoustic emissions detection system (Jan 2010)
* http://www.defpro.com/news/details/18513/ - Reutech radar installed aboard Norwegian frigate (Oct 2010)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1456325" start="4" end="46" title="Fridtjof Nansen-class frigate" label="&amp;quot;Fridtjof Nansen&amp;quot;-class frigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q559026" start="53" end="58" title="Ship class" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="62" end="69" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083573" start="120" end="140" title="Royal Norwegian Navy" label="Royal Norwegian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="175" end="194" title=":Category:Norwegian explorers" label="Norwegian explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548098" start="201" end="227" title="HNoMS Fridtjof Nansen (F310)" label="the lead ship of the class"/>
<link wikidata="Q72292" start="248" end="263" title="Fridtjof Nansen" label="Fridtjof Nansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q378849" start="325" end="333" title="Navantia" label="Navantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="608" end="630" title="anti-submarine warfare" label="anti-submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="672" end="685" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q282470" start="742" end="762" title="Naval Strike Missile" label="Naval Strike Missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143706" start="763" end="789" title="surface-to-surface missile" label="surface-to-surface missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357285" start="820" end="853" title="Kongsberg Defence &amp;amp; Aerospace" label="Kongsberg Defence &amp;amp; Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q676404" start="977" end="989" title="Spanish Navy" label="Spanish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="1031" end="1046" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q380682" start="1054" end="1073" title="AEGIS combat system" label="AEGIS combat system"/>
<link wikidata="Q629539" start="1498" end="1502" title="NH90" label="NH90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="1583" end="1597" title="Anti-submarine warfare" label="anti-submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527950" start="1602" end="1614" title="Anti-Surface Warfare" label="anti-surface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1753" end="1771" title="Sikorsky SH-60 Seahawk#MH-60R" label="MH-60R helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267995" start="1903" end="1924" title="Norwegian Coast Guard" label="Norwegian Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="2349" end="2361" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q698771" start="2400" end="2418" title="Operation Atalanta" label="Operation Atalanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="2473" end="2480" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629539" start="2714" end="2719" title="NH-90" label="NH-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q251295" start="2757" end="2762" title="Rigid-hulled inflatable boat" label="RHIBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="2802" end="2827" title="Special forces" label="special operations forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519885" start="2829" end="2850" title="Marinejegerkommandoen" label="Marinejegerkommandoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="3080" end="3085" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200030" start="3095" end="3102" title="Latakia" label="Latakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="3138" end="3142" title="RoRo" label="RoRo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19739087" start="3200" end="3223" title="Syria chemical weapons program" label="Syrian chemical weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3266" end="3284" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943147" start="3290" end="3305" title="Destruction of Syria&amp;#x27;s chemical weapons" label="for destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043049" start="3390" end="3427" title="Exercise Trident Juncture 2018" label="Exercise &amp;quot;Trident Juncture&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="3490" end="3497" title="Malta" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="3509" end="3519" title="oil tanker" label="oil tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q729298" start="3727" end="3734" title="Beaching (nautical)" label="beached"/>
<link wikidata="Q72292" start="4120" end="4135" title="Fridtjof Nansen" label="Fridtjof Nansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="4137" end="4151" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q321261" start="4153" end="4166" title="Otto Sverdrup" label="Otto Sverdrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q119687" start="4168" end="4181" title="Helge Ingstad" label="Helge Ingstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q133622" start="4186" end="4200" title="Thor Heyerdahl" label="Thor Heyerdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724657" start="5102" end="5143" title="Frégate de Défense et d&amp;#x27;Intervention" label="Frégate de Défense et d&amp;#x27;Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q26883455" start="5154" end="5161" title="Type 31 frigate" label="Type 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q380682" start="5189" end="5208" title="Aegis Combat System" label="Aegis Combat System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436963" start="5210" end="5247" title="List of naval ship classes in service" label="List of naval ship classes in service"/>
<link wikidata="Q26883462" start="5249" end="5290" title="List of active Royal Norwegian Navy ships" label="List of active Royal Norwegian Navy ships"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962625" wikidata="None" url="?curid=962625" title="Usually">
<text></text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962631" wikidata="Q1369970" url="?curid=962631" title="Estes Industries">
<text>Estes Industries is a model rocket company that was started in Denver, Colorado, USA.

==History==

Estes Industries was founded by Vernon Estes in 1958; in 1961, the company moved to a 77-acre tract of land on the outskirts of Penrose, Colorado.&lt;ref name=&quot;vernestes/Articles&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;fmcsa/ESTES&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In 1969, Vernon sold the company to the Damon Corporation of Needham, Massachusetts, a company which also purchased a number of other hobby companies including a smaller competitor of Estes, Centuri Engineering of Phoenix, Arizona. Damon merged the two companies under the name Centuri Engineering. The Penrose entity continued doing business as Estes Industries. Centuri Engineering model rocket products continued to be developed, marketed and sold from the Centuri offices in Phoenix as well, although the actual manufacturing of Centuri products was soon moved to the Estes facility in Penrose. Sales of Centuri model rocket products were never as successful as Estes brand products and the Centuri Engineering offices in Phoenix were finally closed and the Centuri product line was discontinued in 1983.

Following a hostile takeover of the Damon Corporation in 1989, Estes Industries was divested and became part of Hobby Products. The business name of the company was shortened to Centuri Corporation. In 1996, Hobby Products acquired the assets of Cox Products of Corona, California, a company involved with the design and manufacture of model airplanes and glow-fuel model airplane engines. Cox&#x27;s assets were moved to the Estes facility. In 2002, the combined company was sold again and the company&#x27;s name was changed to Estes-Cox Corp.

On August 30, 2002, Barry Tunick, who had been the chief executive officer since 1991, acquired Estes-Cox Corporation from the private equity fund, TCW Capital, for $15 million. On January 15, 2010, Estes-Cox was acquired by Hobbico, Inc. On January 10, 2018, Hobbico filed for bankruptcy protection under the auspices of the United States Bankruptcy Court in Delaware. As a result of the bankruptcy, Estes-Cox was sold to Estes Industries LLC on April 12, 2018.&lt;ref name=&quot;prnewswire/300631645&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

== Accomplishments ==

=== Mabel ===
Vern Estes created &quot;Mabel&quot;. &quot;Mabel&quot; was a machine designed to safely and inexpensively manufacture model rocket engines for Model Missiles Incorporated, primarily using compressed air for machine operations, effectively eliminating the risk of electrical sparks inadvertently igniting rocket propellant. Mabel was capable of producing a completed model rocket engine every 5-1/2 seconds. The operation began with an engine casing tube being loaded onto a rotating table. The table then advanced through multiple stations where the nozzle, propellant, delay and ejection components were added. A paper end cap was then cut from a roll of heavy paper tape and inserted to retain the loose ejection charge. The completed engine was then ejected from the table, sent through the printer and dropped into the finished engine box below.

=== Indoor launch of model rockets in Astrodome===
Along with several smaller rockets, Estes sponsored an indoor launch of a model of a Saturn V at halftime of the Bluebonnet Bowl in the Houston Astrodome on December 31, 1969.

== Estes rockets ==
Estes produced a wide variety of rocket model kits, normally using paperboard tubing for the fuselage and balsa wood for fins and nose cones. Early models tended to be relatively simple in design, differing in size, number of stages and recovery method. The first kit Estes offered was the Astron Scout (Rocket Kit K-1) which sold for $ .70. It was followed by the Astron Mark (K-2) and the Astron Space Plane (K-3). A more advanced rocket, the Astron X-Ray, featured a see-through plastic payload compartment. Another particularly well-known design from this era was the Camroc, a small camera that replaced the nose cone of larger models that was designed to take a single image on a small disk of film when the motor had burned out and the rocket was facing downward. The Cineroc used a small movie camera that could be launched from larger rockets, taking a series of frames as the rocket ascended. In the 1960s, Estes featured scale models patterned after the popular NASA designs such as the Gemini-Titan and Saturn-V crewed rockets.

Later model kits from the late 1970s and early 1980s tended to be more for show than performance, including a series of scale or sport-scale designs and &quot;exotics&quot;. The 1981 Estes catalog featured a replica of the Space Shuttle. Centuri was also well known for these sorts of designs, and the two companies often copied design elements from the other&#x27;s latest models. The downturn in the hobby in the later 1980s led to consolidation of the two companies. During the 1990s the model line was dramatically reduced, and the ones that were left were typically very simple &quot;three fins and a nose cone&quot; designs that were partially or entirely preassembled.

By 2019, Estes was offering a much wider range of rockets for sale, including models as complex as the Saturn V.

=== Estes rocket engine color-coding ===

Estes engines are color-coded for recommended use. 
* Green engines are for use in single-stage models.
* Purple engines for the top stages of multistage rockets and very light single-stage rockets; they have the longest delay times.
* Red engines for all booster and intermediate stages of multi-stage models.
* Black (current) and blue (older) engines are &quot;plugged&quot; and are used for rocket-powered racers, aerobrake recovery rockets, simulated strap-on boosters, and radio controlled gliders; they contain no delay or ejection charge. Black was also used in the past for static test engines.

It can be dangerous to use upper-stage engines in normal single-stage rockets. The long delay in ejection can be problematic. The rocket may already be halfway through its descent when the parachute or streamer is ejected, and the rocket may not slow down enough before it hits the ground.

=== Estes number coding ===
Each rocket engine has a code printed upon the outer jacket. This code is defined by the National Association of Rocketry (NAR). An example of one such code is A8-3.
The capital letter (&quot;e.g.&quot;, &quot;A&quot;) indicates total impulse produced by the engine. Each succeeding letter represents a power range with maximum total impulse twice the impulse of the previous letter. (Example: A single &quot;C&quot; engine can produce anywhere from 5.01 to 10 newton-seconds of impulse, a &quot;G&quot; engine 80.1 to 160 newton-seconds.) Anything over a &quot;G&quot; engine is considered high power model rocketry.

The first number (&quot;e.g.&quot;, 8) specifies that engine&#x27;s average thrust in newtons or the average push exerted by the engine. Thus a B6-0 and a C6-0 will both produce the same average thrust of 6 newtons, but the C6-0, having twice the total impulse, will fire for twice as long. The rocket engines produce maximum thrust shortly after ignition and thrust declines to a steady-state which is maintained for up to 2.5 seconds prior to burnout.

The final number (&quot;e.g.&quot;, 3) indicates the delay between the thrust and the ejection charge, in seconds. Engines with a delay of zero are typically used as booster engines in multi-stage rockets and there is no ejection charge. In this case, the burning propellant ruptures through the top and hot bits of propellant enter the nozzle of the upper stage engine, thus igniting that engine and forcing the booster assembly away, hopefully to tumble safely to earth.

=== Estes engine construction ===

Estes produces single-use engines with compressed black powder propellant. They come in industry-standard sizes of 13mm (1/4A through A), 18mm (1/2A through C), 24mm (C through E), and 29mm (E and F) in diameter. The engines are constructed within a sturdy cardboard tube. Inside are placed a clay nozzle, solid propellant, delay charge, ejection charge, and a clay retainer cap.

The solid propellant is ignited by a coated wire inserted through the nozzle and in contact with the propellant. An electric current heats the wire and ignites the solid propellant. An engine can also be ignited by the hot gases from the propellant of a booster engine.

From 2013 to 2018, Estes carried certain AeroTech E, F and G impulse 29mm single-use APCP (ammonium-perchlorate composite propellant) motors relabeled as Estes Pro Series II for their new, larger rockets of the same name. One feature of these motors is rear retention, which is the addition of a molded-in thrust ring at the base of the motor body on the aft (nozzle) end. This made Estes include a new style of screw-on retaining rings with the Pro Series II kits to accommodate rear retention. However, once the AeroTech motors were discontinued, Estes 29mm black powder motors need a ring of thin tape, about 1/4&quot; in width, around the paper motor case on the nozzle end to simulate the AeroTech aft thrust ring. Even now, some currently-produced kits include screw-on 24mm and 29mm motor retainers, and thus require the tape ring.

==Reception==
Estes model rockets are popular and used by a large number of hobbyists and educators. However, measurements reported by a group at the University of Central Arkansas found that Estes rocket motor models A3-4T, A8-3, B4-4, B6-4, C6-5, and D12-3 have a measured impulses from 15.4% to 22.8% below the claimed impulse. A study at the Australian Defence Force Academy found Estes D11-P motor to have an impulse 11.4% below Estes specifications and the C6-0 motor to be 4.45% below Estes&#x27; specifications. A third study found the A10-PT motor to have a total impulse 20% below Estes&#x27; claims. A research project conducted in 2000 by Ellis Langford (who later became president of Estes Industries, LLC) investigated the performance of black powder model rocket motors at higher altitudes. Langford&#x27;s findings indicate that total impulse and average thrust increase significantly with increased elevation. Estes Industries claimed specifications are based on testing at the Penrose manufacturing plant at an altitude of approximately 5000 feet, versus the three studies and National Association of Rocketry certification tests, all of which were performed at altitudes much nearer sea level.

== Notes ==
==External links==

* Estes Industries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1369970" start="0" end="16" title="Estes Industries" label="Estes Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503383" start="22" end="34" title="model rocket" label="model rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922117" start="132" end="144" title="Vernon Estes" label="Vernon Estes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290504" start="228" end="235" title="Penrose, Colorado" label="Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664345" start="419" end="426" title="Needham, Massachusetts" label="Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="572" end="579" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q494707" start="1430" end="1436" title="Corona, California" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572232" start="1524" end="1533" title="Glow fuel" label="glow-fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="1766" end="1789" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184339" start="1863" end="1874" title="TCW Capital" label="TCW Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874823" start="1940" end="1947" title="Hobbico" label="Hobbico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2421" end="2448" title="G. Harry Stine#Model rocketry" label="Model Missiles Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q22021775" start="3293" end="3308" title="1969 Astro-Bluebonnet Bowl" label="Bluebonnet Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934005" start="3444" end="3454" title="paperboard" label="paperboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="3470" end="3478" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="3483" end="3493" title="balsa wood" label="balsa wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713784" start="3507" end="3516" title="nose cone" label="nose cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050847" start="4852" end="4865" title="consolidation (business)" label="consolidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161829" start="5394" end="5411" title="multistage rocket" label="multistage rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q741745" start="5507" end="5514" title="booster rocket" label="booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436167" start="5730" end="5743" title="radio control" label="radio control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="5747" end="5754" title="Glider aircraft" label="gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253473" start="5772" end="5777" title="delay composition" label="delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350114" start="5781" end="5796" title="ejection charge" label="ejection charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970745" start="6264" end="6296" title="National Association of Rocketry" label="National Association of Rocketry"/>
<link wikidata="Q837940" start="6410" end="6417" title="impulse (physics)" label="impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232577" start="6766" end="6776" title="high powered rocket" label="high power"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="6870" end="6876" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="6880" end="6886" title="newton (unit)" label="newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11574" start="7355" end="7361" title="second" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="8051" end="8055" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q250840" start="8056" end="8062" title="nozzle" label="nozzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="8070" end="8080" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253473" start="8082" end="8094" title="delay charge" label="delay charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350114" start="8096" end="8111" title="ejection charge" label="ejection charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q996592" start="8176" end="8187" title="electric match" label="coated wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407524" start="8495" end="8499" title="APCP" label="APCP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962632" wikidata="Q5628943" url="?curid=962632" title="HANE">
<text>HANE may refer to:

* Hereditary angioneurotic edema, an angioedema
* High-altitude nuclear explosion
==See also==
* Hane (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5628943" start="0" end="4" title="HANE" label="HANE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129007" start="22" end="52" title="Hereditary angioneurotic edema" label="Hereditary angioneurotic edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780403" start="70" end="101" title="High-altitude nuclear explosion" label="High-altitude nuclear explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16357488" start="117" end="138" title="Hane (disambiguation)" label="Hane (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962635" wikidata="Q6446791" url="?curid=962635" title="Kurt Huang">
<text>Kurt Huang is co-founder, president, and chief product officer of BitPass. He has a Computer Science degree from Harvard and an MD from Stanford.

Named to the 2004 list of the world&#x27;s 100 Top Young Innovators by MIT&#x27;s Technology Review magazine.

He was born in Chicago to immigrants from Taiwan.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6446791" start="0" end="10" title="Kurt Huang" label="Kurt Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918689" start="66" end="73" title="BitPass" label="BitPass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="84" end="100" title="Computer Science" label="Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="113" end="120" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="136" end="144" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="300" end="306" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962638" wikidata="Q13962" url="?curid=962638" title="Messier 54">
<text>Messier 54 (also known as M54 or NGC 6715) is a globular cluster in the constellation Sagittarius. It was discovered by Charles Messier in 1778 and then included in his catalog of comet-like objects. 

It is easily found in the sky, being close to the star ζ Sagittarii. It is, however, not resolvable into individual stars even with larger amateur telescopes.

In July 2009, a team of astronomers reported that they had found evidence of an intermediate-mass black hole in the core of M54.

== Distance==
Previously thought to belong to the Milky Way at a distance from Earth of about 50,000 light-years, it was discovered in 1994 that M54 most likely belongs to the Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy (SagDEG), making it the first globular cluster formerly thought to be part of our galaxy reassigned to extragalactic status, even if not recognized as such for more than two centuries. As it is located in SagDEG&#x27;s center, some authors think it actually may be its core; however others have proposed that it is a real globular cluster that fell to the center of this galaxy due to decay of its orbit caused by dynamical friction.

Modern estimates now place M54 at a distance of some 87,000 light-years, translating into a true radius of 150 light-years across. It is one of the denser of the globulars, being of class III (I being densest and XII being the least dense). It shines with the luminosity of roughly 850,000 times that of the Sun and has an absolute magnitude of −10.0.

==See also==
* List of Messier objects
* Omega Centauri
* Mayall II
* Palomar 12

==References and footnotes==
==External links==

* M54 @ SEDS Messier pages</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13962" start="0" end="10" title="Messier 54" label="Messier 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q13962" start="26" end="29" title="Messier 54" label="M54"/>
<link wikidata="Q13962" start="33" end="41" title="Messier 54" label="NGC 6715"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="48" end="64" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="72" end="85" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8866" start="86" end="97" title="Sagittarius (constellation)" label="Sagittarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="120" end="135" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="165" end="176" title="Messier object" label="his catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="180" end="185" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="252" end="256" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q14037" start="257" end="269" title="Zeta Sagittarii" label="ζ Sagittarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="349" end="358" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050633" start="442" end="470" title="intermediate-mass black hole" label="intermediate-mass black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="542" end="551" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="571" end="576" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="593" end="603" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q32885" start="668" end="703" title="Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy" label="Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268968" start="1118" end="1136" title="dynamical friction" label="dynamical friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671212" start="1321" end="1326" title="Shapley-Sawyer Concentration Class" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="1399" end="1409" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1447" end="1450" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="1462" end="1480" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="1507" end="1530" title="List of Messier objects" label="List of Messier objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q14275" start="1533" end="1547" title="Omega Centauri" label="Omega Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535451" start="1550" end="1559" title="Mayall II" label="Mayall II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684102" start="1562" end="1572" title="Palomar 12" label="Palomar 12"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962639" wikidata="Q261678" url="?curid=962639" title="Mochovce">
<text>Mochovce () is a former village in western Slovakia, best known for its nuclear power plant.

It is situated in Nitra Region, northwest of Levice. The village inhabitants were relocated and the village was destroyed to make place for the power plant. A late baroque church and a cemetery are the only remaining structures. In contrast, the power plant construction has brought an economic and demographic boom to the nearby town of Levice in the 1980s.

==References==
==External links==
* Official website of the power plant</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q261678" start="0" end="8" title="Mochovce" label="Mochovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="43" end="51" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085951" start="72" end="91" title="Mochovce Nuclear Power Plants" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q184548" start="112" end="124" title="Nitra Region" label="Nitra Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q506693" start="139" end="145" title="Levice" label="Levice"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="258" end="265" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="380" end="388" title="economic" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="393" end="404" title="demographic" label="demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="405" end="409" title="Boom and bust" label="boom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962642" wikidata="Q4372" url="?curid=962642" title="The Wedding Present">
<text>The Wedding Present are an English indie rock group formed in 1985 in Leeds, England, by members of The Lost Pandas. The band has been led by vocalist and guitarist David Gedge, the band&#x27;s only constant member.

Closely linked to the C86 scene, the band has charted a total of eighteen singles in the top 40 of the UK Singles Chart, including a historic run of twelve singles – one for each month – in 1992, which tied Elvis Presley&#x27;s record for most top 40 hits in a single year.

==History==
===Early stages and the Reception era (1985–1989)===
The band has its origins in the Lost Pandas, which folded in 1984 when Janet Rigby, the drummer for the band, left following departure of guitarist Michael Duane. David Gedge and The Lost Pandas&#x27; bass player, Keith Gregory, continued the band, renaming it The Wedding Present. The name was jointly conceived by Gedge and his girlfriend at the time, as they were both avid fans of The Birthday Party and it was an homage to their favourite band.

Gedge and Gregory recruited an old schoolmate of Gedge&#x27;s, Peter Solowka, to play guitar and auditioned a string of drummers, including John Ramsden, and Mike Bedford, with whom they recorded a demo tape, before settling on Shaun Charman. The band played at clubs and bars as they prepared for the recording of their first, self-financed single. &quot;Go Out and Get ’Em, Boy!&quot; was chosen over early favourite &quot;Will You Be Up There?&quot; Charman felt somewhat insecure about his drumming abilities and so the A-side features drumming by hired hand Julian Sowa (Charman does, however, play drums on its B-side). The single was released on the band&#x27;s own Reception Records label with distribution through Red Rhino.

Two more singles followed that did well on the independent charts helped by veteran BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel who was one of their first champions. He invited them to do a radio session (three songs from the session are included on the 1988 compilation &quot;Tommy 1985-1987;&quot; the entire session had already been released as an EP in 1986), starting a long collaboration. By the time the band started work on their debut album, a number of independent and major record companies showed interest, but the band declined all offers and decided to keep releasing their material themselves. The album was released in 1987 and titled &quot;George Best&quot; after the well-known Northern Irish football player. It was produced by the band and Chris Allison.

Upon its release, the album was critically acclaimed and the band were soon classified, with some of their peers, as members of the &#x27;shambling&#x27; or C86 scene, a categorisation that they vehemently declined (although they were featured on the original C86 compilation). Musically, the album featured fast-paced rhythm guitar; lyrically, apart from a few excursions into social critique (&quot;All This and More&quot;) and politics (&quot;All About Eve&quot;), Gedge&#x27;s main concerns (which would become his trademark) were love, lust, heartbreak and revenge. Soon after the release of &quot;George Best&quot;, the early singles and radio sessions were compiled and released as &quot;Tommy (1985-1987).&quot; When Solowka, who has Ukrainian roots, started fooling around with a Ukrainian folk tune during one of their Peel sessions, the idea arose to devote some of their radio time to recording their versions of Ukrainian folk songs, encouraged by Peel. To this end, two guest musicians were invited, singer/violin player Len Liggins and mandolin player Roman Remeynes, and three Peel sessions were recorded with Gedge temporarily limiting himself to playing rhythm guitar and arranging the songs.

Between the recording of the first and the second &#x27;Ukrainian&#x27; session, Charman was fired from the band. His replacement was Simon Smith, who remained the band&#x27;s drummer until 1997 and for a long time was, next to Gedge, the only other stable factor in the shifting line-ups. The band planned on releasing eight cuts from the Ukrainian sessions on a 10&quot; LP and an initial batch was pressed when Red Rhino went into receivership. Rather than trying to find a new distribution company, the band decided to fold their Reception label altogether and sign with a regular record company: RCA.

===The RCA era (1989–1993)===
Although the band were criticized by some quarters for &#x27;selling out&#x27;, under the terms of their contract they were allowed their own choice of producer and singles. They also had the option of releasing any singles rejected by the label independently without breach of contract. The band&#x27;s new record company bought the initial Reception stock of the Ukrainian record from the band, pressed another batch, and released the record in April 1989 under the name of &quot;Українські Виступи в Івана Піла&quot; (meaning &#x27;Ukrainian John Peel Sessions&#x27;; the Latin transliteration &quot;Ukraïnski Vistupi v Ivana Peela&quot; appeared on the sleeve&#x27;s spine only).

The first proper album that The Wedding Present recorded for their new label was released in the same year 1989 and reunited them with producer Chris Allison. &quot;Bizarro&quot;’s lyrical themes were largely the same as before and the songs featured the same three-chord structures, but its production values had increased due to a larger recording budget. The album was recorded at Jacobs Studios by Steve Lyon and mixed by him and Chris Allison. The album&#x27;s companion single, &quot;Kennedy&quot;, provided the band with their first British Top 40 hit. 

In 1989, the band covered the song &quot;Box Elder&quot; by a then-unknown American indie rock band named Pavement. Gregory had found Pavement&#x27;s limited-pressing debut single during a trip to the United States and The Wedding Present&#x27;s cover inspired John Peel to promote Pavement on his radio show, a key step in Pavement&#x27;s breakthrough.

Seeing that they were growing more popular in the American college radio scene, the band turned towards America for their next project. The band decided to re-record &quot;Bizarro&quot; track &quot;Brassneck&quot; with the former Big Black frontman Steve Albini. It was the start of a two-year collaboration: the next single, &quot;Corduroy&quot;, and album, &quot;Seamonsters&quot;, were also recorded by Albini at Pachyderm Recording Studio in Cannon Falls, Minnesota.

&quot;Melody Maker&quot; likened listening to the record to sandpapering your ears. End-of-year readers polls, however, showed the opening track and lead single of the album, &quot;Dalliance&quot;, amongst the top of the favourites list. Almost directly after recording the album, the band announced that they had sacked Solowka. His replacement was Paul Dorrington of local band Tse Tse Fly (also formerly of A.C. Temple). Solowka teamed up again with Liggins and Remeynes to form The Ukrainians, and continued to blend post-punk with traditional Ukrainian music.

==== The Hit Parade (1992) ====
The next year saw the band release twelve 7&quot; singles in one year. Each single had a limited pressing of 10,000 copies which all reached the Top 30 in the UK Singles Chart, equalling Elvis Presley&#x27;s record for the most UK Top 30 hits in one year. To economise on songwriting, the B-sides consisted of cover versions of songs including Julee Cruise&#x27;s &quot;Falling&quot; (the theme tune from &quot;Twin Peaks&quot;). The singles and their B-sides, produced by various producers such as Ian Broudie (Lightning Seeds) and Jimmy Miller (The Rolling Stones) were collected on two albums, &quot;Hit Parade 1&quot; and &quot;Hit Parade 2&quot;.

The demand in the United Kingdom for The Wedding Present&#x27;s singles was so high that distributors began poaching from a separate 5,000-copy stash meant for sale in all other markets to sell in the UK. The Wedding Present had the distinction of having all 12 hit singles be solely original material, whereas Elvis reached his record through archival re-issues. &quot;The Hit Parade&quot; effectively served as the band&#x27;s third album under the RCA contract, and the band played &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; four times in the same year. 

&quot;Seamonsters&quot;, &quot;Hit Parade 1&quot; and &quot;Hit Parade 2&quot; were released in the United States in 1991 and 1992 by New York-based pseudo-indie label First Warning Records. Shortly after the 1992 singles scheme had ended, the band announced they were leaving RCA.

===The Island era (1994–1995)===
The band spent most of 1993 taking time off, occasionally playing gigs. A stopgap compilation of three more archive radio sessions, &quot;Peel Sessions 1987-1990&quot;, was released by Strange Fruit. When they re-emerged in early 1994 with the news that they had signed to Island Records, it was quickly followed by the announcement that Gregory had left the band, due to lack of enthusiasm, and was replaced by Darren Belk. For their next album, The Wedding Present again left for the United States and enlisted Steve Fisk (Screaming Trees, Nirvana). The result was &quot;Watusi&quot;. The album&#x27;s songs ranged from warm lo-fi pop (&quot;Gazebo&quot;, &quot;Big Rat&quot;) to semi-psychedelic, Velvets-like workouts (&quot;Click Click&quot;, &quot;Catwoman&quot;).

No further albums were recorded for Island, and the best part of 1995 was spent the same way as 1993: touring, writing new material, no recording. Paul Dorrington quit the band; no replacement was made as Belk doubled on bass and guitar. In the autumn of 1995, The Wedding Present released &quot;Sucker&quot;, a self-financed single that was sold at their gigs only (it has since been included on compilation albums). Shortly after, the band signed with independent label Cooking Vinyl.

===The Cooking Vinyl era (1995–1997/99)===
The band, still a three-piece, recorded their newly written material and issued the car-themed six-track mini-album, &quot;Mini&quot;. Belk played both guitar and bass on the songs. Shortly after releasing the album, Jayne Lockey, who had already sung backing vocals on &quot;Mini&quot;, was announced as the band&#x27;s new bass player. Belk quit the band and was replaced by Simon Cleave. Both Lockey and Cleave were former members of Tse Tse Fly, along with Paul Dorrington and Mark Goodham.

The band still had material from their sabbatical year and went into the studio again to record &quot;Saturnalia&quot;. This proved to be the last new material by The Wedding Present for a long time. After playing a number of gigs to support the album, the last one in Liverpool on 18 January 1997, the band took a long sabbatical.

===Contractual obligations and Cinerama (1997–2004)===
To fulfill contractual obligations, two more compilations were released by Cooking Vinyl: another Peel sessions volume, &quot;John Peel Sessions 1992-1995&quot; (1998), and &quot;Singles 1995-1997&quot; (1999). Additionally, Strange Fruit offered another radio sessions compilation, &quot;Evening Sessions 1986-1994&quot; (1997), and the band&#x27;s American label released &quot;Singles 1989-1991&quot; (1999), a 2CD package which added rarities and live tracks. Gedge recorded an album, &quot;Va Va Voom&quot;, in 1998 under the Cinerama band name with his girlfriend, Sally Murrell, and some session musicians. The project became a full-time band.

Following Gedge&#x27;s split from Murrell in 2003, and with the increasing inclusion of Wedding Present songs in Cinerama&#x27;s live sets (in previous years Gedge had good-naturedly refused calls from the audience to play Wedding Present songs, frequently replying &quot;that&#x27;s another band&quot; or &quot;you&#x27;re at the wrong gig&quot;), Gedge effectively renamed Cinerama in 2004, keeping the line-up, reflecting the change in sound over the years to the more familiar territory of The Wedding Present.

===Reformation (2004–2019)===

News came in early September 2004 that Cinerama would be rebranded as The Wedding Present. The line-up was to be the same as the last line-up of Cinerama, which included Simon Cleave. The first new single, &quot;Interstate 5&quot;, was issued on 15 November 2004, to lead off the new album, &quot;Take Fountain&quot;, which was released on 14 February 2005. A second single, &quot;I&#x27;m From Further North Than You&quot;, was released on 11 April 2005. Third and final single &quot;Ringway to SeaTac&quot; was released on 24 October 2005.

All singles, their B-sides and acoustic versions from this period were compiled on the 2006 compilation &quot;Search for Paradise: Singles 2004-5&quot;. The release came with a bonus DVD compiling the videos for &quot;Don&#x27;t Touch That Dial&quot; (a Cinerama single re-recorded for &quot;Take Fountain&quot;), &quot;Interstate 5&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;m From Further North Than You&quot;, &quot;Ringway to SeaTac&quot; and others.

The Wedding Present toured Europe and North America in the Spring of 2005 (with John Maiden on drums) and again in Europe towards the end of 2005 (this time, with Simon Pearson on drums). During Christmas 2006, guitarist Simon Cleave left the group and was replaced by the group&#x27;s sound engineer Chris McConville – who played on the 2006 tours of North America (with Charlie Layton on drums) and Europe (with Graeme Ramsay on drums).

Until 2009 the line-up remained stable with Gedge, De Castro, McConville, and Ramsay co-writing. They recorded 17 songs with Steve Albini in January 2008, some of which have been played live at gigs in recent years. Titles include &quot;I&#x27;ve Lost the Monkey&quot;, &quot;Soup&quot;, &quot;Drink You Eat You&quot;, &quot;Model, Actress, Whatever...&quot;, &quot;The Thing I Like Most About Him Is His Girlfriend&quot;, &quot;Twenty Jackies&quot;, &quot;Swingers&quot;, &quot;Peek-a-boo&quot;, &quot;Hulk Loves Betty&quot;, &quot;Boo Boo&quot;, &quot;Palisades&quot;, &quot;Santa Ana Winds&quot;, &quot;Pinch Pull Twist Release&quot;, &quot;The Trouble With Men&quot;, &quot;Don&#x27;t Take Me Home Until I&#x27;m Drunk&quot; and &quot;Spider-Man in Hollywood&quot;.

The album &quot;El Rey&quot; was released on 20 May 2008 in North America and 26 May 2008 in Europe, accompanied by the digital download-only single &quot;The Thing I Like Best About Him Is His Girlfriend&quot;. A compilation of singles and remixes, &quot;How The West Was Won&quot;, was released towards the end of 2008 and accompanied by a single, &quot;Holly Jolly Hollywood&quot;. The Wedding Present also covered The Cure&#x27;s &quot;High&quot; for American Laundromat Records tribute &quot;Just Like Heaven - a tribute to The Cure&quot;.

Some months before a short tour of the UK and Japan in March 2009, Chris McConville left the band and was replaced by former guitarist Simon Cleave, who left the band again later that year. Graeme Ramsay subsequently moved from drums to guitar and Charles Layton once again became their drummer.

In 2009 two The Wedding Present songs, &quot;I&#x27;m From Further North Than You&quot; and &quot;Ringway to SeaTac&quot;, appeared in the award-winning Monty Miranda–directed independent film &quot;Skills Like This&quot;. The director was praised for his use of music in an integrated soundtrack.

In August 2010 it was announced that De Castro would not be touring with The Wedding Present for the Autumn 21st anniversary tour of &quot;Bizarro&quot;, and that her last gig would be at 28 August 2010 at Gedge&#x27;s mini festival &quot;At the Edge of the Sea&quot; in Brighton. This marked the end of a 12-year association with Gedge, stretching back to when Cinerama was formed. She was replaced by Pepe le Moko.

A new Wedding Present album, &quot;Valentina&quot;, was released in March 2012. Shortly before its release, guitarist Graeme Ramsay left the band after six years. and was replaced by Patrick Alexander (ex-The Young Playthings and The Pipettes).

During 2012, The Wedding Present toured a set which usually featured the whole of &quot;Seamonsters&quot;, performed live and in album order. The rest of the set was a mixture of songs from &quot;Valentina&quot; and the back catalogue. In April of the year, The Wedding Present toured Australia for the first time, playing concerts in Adelaide, Sydney and Melbourne.

On 25 October 2012, the &quot;4 Songs&quot; Extended Play was released on download only. These four new songs (&quot;Journey Into Space&quot;, &quot;Pain Perdu&quot;, &quot;1000 Fahrenheit&quot; and &quot;Can You Keep a Secret&quot;) recorded during the &quot;Valentina&quot; sessions could be downloaded following the purchase of &quot;Valentina: The Story of a Wedding Present&quot;, a book documenting the making of the long player itself. &quot;Valentina&quot; itself was re-released in May 2015 after being re-interpreted and re-recorded by David Gedge&#x27;s other band Cinerama.

In early 2013 the band started a world tour including taking in the US, Australia and for the first time New Zealand. The Wedding Present played &quot;George Best&quot; and &quot;The Hit Parade&quot; in their entirety on this tour celebrating the 25th and 21st &#x27;birthday&#x27; of these albums respectively.

The band released their ninth album, &quot;Going, Going...&quot;, on 2 September 2016.

2017 saw the 30th anniversary of the release of &quot;George Best&quot;, an anniversary tour and a feature-length documentary about the record titled &quot;The Wedding Present: Something Left Behind&quot;.

In mid-2019, the band issued a completely re-recorded version of 1988 compilation &quot;Tommy&quot;, plus their first picture disc: a 10&quot; single featuring two new songs.

In late 2019, the band toured playing &quot;Bizarro&quot; in its entirety. During this tour the band were joined on guitar by Jon Stewart of Sleeper and Chris Hardwick from My Life Story on drums.

===Acoustic versions and &quot;24 Songs&quot; (2020–present)===
In 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic, the band recorded various acoustic versions of the bands&#x27; tracks, with each musician recording their part of the song from home. The songs were released on the band&#x27;s social media accounts. Twelve tracks including a duet of a previously unrecorded Sleeper song called &quot;We Should Be Together&quot;, recorded as a duet with Louise Wener, were released in February 2021 as &quot;Locked Down and Stripped Back&quot;.

In December 2020 the band, and various ex-members and collaborators released an album of James Bond–theme cover versions called &quot;Not From Where I’m Standing&quot;, for the mental health charity Campaign Against Living Miserably.

In April 2021, the band re-released a 30th anniversary version of &quot;Seamonsters&quot; including the B-sides to the singles released to promote the original 1991 album and tracks from a John Peel Session.

In October 2021, the band announced that in 2022 they would release a 7&quot; single per month, featuring two new songs, for the duration of 2022, repeating their one-single-per-month approach of 1992. This &quot;24 Songs&quot; project saw songs written by David Gedge and Sleeper guitarist Jon Stewart, collaborating to write tracks for the first time in the band&#x27;s history.

In May 2022 the band announced they would release &quot;Locked Down and Stripped Back Volume Two&quot;, the second album of acoustic home recordings of Wedding Present and Cinerama classics, recorded by band and former band members.

==Personnel==
===Current===
* David Gedge: vocals, guitar (1985–1997, 2004–present)
* Jon Stewart: guitar (2019–present)
* Paul Blackburn: bass (2023–present)
* Vincenzo Lammi: drums (2023–present)

* Rachael Wood: guitar (frequent touring stand-in for Jon Stewart, 2023–present)

Per The Wedding Present line-up history from their official website.

===Past===
*Keith Gregory: bass (1985–1993)
*Peter Solowka: guitar (1985–1991)
*Shaun Charman: drums, vocals (1985–1988)
*Simon Smith: drums (1988–1997)
*Paul Dorrington: guitar (1991–1995)
*Darren Belk: bass, vocals (1993–1995), guitar (1995–1996)
*Jayne Lockey: bass, vocals (1995–1997)
*Simon Cleave: guitar (1996–1997, 2004–2006, 2009)
*Kari Paavola: drums (2004–2005)
*Simon Pearson: drums (2005)
*Graeme Ramsay: drums (2006–2009), guitar (2009–2012)
*Christopher McConville: guitar (2006–2009)
*Pepé le Moko: bass, vocals (2010–2012)
*Patrick Alexander: guitar (2012–2013)
*Jennifer Schwartz: bass (2013)
*Geoffrey Maddock: guitar (2013)
*Katharine Wallinger: bass (2013–2016)
*Samuel Beer-Pearce: guitar (2013–2016)
*Marcus Kain: guitar (2016–2017)
*Terry de Castro: bass, vocals (2004–2010, 2018)
*Danielle Wadey: bass (2016–2017), guitar (2018–2019)
*Charles Layton: drums (2005, 2009–2019)
*Chris Hardwick: drums (2019–2021)
*Melanie Howard: bass, vocals (2018–2023)
*Nicholas Wellauer: drums (2021–2023)

=== Timeline ===
==Discography==

*&quot;George Best&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Bizarro&quot; (1989)
*&quot;Seamonsters&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Watusi&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Saturnalia&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Take Fountain&quot; (2005)
*&quot;El Rey&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Valentina&quot; (2012)
*&quot;Going, Going...&quot; (2016)

==References==
==External links==
* Scopitones The official home of The Wedding Present and Cinerama
* Interview with David Gedge of The Wedding Present 2012, Rocker Magazine
* Something And Nothing 
* Trouser Press entry
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4372" start="0" end="19" title="The Wedding Present" label="The Wedding Present"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="35" end="45" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="70" end="75" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234068" start="165" end="176" title="David Gedge" label="David Gedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022692" start="239" end="242" title="C86" label="C86"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="320" end="336" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="424" end="437" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147045" start="942" end="960" title="The Birthday Party (band)" label="The Birthday Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177026" start="1071" end="1084" title="Peter Solowka" label="Peter Solowka"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="1206" end="1215" title="demo tape" label="demo tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1350" end="1356" title="single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="1532" end="1538" title="A-side and B-side" label="A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="1625" end="1631" title="A-side and B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372" start="1681" end="1698" title="Reception Records" label="Reception Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304788" start="1731" end="1740" title="Red Rhino" label="Red Rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="1827" end="1838" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="1839" end="1841" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="1842" end="1851" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="1983" end="1994" title="compilation album" label="compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="2075" end="2077" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="2209" end="2225" title="record company" label="record companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536947" start="2381" end="2392" title="George Best (album)" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2420" end="2434" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q164521" start="2435" end="2450" title="George Best" label="football player"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105720" start="2484" end="2497" title="Chris Allison" label="Chris Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022692" start="2657" end="2660" title="C86 (music)" label="C86"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819154" start="3195" end="3212" title="Tommy (1985-1987)" label="Tommy (1985-1987)"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="3242" end="3251" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="3514" end="3520" title="singing" label="singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="3521" end="3527" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3535" end="3546" title="Len Liggins" label="Len Liggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="3551" end="3559" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3567" end="3581" title="Roman Remeynes" label="Roman Remeynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q670969" start="3672" end="3685" title="rhythm guitar" label="rhythm guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519791" start="3846" end="3857" title="Simon Smith (drummer)" label="Simon Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="4085" end="4087" title="vinyl record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594302" start="4146" end="4158" title="receivership" label="receivership"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="4313" end="4316" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878469" start="4831" end="4862" title="Українські Виступи в Івана Піла" label="Українські Виступи в Івана Піла"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="4930" end="4945" title="transliteration" label="transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105720" start="5178" end="5191" title="Chris Allison" label="Chris Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919378" start="5199" end="5206" title="Bizarro (album)" label="Bizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212946" start="5294" end="5305" title="three-chord song" label="three-chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="5582" end="5588" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q922445" start="5702" end="5710" title="Pavement (band)" label="Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="5857" end="5866" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q572821" start="6181" end="6190" title="Big Black" label="Big Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="6200" end="6212" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440729" start="6316" end="6327" title="Seamonsters" label="Seamonsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296873" start="6367" end="6393" title="Pachyderm Studio" label="Pachyderm Recording Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q255736" start="6397" end="6420" title="Cannon Falls, Minnesota" label="Cannon Falls, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="6429" end="6441" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150327" start="6773" end="6788" title="Paul Dorrington" label="Paul Dorrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849486" start="6803" end="6814" title="Tse Tse Fly (band)" label="Tse Tse Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647079" start="6833" end="6844" title="A.C. Temple" label="A.C. Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q276942" start="6905" end="6919" title="The Ukrainians" label="The Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="7180" end="7196" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="7208" end="7221" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="7310" end="7316" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q272496" start="7365" end="7377" title="Julee Cruise" label="Julee Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085" start="7432" end="7442" title="Twin Peaks" label="Twin Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q921695" start="7520" end="7531" title="Ian Broudie" label="Ian Broudie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973228" start="7533" end="7548" title="Lightning Seeds" label="Lightning Seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q59477" start="7554" end="7566" title="Jimmy Miller (producer)" label="Jimmy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="7568" end="7586" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871439" start="7624" end="7636" title="Hit Parade 1" label="Hit Parade 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871448" start="7653" end="7665" title="Hit Parade 2" label="Hit Parade 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="8165" end="8180" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440729" start="8224" end="8235" title="Seamonsters" label="Seamonsters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8672" end="8695" title="Peel Sessions 1987-1990" label="Peel Sessions 1987-1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q679126" start="8719" end="8732" title="Strange Fruit Records" label="Strange Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="8807" end="8821" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224784" start="8946" end="8957" title="Darren Belk" label="Darren Belk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798410" start="9047" end="9057" title="Steve Fisk" label="Steve Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411035" start="9059" end="9074" title="Screaming Trees" label="Screaming Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="9076" end="9083" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975079" start="9107" end="9113" title="Watusi (album)" label="Watusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="9221" end="9232" title="psychedelic music" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="9234" end="9241" title="Velvet Underground" label="Velvets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996526" start="9778" end="9791" title="Cooking Vinyl" label="Cooking Vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="9921" end="9924" title="motorcar" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864998" start="9960" end="9964" title="Mini (EP)" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10054" end="10066" title="Jayne Lockey" label="Jayne Lockey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10214" end="10226" title="Simon Cleave" label="Simon Cleave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426821" start="10435" end="10445" title="Saturnalia (The Wedding Present album)" label="Saturnalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="10602" end="10611" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10847" end="10875" title="John Peel Sessions 1992-1995" label="John Peel Sessions 1992-1995"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10900" end="10917" title="Singles 1995-1997" label="Singles 1995-1997"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11010" end="11036" title="Evening Sessions 1986-1994" label="Evening Sessions 1986-1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774064" start="11101" end="11118" title="Singles 1989-1991" label="Singles 1989-1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q658001" start="11252" end="11260" title="Cinerama (band)" label="Cinerama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677610" start="12132" end="12144" title="Interstate 5 (The Wedding Present song)" label="Interstate 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677610" start="12217" end="12230" title="Take Fountain" label="Take Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677610" start="12301" end="12337" title="I&amp;#x27;m From Further North Than You" label="I&amp;#x27;m From Further North Than You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677610" start="12405" end="12422" title="Ringway to SeaTac" label="Ringway to SeaTac"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12573" end="12608" title="Search for Paradise: Singles 2004-5" label="Search for Paradise: Singles 2004-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="13461" end="13473" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352015" start="14123" end="14129" title="El Rey (The Wedding Present album)" label="El Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473564" start="14227" end="14243" title="music download" label="digital download"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="14525" end="14533" title="The Cure" label="The Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744310" start="14562" end="14589" title="American Laundromat Records" label="American Laundromat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906711" start="15103" end="15116" title="Monty Miranda" label="Monty Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535255" start="15149" end="15165" title="Skills Like This" label="Skills Like This"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910843" start="15702" end="15711" title="Valentina (The Wedding Present Album)" label="Valentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440729" start="16001" end="16012" title="Seamonsters" label="Seamonsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="16325" end="16338" title="Extended Play" label="Extended Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q29830096" start="17224" end="17239" title="Going, Going..." label="Going, Going..."/>
<link wikidata="Q5536947" start="17323" end="17334" title="George Best (album)" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819154" start="17564" end="17569" title="Tommy (The Wedding Present album)" label="Tommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919378" start="17696" end="17703" title="Bizarro (album)" label="Bizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q640008" start="17793" end="17800" title="Sleeper (band)" label="Sleeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044700" start="17825" end="17838" title="My Life Story" label="My Life Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="17933" end="17950" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263844" start="18289" end="18301" title="Louise Wener" label="Louise Wener"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="18470" end="18480" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027741" start="18580" end="18613" title="Campaign Against Living Miserably" label="Campaign Against Living Miserably"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="18805" end="18822" title="John Peel Session" label="John Peel Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234068" start="19471" end="19482" title="David Gedge" label="David Gedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q640008" start="19527" end="19538" title="Sleeper (band)" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536853" start="19564" end="19578" title="Gomez (band)" label="Paul Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177026" start="19837" end="19850" title="Peter Solowka" label="Peter Solowka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519791" start="19914" end="19925" title="Simon Smith (drummer)" label="Simon Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150327" start="19946" end="19961" title="Paul Dorrington" label="Paul Dorrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224784" start="19983" end="19994" title="Darren Belk" label="Darren Belk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536947" start="20849" end="20860" title="George Best (album)" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919378" start="20881" end="20888" title="Bizarro (album)" label="Bizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440729" start="20909" end="20920" title="Seamonsters" label="Seamonsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975079" start="20941" end="20947" title="Watusi (album)" label="Watusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426821" start="20968" end="20978" title="Saturnalia (The Wedding Present album)" label="Saturnalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677610" start="20999" end="21012" title="Take Fountain" label="Take Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352015" start="21033" end="21039" title="El Rey (The Wedding Present album)" label="El Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910843" start="21060" end="21069" title="Valentina (album)" label="Valentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q29830096" start="21090" end="21105" title="Going, Going..." label="Going, Going..."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962645" wikidata="Q83295" url="?curid=962645" title="West Ealing">
<text>West Ealing is a district in the London Borough of Ealing, in West London. The district is about west of Ealing Broadway. Although there is a long history of settlement in the area, West Ealing in its present form is less than one hundred years old. West Ealing falls under the postcode district W13 and neighbours Hanwell, Ealing, Perivale and Northfields

==History==

===Early history===
A hamlet named West Ealing was recorded in 1234 AD, although it was later renamed &quot;Ealing Dean&quot;; the West Ealing railway station was known as the &quot;Castle Hill &amp; Ealing Dean Station&quot; when it was built in 1871. Ealing Dean may derive from &quot;denu&quot; (valley); its first reference was in 1456, and it appears on a 1777 Ealing parish map. Most of what is now West Ealing was open countryside, with houses at Ealing Dean, Drayton Green and Castle Bear Hill (now Castlebar Hill).

In 1387 Drayton Green was known as Drayton and, later, as Drayton in Ealing. During the late 19th century, Drayton was a hamlet with eight householders. The area around Drayton Green Lane was later called Steven&#x27;s Town and had over forty cottages.

A major east–west road in the area became known as the Uxbridge Road. It was a popular 19th-century stagecoach route, and the London-to-Banbury-and-Oxford coach stopped at the &quot;Halfway House pub&quot; (the present Broadwalk Hotel) in West Ealing. The &quot;Green Man pub&quot; in West Ealing was a carters&#x27; stop, reportedly with stabling for a hundred horses.

===19th century===
During the 19th century much of the land from the Uxbridge Road south to Windmill Road, east to Northfield Avenue and west to Boston Road was market gardens and orchards. In addition to a few streets named for apple varieties, among the last remaining evidence of this is the little-changed Steel&#x27;s Fruit Packing Warehouse at the intersection of Northfield and Northcroft Roads.

At the eastern boundary of these market gardens and orchards were allotments dating to 1832, when the area known as Ealing Dean Common (both sides of Northfield Avenue) was given to West Ealing&#x27;s poor by the bishop of London. The allotments on the east side of Northfield Avenue are original, but those on the west side were developed in the early 1980s.

Ealing Dean&#x27;s principal claim to fame in the 1800s was its pony and donkey races. These races, on what was known as &quot;Jackass Common&quot; (the present Dean Gardens), ended in 1880 when the local council forbade them on moral grounds.

In 1882, the Ealing Lawn Tennis Club was founded on land between St. Leonards Road and the Great Western Railway (GWR). The club quickly became the most successful women&#x27;s lawn-tennis club in the world. Three Ealing-born club members (Blanche Bingley, Charlotte Cooper and Dorothea Douglass) won a total of thirteen Wimbledon Singles titles between 1886 and 1906. In 1906, the club moved to Creffield Road in Ealing Common.

During the 1890s, central West Ealing&#x27;s shops were more informal than those in central Ealing. There were then (and now) fruit and vegetable stalls in West Ealing which were absent from Ealing. Central West Ealing throve during the mid-20th century when draper, house furnisher, clothier and outfitters F. H. Rowse and draper and fashion house W. J. Daniel and Company flourished with Marks and Spencer, British Home Stores, Woolworth, Sainsbury&#x27;s and WHSmith. Later, Waitrose, McDonald&#x27;s and Blockbuster Video arrived.

The West Ealing Library is on Melbourne Avenue south of the Uxbridge Road. Its former location, which opened in 1903, was between Melbourne Avenue and St James&#x27;s Avenue (the present Sainsbury&#x27;s location).

===Modern history===
West Ealing had a large cinema at the Uxbridge Road end of Northfield Avenue, which opened as the Kinema in 1913 and replaced the Ealing Dean Cottage Hospital. The cinema was rebuilt in 1928 as the Lido. When attendance fell, it was divided into two small cinemas (Studio one and Studio two) and the main hall became a bingo hall. After a change in ownership, the cinemas became Cannon 1 and 2 and the bingo facility reopened as a snooker hall. With another change of ownership it was briefly the Gosai, an Indian cinema primarily devoted to Bollywood films. After it closed, it was demolished in 2005. The site has been redeveloped in a partnership of the Dominion Housing Group and the Ealing Community and Voluntary Service; the new building, the Lido Centre, opened in 2007 as Ealing&#x27;s volunteer centre. Above the voluntary-organisation work space are a number of small utility flats intended for social housing.
Residential building growth in the area may be attributed to the 1871 GWR railway station at Ealing Dean and the line&#x27;s later extension to Greenford via Castle Bar Park railway station and Drayton Green railway station; the 1901 London United Tramways Company line from Ealing to Southall, and the 1907 District Railway halt at Northfields.

During the 1920s, a number of houses were built on the Argyle Park estate (from the Argyle Road to the Greenford GWR railway line) and along Kent Avenue. Later housing developments replaced the allotments west of Northfield Avenue; others created flats in Langham Gardens (off Gordon Road) in 1970 and another, in 1977, created the Green Man Lane Estate. In the early 1980s, the Berners Drive-Coleridge Square estate was built next to the rebuilt West Middlesex Lawn Tennis club west of Drayton Green.

Since World War II there has been rebuilding in West Ealing, with a number of Victorian houses converted into flats. F. H. Rowse&#x27;s, WHSmith, Marks and Spencer, Woolworth and McDonald&#x27;s have left. Recent arrivals include Wilko. The Daniel&#x27;s store has been replaced by a gym under a block of flats. Waitrose replaced its original store with a larger one. Although West Ealing&#x27;s shopping and cultural facilities have gradually declined, in 2001 it saw the establishment of London&#x27;s only street market dedicated to farm produce.

There has been a large settling of immigrants from countries such as Somalia and Poland to name a few. This has led to the creation of multiple estates and housing projects to house these new resident influx into the area. One estate in particular is the Green Man Lane Estate, which was built in the 70&#x27;s and is situated just north of the High Street. This estate has been knocked down and still is in the process of a regeneration which is to make way for replacement properties for affordable rent, shared ownership and outright sale.

==Religion==

There are three Church of England churches in West Ealing. St John&#x27;s Church is in Mattock Lane, to the southeast; St James&#x27;s Church is located to the southwest, in St James&#x27;s Avenue; and St Stephen&#x27;s Church is located to the north, in St Stephen&#x27;s Road.

St John&#x27;s Church was built in 1876 by Edwin Henry Horne, burned down in 1920, and was rebuilt and re-opened in 1923. St James&#x27;s Church was founded in 1900, disused later in the 20th century and &quot;re-planted&quot; with a new congregation in the late 1980s.
St Stephen&#x27;s Church was founded in 1867 and in 1891 a spire, nearly fifty metres tall, was added which today still dominates the Ealing skyline. The old church building suffered from subsidence and by 1979 the building had to be closed and Sunday services held elsewhere. In 1985, the decision was made to sell the church building to a developer for conversion into apartments and build a new church centre on the site of the old Church Hall. This was completed and dedicated in 1987.

West Ealing is also home to the West London Islamic Centre (WLIC). The West London Islamic Centre was established in 1984 to serve the needs of the then fledgling Muslim community of Ealing and Hanwell. The original Mosque based at 119 and 121 Oaklands Road consisted of two shops that had been converted to accommodate men and women. This mosque is currently under construction and will likely be completed in Mid-Late 2019 and become one of the largest mosques in London.

There are also two Hindu temples housed in former church buildings, and West Ealing is also the location of Ealing Liberal Synagogue.

==Political representation==
West Ealing is made up of three electoral wards for local council elections: Cleveland, Elthorne and Walpole; it is also served by small portions of the Northfields and Ealing Broadway wards. These wards each elect three councillors to the Ealing Council. Recent elections have seen seats changing parties; as of the 2014 election the area has mainly Labour representation, with Labour councillors in Elthorne and Walpole and two Labour and one Conservative councillor in Cleveland.

West Ealing was in the parliamentary constituency of Ealing Central and Acton (represented since 2015 by Labour MP Rupa Huq). Following boundary changes for the 2024 general election, it became part of Ealing Southall (represented by Labour MP Deirdre Costigan). Portions of the area are in the Ealing North constituency, represented by Labour MP James Murray. West Ealing is in the London Assembly constituency of Ealing and Hillingdon, which has one assembly member: Onkar Sahota (Labour), who was elected in May 2012.

==Geography==
Although there are no official boundaries for West Ealing, with the exception of Grosvenor Road in W7 it falls into the postcode district W13. W13 reaches as north as Perivale and as south as Northfields. 6 bus routes (E3, E8, 207, 427, 483, 607) run through West Ealing and link the district to Shepherd&#x27;s Bush, Ealing, Hanwell, Greenford, Acton, Southall

===Neighbouring locations===
*Perivale
*Hanwell
*Ealing
*Brentford
*Chiswick
*Northfields
*Greenford

==Rail stations==
* West Ealing Station (Elizabeth line and Great Western Railway)
* Castle Bar Station 
* Drayton Green Station

===Nearby tube and rail stations===
* Boston Manor tube station
* Ealing Broadway station (tube and mainline rail)
* Hanwell station
* Northfields tube station
* Perivale tube station
* South Ealing station

==References==
==Sources==
* Hounsell, Peter (1991) &quot;Ealing and Hanwell Past&quot;, London : Historical Publ., 
* Neaves, Cyril M. (1971 [1931]) &quot;A history of Greater Ealing&quot;, Local history reprint series, 2nd Ed, Wakefield : S.R. Publishers [Facsimile reprint of 2nd ed., Brentford: Brentford Printing], 

==External links==
* Ealing Council official site
* London Farmer&#x27;s Markets
* West Ealing Neighbours
* West Ealing Heritage History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83295" start="0" end="11" title="West Ealing" label="West Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207218" start="33" end="57" title="London Borough of Ealing" label="London Borough of Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734390" start="62" end="73" title="West London" label="West London"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="105" end="120" title="Ealing" label="Ealing Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958518" start="296" end="299" title="W postcode area" label="W13"/>
<link wikidata="Q83593" start="315" end="322" title="Hanwell" label="Hanwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="324" end="330" title="Ealing" label="Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83294" start="332" end="340" title="Perivale" label="Perivale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059411" start="345" end="356" title="Northfields, London" label="Northfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="393" end="399" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985007" start="502" end="529" title="West Ealing railway station" label="West Ealing railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="737" end="743" title="Ealing" label="Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="744" end="750" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050452" start="878" end="892" title="Castlebar Hill" label="Castlebar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904034" start="1205" end="1218" title="Uxbridge Road" label="Uxbridge Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="1250" end="1260" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q806160" start="1286" end="1293" title="Banbury" label="Banbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1298" end="1304" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="1958" end="1972" title="Market gardening" label="market gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404694" start="1991" end="2001" title="Allotment (gardening)" label="allotments"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417925" start="2041" end="2059" title="Ealing Dean Common" label="Ealing Dean Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="2622" end="2643" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q273468" start="2771" end="2786" title="Blanche Bingley" label="Blanche Bingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q233815" start="2788" end="2804" title="Charlotte Cooper (tennis player)" label="Charlotte Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q53369" start="2809" end="2826" title="Dorothea Douglass Chambers" label="Dorothea Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q532598" start="2852" end="2869" title="List of Wimbledon Ladies&amp;#x27; Singles champions" label="Wimbledon Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q593362" start="3220" end="3226" title="draper" label="draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q242468" start="3245" end="3253" title="Tailor" label="clothier"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="3351" end="3368" title="Marks and Spencer" label="Marks and Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346145" start="3370" end="3389" title="British Home Stores" label="British Home Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q958479" start="3391" end="3400" title="Woolworths Group (United Kingdom)" label="Woolworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548712" start="3423" end="3430" title="WHSmith" label="WHSmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q771734" start="3439" end="3447" title="Waitrose" label="Waitrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="3449" end="3464" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q884711" start="3469" end="3486" title="Blockbuster Video" label="Blockbuster Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q152096" start="3684" end="3700" title="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s" label="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407974" start="4053" end="4063" title="Bingo (Commonwealth)" label="bingo hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="4165" end="4172" title="snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="4241" end="4254" title="Cinema of India" label="Indian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="4276" end="4285" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941024" start="4529" end="4545" title="volunteer centre" label="volunteer centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="4640" end="4654" title="Public housing" label="social housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83475" start="4800" end="4809" title="Greenford" label="Greenford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049994" start="4814" end="4845" title="Castle Bar Park railway station" label="Castle Bar Park railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947698" start="4850" end="4879" title="Drayton Green railway station" label="Drayton Green railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670986" start="4890" end="4912" title="London United Tramways" label="London United Tramways"/>
<link wikidata="Q83434" start="4941" end="4949" title="Southall" label="Southall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="4964" end="4980" title="District Railway" label="District Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4981" end="4985" title="Train station#Halt" label="halt"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5512" end="5524" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="5584" end="5593" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002536" start="5736" end="5741" title="Wilko (retailer)" label="Wilko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="6126" end="6133" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="6138" end="6144" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="6631" end="6648" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593568" start="6895" end="6916" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Church Ealing" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23696685" start="6938" end="6955" title="Edwin Henry Horne" label="Edwin Henry Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26641157" start="7165" end="7189" title="St Stephen&amp;#x27;s Church, Ealing" label="St Stephen&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="8239" end="8263" title="Ealing Liberal Synagogue" label="Ealing Liberal Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="8327" end="8341" title="electoral ward" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q853171" start="8347" end="8360" title="Local government in the United Kingdom" label="local council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8372" end="8381" title="Cleveland ward, Ealing" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367809" start="8383" end="8391" title="Elthorne (ward)" label="Elthorne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8396" end="8403" title="Walpole ward, Ealing" label="Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8448" end="8459" title="Northfields ward, Ealing" label="Northfields"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8464" end="8484" title="Ealing Broadway ward" label="Ealing Broadway ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q207218" start="8535" end="8549" title="London Borough of Ealing" label="Ealing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="8802" end="8812" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="8816" end="8828" title="constituency" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231914" start="8832" end="8856" title="Ealing Central and Acton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ealing Central and Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="8884" end="8890" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="8891" end="8893" title="Member of Parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380182" start="8894" end="8902" title="Rupa Huq" label="Rupa Huq"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="8940" end="8961" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077590" start="8981" end="8996" title="Ealing Southall (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ealing Southall"/>
<link wikidata="Q126849187" start="9023" end="9039" title="Deirdre Costigan" label="Deirdre Costigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077439" start="9074" end="9086" title="Ealing North (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ealing North"/>
<link wikidata="Q75292880" start="9126" end="9138" title="James Murray (London politician)" label="James Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="9162" end="9177" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388154" start="9194" end="9215" title="Ealing and Hillingdon" label="Ealing and Hillingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093978" start="9248" end="9260" title="Onkar Sahota" label="Onkar Sahota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958518" start="9414" end="9416" title="W postcode area" label="W7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958518" start="9453" end="9456" title="W postcode area" label="W13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026182" start="9611" end="9631" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="9633" end="9639" title="Ealing" label="Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83593" start="9641" end="9648" title="Hanwell" label="Hanwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83475" start="9650" end="9659" title="Greenford" label="Greenford"/>
<link wikidata="Q83609" start="9661" end="9666" title="Acton, London" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q83434" start="9668" end="9676" title="Southall" label="Southall"/>
<link wikidata="Q83294" start="9708" end="9716" title="Perivale" label="Perivale"/>
<link wikidata="Q83593" start="9718" end="9725" title="Hanwell" label="Hanwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="9727" end="9733" title="Ealing" label="Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013528" start="9735" end="9744" title="Brentford" label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q845015" start="9746" end="9754" title="Chiswick" label="Chiswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059411" start="9756" end="9767" title="Northfields, London" label="Northfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q83475" start="9769" end="9778" title="Greenford" label="Greenford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985007" start="9800" end="9819" title="West Ealing railway station" label="West Ealing Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="9821" end="9835" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419438" start="9840" end="9861" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049994" start="9865" end="9883" title="Castle Bar Park railway station" label="Castle Bar Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947698" start="9887" end="9908" title="Drayton Green railway station" label="Drayton Green Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q894569" start="9948" end="9973" title="Boston Manor tube station" label="Boston Manor tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q800705" start="9976" end="9999" title="Ealing Broadway station" label="Ealing Broadway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784392" start="10027" end="10042" title="Hanwell railway station" label="Hanwell station"/>
<link wikidata="Q764016" start="10045" end="10069" title="Northfields tube station" label="Northfields tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650871" start="10072" end="10093" title="Perivale tube station" label="Perivale tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304475" start="10096" end="10116" title="South Ealing tube station" label="South Ealing station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962647" wikidata="Q1142289" url="?curid=962647" title="List of Ottoman grand viziers">
<text>The grand vizier of the Ottoman Empire ( or &quot;Sadr-ı Azam&quot; (&quot;Sadrazam&quot;); Ottoman Turkish: or ) was the &quot;de facto&quot; prime minister of the sultan in the Ottoman Empire, with the absolute power of attorney and, in principle, removable only by the sultan himself in the classical period, before the Tanzimat reforms, or until the 1908 Revolution. He held the imperial seal and could summon all other viziers to attend to affairs of the state in the Imperial Council; the viziers in conference were called &quot;&quot;kubbe&quot; viziers&quot; in reference to their meeting place, the &quot;Kubbealtı&quot; (&#x27;under-the-dome&#x27;) in Topkapı Palace. His offices were located at the Sublime Porte.

==History==

During the emerging phases of the Ottoman state, &quot;vizier&quot; was the only title used. The first of these Ottoman viziers who was titled &quot;grand vizier&quot; was Çandarlı Kara Halil Hayreddin Pasha (also known as Çandarlı Halil Pasha the Elder). The purpose in instituting the title &quot;grand vizier&quot; was to differentiate the holder of the sultan&#x27;s seal from other viziers. The initially more regularly used title of &quot;vezir-i âzam&quot; was slowly replaced by &quot;sadrazam&quot;, both meaning grand vizier in practice. Throughout Ottoman history, the grand viziers have also been called &quot;sadr-ı âlî&quot; (&#x27;high vizier&#x27;), &quot;vekil-i mutlak&quot; (&#x27;absolute attorney&#x27;), &quot;sâhib-i devlet&quot; (&#x27;holder of the state&#x27;), &quot;serdar-ı ekrem&quot; (&#x27;gracious general&#x27;), &quot;serdar-ı azam&quot; (&#x27;grand general&#x27;), and &quot;zât-ı âsafî&quot; (&#x27;vizieral person&#x27;) and &quot;başnazır&quot;, literally &quot;prime minister&quot; in Ottoman Turkish. The Office of the Grand Vizier was called the &quot;sadaret&quot;.

In the late periods of the Ottoman Empire, especially during and after the 19th century, the grand vizier began to hold a position almost identical to that of a prime minister in other European states. Reforms seen during and after the Tanzimat (1838), the First Constitutional Era (1876–1878), and the Second Constitutional Era (1908–1920) further brought the office of the grand vizier in line with the European standard, making the incumbent the head of a Cabinet of other ministers. During the two constitutional eras, the grand vizier also served as the speaker of the Senate, the upper house of the bicameral Ottoman Parliament. With the establishment of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, the Prime Minister of Turkey took on the roles of the former office.

Grand viziers were often replaced or resigned in rapid succession, frequently leading to political instability. In the final 10 years of the Empire alone, the office of the grand vizier changed hands 13 times between 12 men; some, such as Ahmed Izzet Pasha and Salih Hulusi Pasha, held office for less than a month.

== Office of the Grand Vizierate ==
The Office of the Grand Vizierate was known as the &quot;Sadaret-i Uzma&quot;, or alternatively the &quot;Baş Vekâlet&quot; (The Prime Ministry), or &quot;Bâb-ı Âli&quot; (Literally the Sublime Porte, all the departments under the Vezierate). In 1839, this office included only included the &quot;Âmedi-i Divan-ı Hümayun&quot;, (Office of the Imperial Council).

==List of grand viziers==
===Chief viziers (1320–1439)===

=== Grand Viziers (1439–1839) ===
The position of grand vizier was established with Murad II&#x27;s appointment of Çandarlızade Halil Pasha the Younger to such a position. In the 19th century, Mahmud II would abolish the title of Grand Vizier, and appointed Mehmed Emin Rauf Pasha as &quot;Başvekil&quot;, or Prime Minister. Upon Sultan Abdülmecid I&#x27;s ascention to the throne, the Grand Vizierate was restored.
=== Tanzimat (1839–1876) ===
The Gülhane edict was announced soon after Abdul Mecid&#x27;s sword girding, ushering in the Tanzimat period, a time of major bureaucratic and administrative reform.
=== First Constitutional Monarchy (1876–1878) ===
Under pressure from constitutionalist ministers which overthrew his relatives Abdülaziz and Murad V, Abdülhamid II promulgated a constitution and parliament upon his ascension to the throne.
=== &quot;İstibdat&quot; (1878–1908) ===
Abdul Hamid II suspended the constitution and parliament in the aftermath of the 1877–1878 Russo Turkish war, and ruled the Ottoman Empire for the next three decades in a personal dictatorship. Opposition politicians dubbed this era of Ottoman history as the era of &quot;İstibdat&quot; (despotism). Abdul Hamid revived the use of the title &quot;Başnazır&quot;, or Prime Minister, though he eventually settled on his government chiefs being called &quot;Sadr-ı Azam&quot;, or Grand Vizier.
=== Second Constitutional Monarchy (1908–1920) ===
The Young Turks force Abdul Hamid II to reinstate the constitution and parliament on 24 July 1908. Political parties were introduced in the Second Constitutional Era.


=== Last grand viziers (1920–1922) ===
Following the end of the Second Constitutional Era in 1920, the Ottoman Empire was in a state of diarchy, with the government based in Constantinople and the government based in Ankara both asserting themselves as the legitimate Turkish government. Mehmed VI abolished the constitution and suspended parliament when the Chamber of Deputies voted in support of the National Pact in the Turkish War of Independence.

During the Conference of London, Ahmet Tevfik Pasha recognized the ambassador of the Grand National Assembly as the legitimate government of Turkey. On 1 November 1922, the Grand National Assembly voted to abolish the Sultanate. Ahmet Tevfik Pasha was the last grand vizier of the Ottoman Empire, and resigned from the premiership on November 4, 1922, without a replacement.

== Prime Minister of the Government of the Grand National Assembly (1920–1923) ==

==See also==

*List of prime ministers of Turkey
*List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire
*List of Kapudan Pashas

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===

===Further reading===
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="4" end="16" title="grand vizier" label="grand vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="24" end="38" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="92" end="107" title="Ottoman Turkish language" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="143" end="157" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="165" end="171" title="Sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="179" end="193" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q159733" start="213" end="230" title="power of attorney" label="power of attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="272" end="278" title="Sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332014" start="323" end="331" title="Tanzimat Fermanı" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q233486" start="354" end="369" title="Second Constitutional Era" label="1908 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="424" end="430" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18693391" start="473" end="489" title="Imperial Council (Ottoman Empire)" label="Imperial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="662" end="676" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="710" end="723" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572401" start="911" end="946" title="Çandarlı Kara Halil Hayreddin Pasha" label="Çandarlı Kara Halil Hayreddin Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="1765" end="1780" title="Ottoman Turkish language" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1786" end="1812" title="Office of the Grand Vizier" label="Office of the Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="2011" end="2025" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="2086" end="2094" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545916" start="2107" end="2131" title="First Constitutional Era (Ottoman Empire)" label="First Constitutional Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q233486" start="2153" end="2178" title="Second Constitutional Era (Ottoman Empire)" label="Second Constitutional Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="2409" end="2416" title="speaker (politics)" label="speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080059" start="2424" end="2430" title="Senate of the Ottoman Empire" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333555" start="2465" end="2483" title="General Assembly of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2515" end="2533" title="Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430415" start="2547" end="2571" title="Prime Minister of Turkey" label="Prime Minister of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q247611" start="2852" end="2869" title="Ahmed Izzet Pasha" label="Ahmed Izzet Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q931948" start="2874" end="2892" title="Salih Hulusi Pasha" label="Salih Hulusi Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="3152" end="3165" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18693391" start="3271" end="3286" title="Imperial Council (Ottoman Empire)" label="Divan-ı Hümayun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18693391" start="3309" end="3325" title="Imperial Council (Ottoman Empire)" label="Imperial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="3472" end="3480" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572451" start="3503" end="3539" title="Çandarlı Halil Pasha the Younger" label="Çandarlızade Halil Pasha the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="3581" end="3590" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809540" start="3646" end="3668" title="Mehmed Emin Rauf Pasha" label="Mehmed Emin Rauf Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="3725" end="3737" title="Abdülmecid I" label="Abdülmecid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="3808" end="3816" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332014" start="3837" end="3850" title="Edict of Gülhane" label="Gülhane edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="3876" end="3887" title="Abdulmejid I" label="Abdul Mecid"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="3926" end="3934" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545916" start="4003" end="4044" title="First Constitutional Era" label="First Constitutional Monarchy (1876–1878)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109561686" start="4103" end="4112" title="1876 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="overthrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q151500" start="4127" end="4136" title="Abdulaziz" label="Abdülaziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q199827" start="4141" end="4148" title="Murad V" label="Murad V"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="4150" end="4163" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdülhamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318452" start="4178" end="4190" title="Constitution of the Ottoman Empire" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333555" start="4195" end="4205" title="Ottoman Parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="4244" end="4276" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="&amp;quot;İstibdat&amp;quot; (1878–1908)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="4362" end="4389" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="1877–1878 Russo Turkish war"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="4569" end="4578" title="despotism" label="despotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q233486" start="4776" end="4818" title="Second Constitutional Era" label="Second Constitutional Monarchy (1908–1920)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="4827" end="4838" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="4845" end="4859" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdul Hamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="4908" end="4920" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="24 July 1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q233486" start="4963" end="4988" title="Second Constitutional Era" label="Second Constitutional Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q233486" start="5056" end="5081" title="Second Constitutional Era" label="Second Constitutional Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q162543" start="5280" end="5289" title="Mehmed VI" label="Mehmed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q13380338" start="5351" end="5370" title="Chamber of Deputies (Ottoman Empire)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q643030" start="5395" end="5408" title="Misak-ı Millî" label="National Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="5416" end="5443" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082044" start="5457" end="5477" title="Conference of London of 1921–1922" label="Conference of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q276098" start="5479" end="5497" title="Ahmet Tevfik Pasha" label="Ahmet Tevfik Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949827" start="5531" end="5554" title="Government of the Grand National Assembly" label="Grand National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="5619" end="5642" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Grand National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809270" start="5652" end="5673" title="Abolition of the Ottoman sultanate" label="abolish the Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949827" start="5847" end="5888" title="Government of the Grand National Assembly" label="Government of the Grand National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q474514" start="5920" end="5953" title="List of prime ministers of Turkey" label="List of prime ministers of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="5955" end="5992" title="List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire" label="List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575776" start="5994" end="6016" title="List of Ottoman Kaptan Pashas" label="List of Kapudan Pashas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962653" wikidata="Q2304475" url="?curid=962653" title="South Ealing tube station">
<text>South Ealing tube station is a London Underground station in the London Borough of Ealing. The station is on the Heathrow branch of the Piccadilly line, between Northfields and Acton Town stations. It is located on South Ealing Road and is in Travelcard Zone 3.

==Station information==
South Ealing tube station has a waiting room.

The station does not offer step-free access from the train or platform to street level.

Like all other London Underground stations, South Ealing has a &quot;Labyrinth&quot; artwork by Mark Wallinger, in place since 2013.

===Connections===
London Buses route 65 and night route N65 serve the station directly, with routes E3 and N11 stopping nearby.

==History==
South Ealing station was opened as a stop on the District Railway (later the District line) on 1 May 1883. These trains were initially steam-powered, but the line has been electrified since 1905.

The station has been served by the Piccadilly line since 9 January 1933. It was modernised between 1935 and 1936, with the original buildings replaced, the eastbound platform receiving a new concrete canopy and waiting room and electric lights being installed.

The District line service was withdrawn in 1964.

The station building was again replaced in 1983. It was refurbished once more in 2006.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==

* London Transport Museum Photographic Archive
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2304475" start="0" end="25" title="South Ealing tube station" label="South Ealing tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="31" end="49" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q207218" start="65" end="89" title="London Borough of Ealing" label="London Borough of Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="113" end="121" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q207689" start="136" end="151" title="Piccadilly line" label="Piccadilly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q764016" start="161" end="172" title="Northfields tube station" label="Northfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q344481" start="177" end="187" title="Acton Town tube station" label="Acton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q41172223" start="243" end="260" title="Travelcard Zone 3" label="Travelcard Zone 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q674251" start="319" end="331" title="waiting room" label="waiting room"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351982" start="492" end="501" title="Labyrinth (artwork)" label="Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285270" start="519" end="533" title="Mark Wallinger" label="Mark Wallinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="575" end="587" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670130" start="594" end="596" title="London Buses route 65" label="65"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="613" end="616" title="London Buses route N65" label="N65"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="657" end="659" title="London Buses route E3" label="E3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="664" end="667" title="London Buses route N11" label="N11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="747" end="763" title="District Railway" label="District Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="775" end="788" title="District line" label="District line"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="833" end="846" title="Steam locomotive" label="steam-powered"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962655" wikidata="Q8425725" url="?curid=962655" title="Tseung Kwan O Industrial Estate">
<text>Tseung Kwan O Industrial Estate (, branded as ) is located in the southeast of the Tseung Kwan O New Town, Sai Kung District in Hong Kong.

==Location==
Tseung Kwan O Industrial Estate has an area of 75 ha (other sources mention 86 ha and 95 ha). It is located 3 km south east of Tseung Kwan O New Town. The Estate has a marine frontage and was partly built on reclaimed land. Reclamation and servicing work were completed in 1997.

The former island of Fat Tong Chau is located at the southwest of the Estate. The South East New Territories Landfill (SENT) is located at the south of the Estate and Fat Tong Chau.

==Tenants==
The headquarters of Television Broadcasts Limited (TVB), known as TVB City, is located in the Industrial Estate at 77 Chun Choi Street, and broadcasts the Cantonese-language TV station TVB Jade and the English-language TVB Pearl.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8425725" start="0" end="31" title="Tseung Kwan O Industrial Estate" label="Tseung Kwan O Industrial Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q371567" start="83" end="105" title="Tseung Kwan O" label="Tseung Kwan O New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q155697" start="107" end="124" title="Sai Kung District" label="Sai Kung District"/>
<link wikidata="Q371567" start="280" end="302" title="Tseung Kwan O New Town" label="Tseung Kwan O New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q13642695" start="361" end="375" title="Land reclamation in Hong Kong" label="reclaimed land"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437227" start="454" end="467" title="Fat Tong Chau" label="Fat Tong Chau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972828" start="552" end="556" title="Waste management in Hong Kong" label="SENT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195543" start="648" end="677" title="Television Broadcasts Limited" label="Television Broadcasts Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672164" start="694" end="702" title="TVB City" label="TVB City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258605" start="813" end="821" title="TVB Jade" label="TVB Jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339860" start="847" end="856" title="TVB Pearl" label="TVB Pearl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962660" wikidata="Q847886" url="?curid=962660" title="Line 10 (Beijing Subway)">
<text>Line 10 of the Beijing Subway () is the second loop line in Beijing&#x27;s rapid transit network as well as the second longest and most widely used line. The line is in length, and runs entirely underground through Haidian, Chaoyang and Fengtai Districts, either directly underneath or just beyond the 3rd Ring Road. The Line 10 loop is situated between outside the Line 2 loop, and intersects with every subways line through the city centre, with 24 transfer stations and 45 stations in all. The line&#x27;s color is capri.

Upon completion in May 2013, it held the record as the world&#x27;s longest rapid transit loop line, an acolade it held until March 2023. It remains one of the longest entirely underground subway lines in the world, requiring 104 minutes to complete one full journey in either direction.

==History==
===Planning===
The Beijing Subway network was originally conceived to have only one loop line. The booming economy and explosive population growth of Beijing put huge demand on Line 2, surpassing its designed capacity. In 2001 and 2002, the China Academy of Urban Planning and Design proposed two &quot;L-shaped&quot; lines named Line 10 and 11. Together they would form a second loop around Beijing and relieve pressure on line 2.

===Phase I===
On December 27, 2003, in preparation for the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, Phase 1 of Line 10 started construction. On July 19, 2008, Phase I of Line 10 entered operation ahead of the opening of the Olympic Games. It was in length and had 22 stations. Phase I consisted of the northern and eastern sides of Line 10&#x27;s rectangular loop from to forming an inverted L-shaped line.

===Phase II===
Construction on Phase II began on December 28, 2007. which meant that the original plan for Line 11 was not incorporated into the final network design and was instead absorbed into Line 10. Line 10 formed the second full loop around Beijing. In 2010, the Ministry of Railways proposed that Fengtai Railway Station was to be renovated and expanded to become a bigger intercity rail terminal for Beijing, with access to the Beijing-Guangzhou high-speed railway. The rationale was to ease intercity traffic pressure on Beijing West railway station. Due to the need to reorganize the stations on Line 10 to better serve the new rail terminal, work stopped on 2 stations, namely Mengjiacun (孟家村) and Niwa (泥洼). The planning department proposed that the original Mengjiacun and Niwa subway stations be merged into the new Fengtai railway station, known as the &quot;three stations into one&quot; program. Local residents, after realizing their travel to a subway station would be greatly lengthened, quickly opposed the plan. Planners reconsidered and moved Niwa station north to its current position and Mengjiacun station north to be renamed as Fengtai Railway Station. The original station shells were demolished and new stations built in their respective new locations. Niwa station started reconstruction in February 2012, while Fengtai railway station started on April 11, 2012. This made the late 2012 opening date for that section of Line 10 highly unlikely and was postponed to the next year. On December 30, 2012, the first section of Phase II, consisting of the southern and western sides of the loop opened. With the opening of Phase I and Phase II, Line 10 became a &quot;C&quot; shape.

The near completion of Line 10 led to rapid growth of Line 10&#x27;s ridership. At the same time, some traffic from Line 1 was diverted to the parallel and newly opened Line 6, allowing Line 10 to overtake Line 1 as Beijing&#x27;s busiest subway line.
The Beijing Subway started operating express trains that ran non-stop between Songjiazhuang to Jinsong to alleviate traffic in the southeastern section of Line 10. These express trains stopped operating after the completion of the loop.

The loop was fully enclosed on May 5, 2013 with the opening of Fengtai and Niwa stations, as well as the infill Jiaomen East. Initially, Line 10 services consisted of a &quot;full-loop&quot; service that make the journey through all 45 stations in 104 minutes, and &quot;partial-loop&quot; trains that run from Chedaogou in the north-west to Songjiazhuang in the south-east before turning back. With the delivery of more rolling stock, &quot;partial-loop&quot; trains were removed and all trains are now serving the full loop at a headway of 2 minutes and 15 seconds. By 2014, the completed loop carried on average 1.69 million passengers per day. By 2019, large sections of Line 10 operated above 100% capacity, particularly the eastern and northern sections. Beijing Subway has responded by increasing the frequency of trains to every two minutes and removing some seats on trains to increase capacity. 

==Operation==

From near Wanliu Park in Haidian District, Line 10 runs straight east, between the northern 3rd and 4th Ring Roads. At Xitucheng, the line meets the northern section of the Yuan dynasty earthen city wall, called &quot;tucheng&quot;. Jiandemen and Anzhenmen stations are named after former gates in the wall. At Beitucheng, Line 8 (Phase 1) extends off Line 10 and provides access to the Beijing Olympic Green. Farther east, Line 10 turns south after the and follows the eastern 3rd Ring Road straight south to in Chaoyang District. The Bagou-Jingsong section constituted Phase I of Line 10, which first opened in July 2008, and connects the university district in Haidian with the embassy district and Beijing CBD. A trip from Bagou to Jingsong takes about 40 minutes. The full loop takes about 104 minutes.

===Fare===

Starting fare of RMB(¥) 3 that increases according to the distance fare scheme introduced in December 2014.

Regular subway users can use a Yikatong card, which offers even cheaper journeys, as well as mobile phone apps, which deploy payment via a QR code.

===Hours of Operation===
The first train on the inner (clockwise) loop departs from Xiju towards Shoujingmao at 5:20am. The first train on the outer (counter-clockwise) loop departs from Shoujingmao towards Xiju at 6:12am. The last inner loop train leaves Xiju for Bagou at 11:29pm. The last outer loop train leaves Shoujingmao for Chedaogou at 11:06pm. For the official timetable, see.

===Safety===
There are subway public security bureaus (police stations) located in the , and stations. Emergencies can be reported by calling 110 or 64011327.

==Stations==
Some trains terminate at stations marked &#x27;*&#x27;.

==Technology==
===Rolling Stock===
Line 10 utilizes a fleet of 6-car DKZ15 trains manufactured by CRRC Changchun Railway Vehicles. Initially when Phase I opened the line was operated with a fleet of only 40 trainsets (240 cars). Some sets operated on the Olympic section of Line 8 before Line 8 was extended and acquired its own dedicated rolling stock. When Line 10 Phase II opened the fleet was expanded to 84 trains. However the two existing depots serving Line 10 had insufficient capacity for the entire fleet. Therefore, only 76 trainsets could operate on the line with 8 being temporary stored in other Beijing Subway depots. With the opening of the new depot in Songjiazhuang and the need to reduce the headway on line to decrease crowding, an additional 32 trainsets were ordered. The fleet grew to 116 trainsets allowing Line 10 to operate at a headway of every 2 minutes throughout the line during rush hour. Some trains had some seats removed to increase capacity.
===Signaling system===
Siemens Transportation Systems and China Railway Signaling &amp; Communication Corp. have equipped the entire line with Siemens&#x27;s Trainguard MT Communication Based Train Control (CBTC) system. As a fallback, ETCS Level 1 is also available.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*&quot;New Beijing subway to open soon.&quot; &quot;China Daily&quot;. February 28, 2008.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q847886" start="0" end="7" title="Line 10 (Beijing Subway)" label="Line 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q235319" start="15" end="29" title="Beijing Subway" label="Beijing Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q145179" start="47" end="56" title="orbital (metro)" label="loop line"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="60" end="67" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="75" end="88" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q393454" start="215" end="222" title="Haidian District" label="Haidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q394701" start="224" end="232" title="Chaoyang District (Beijing)" label="Chaoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q393831" start="237" end="244" title="Fengtai District" label="Fengtai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="302" end="315" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q680973" start="366" end="372" title="Line 2 (Beijing Subway)" label="Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="602" end="615" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037403" start="694" end="727" title="List of longest subway tunnel sections" label="entirely underground subway lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q680973" start="911" end="920" title="Line 2, Beijing Subway" label="loop line"/>
<link wikidata="Q28411472" start="1068" end="1110" title="China Academy of Urban Planning and Design" label="China Academy of Urban Planning and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="1319" end="1339" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038182" start="1930" end="1950" title="Ministry of Railways (China)" label="Ministry of Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712677" start="2097" end="2133" title="Beijing–Guangzhou–Shenzhen–Hong Kong High-Speed Railway" label="Beijing-Guangzhou high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q523887" start="2191" end="2219" title="Beijing West railway station" label="Beijing West railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q748987" start="3486" end="3492" title="Line 1, Beijing Subway" label="Line 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553138" start="3539" end="3545" title="Line 6, Beijing Subway" label="Line 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q898095" start="3700" end="3713" title="Songjiazhuang Station" label="Songjiazhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q847852" start="3717" end="3724" title="Jinsong Station" label="Jinsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q130440" start="3923" end="3930" title="Fengtai railway station" label="Fengtai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041866" start="3935" end="3939" title="Niwa station" label="Niwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q75262" start="3972" end="3984" title="Jiaomen East station" label="Jiaomen East"/>
<link wikidata="Q75264" start="4171" end="4180" title="Chedaogou station" label="Chedaogou"/>
<link wikidata="Q898095" start="4202" end="4215" title="Songjiazhuang station" label="Songjiazhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q393454" start="4807" end="4823" title="Haidian District" label="Haidian District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="4874" end="4877" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562503" start="4882" end="4885" title="4th Ring Road" label="4th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="4955" end="4967" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812732" start="4968" end="4985" title="Beijing city fortifications" label="earthen city wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q847771" start="5105" end="5121" title="Line 8 (Beijing Subway)" label="Line 8 (Phase 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q912817" start="5177" end="5190" title="Olympic Green" label="Olympic Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="5260" end="5273" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q394701" start="5295" end="5312" title="Chaoyang District, Beijing" label="Chaoyang District"/>
<link wikidata="Q393454" start="5446" end="5453" title="Haidian District" label="Haidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q903203" start="5484" end="5495" title="Beijing CBD" label="Beijing CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="5620" end="5626" title="Renminbi" label="RMB(¥)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972048" start="5743" end="5751" title="Yikatong" label="Yikatong"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203" start="5851" end="5858" title="QR code" label="QR code"/>
<link wikidata="Q906722" start="6279" end="6301" title="Chinese public security bureau" label="public security bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q848225" start="6577" end="6608" title="CRRC Changchun Railway Vehicles" label="CRRC Changchun Railway Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q847771" start="6753" end="6759" title="Line 8, Beijing Subway" label="Line 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q391895" start="7479" end="7509" title="Siemens Mobility" label="Siemens Transportation Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536603" start="7614" end="7627" title="Trainguard MT CBTC" label="Trainguard MT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120452" start="7628" end="7668" title="Communications-based train control" label="Communication Based Train Control (CBTC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q604804" start="7692" end="7696" title="European Train Control System" label="ETCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q851422" start="7822" end="7833" title="China Daily" label="China Daily"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962664" wikidata="Q228819" url="?curid=962664" title="Far">
<text>Far or FAR may refer to:
==Government==
* Federal Acquisition Regulation, US
* Federal Aviation Regulations, US
* Florida Administrative Register, US

== Military and paramilitary ==
* Rebel Armed Forces (Spanish: &quot;), a defunct guerilla organization in Guatemala
* Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces (Spanish: &quot;)
* Royal Moroccan Armed Forces (French: &quot;)
* Rwandan Armed Forces (French: &quot;)
* Revolutionary Anarchist Front (Spanish: &quot;&quot;)

==Music==
* Far (band), California, US
* &quot;Far&quot; (album), by Regina Spektor
* &quot;Far&quot;, an EP by Tina Dico
* &quot;Far&quot;, a song by George Hrab
* &quot;Far&quot;, a song by Longpigs
* &quot;Far&quot;, a song by Gunna from the album &quot;Wunna&quot;
* &quot;F.A.R.&quot; (album), by Japanese singer-songwriter Marie Ueda
* &quot;Far&quot;, by C418 from &quot;Minecraft - Volume Beta&quot;, 2013
*&quot;Far&quot;, a song by SZA from &quot;SOS&quot; (2022)

==Places==
* Far`, a village in Saudi Arabia
* Far, Iran, a village in Markazi Province
* Far, West Virginia, US
* Far Mountain, a mountain in British Columbia, Canada
* Fargo (Amtrak station), North Dakota, US, station code
* Faroe Islands, IIGA country code
* Hector International Airport, in Fargo, North Dakota, US, IATA code and FAA LID

==Science, technology, and medicine==
* Far Manager, a file manager for Microsoft Windows
* IPCC First Assessment Report, 1990
* Fuel–air ratio

==Other uses==
* FAR (Tracteurs FAR), a former French truck manufacturer
* &quot;&quot;, a 2018 video game
** &quot;&quot;, a sequel to &quot;Lone Sails&quot;
* Far Breton, a custard-based dessert
* FAR Rabat, a Moroccan football club
* Fataleka language, ISO 639-3 code
* Floor area ratio in real estate
* Fund for Armenian Relief
* Funlola Aofiyebi-Raimi, Nigerian actress
* The Ancient Roman name for the wheat emmer
* Financial Accounting and Reporting in the Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination

==See also==
* Fars (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228819" start="0" end="3" title="Far" label="Far"/>
<link wikidata="Q228819" start="7" end="10" title="Far" label="FAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439994" start="42" end="72" title="Federal Acquisition Regulation" label="Federal Acquisition Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q464490" start="79" end="107" title="Federal Aviation Regulations" label="Federal Aviation Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182968" start="114" end="145" title="Florida Administrative Register" label="Florida Administrative Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060578" start="185" end="203" title="Rebel Armed Forces" label="Rebel Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q663472" start="270" end="302" title="Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces" label="Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q34511" start="323" end="350" title="Royal Moroccan Armed Forces" label="Royal Moroccan Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075392" start="370" end="390" title="Rwandan Armed Forces" label="Rwandan Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q105979818" start="410" end="439" title="Revolutionary Anarchist Front" label="Revolutionary Anarchist Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q455060" start="477" end="487" title="Far (band)" label="Far (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761663" start="506" end="529" title="Far (album)" label="&amp;quot;Far&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q457272" start="577" end="586" title="Tina Dico" label="Tina Dico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540808" start="616" end="627" title="George Hrab" label="George Hrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043165" start="657" end="665" title="Longpigs" label="Longpigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q95979380" start="722" end="727" title="Wunna (album)" label="Wunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767914" start="736" end="762" title="F.A.R. (album)" label="&amp;quot;F.A.R.&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="843" end="866" title="Music of Minecraft#Minecraft – Volume Beta" label="Minecraft - Volume Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q115271946" start="922" end="925" title="SOS (SZA album)" label="SOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434665" start="953" end="957" title="Far`" label="Far`"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434472" start="987" end="996" title="Far, Iran" label="Far, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153582" start="1030" end="1048" title="Far, West Virginia" label="Far, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434584" start="1055" end="1067" title="Far Mountain" label="Far Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435101" start="1110" end="1132" title="Fargo (Amtrak station)" label="Fargo (Amtrak station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="1167" end="1180" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699491" start="1202" end="1230" title="Hector International Airport" label="Hector International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386527" start="1323" end="1334" title="Far Manager" label="Far Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972980" start="1375" end="1403" title="IPCC First Assessment Report" label="IPCC First Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q178895" start="1412" end="1426" title="Fuel–air ratio" label="Fuel–air ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069840" start="1445" end="1464" title="FAR (Tracteurs FAR)" label="FAR (Tracteurs FAR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396059" start="1589" end="1599" title="Far Breton" label="Far Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270141" start="1627" end="1636" title="FAR Rabat" label="FAR Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067168" start="1665" end="1682" title="Fataleka language" label="Fataleka language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370687" start="1701" end="1717" title="Floor area ratio" label="Floor area ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508876" start="1735" end="1759" title="Fund for Armenian Relief" label="Fund for Armenian Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149393" start="1762" end="1784" title="Funlola Aofiyebi-Raimi" label="Funlola Aofiyebi-Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q167339" start="1842" end="1847" title="emmer" label="emmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885018" start="1892" end="1939" title="Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination" label="Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q256092" start="1956" end="1977" title="Fars (disambiguation)" label="Fars (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962667" wikidata="Q453448" url="?curid=962667" title="Near">
<text>NEAR or Near may refer to:
== People ==
* Thomas J. Near, US evolutionary ichthyologist
* Near, a developer who created the higan emulator

== Science, mathematics, technology, biology, and medicine ==
* National Emergency Alarm Repeater (NEAR), a former alarm device to warn civilians of a foreign nuclear attack on the United States
* National Emergency Airway Registry (NEAR), a patient registry for intubations in the United States
* Nicking enzyme amplification reaction (NEAR), a method of DNA amplification
* NEAR Protocol, a layer-1 blockchain
* NEAR Shoemaker, a spacecraft that studied the near-Earth asteroid Eros
* Nearness or proximity space
*&quot;Near&quot;, a city browser by NearGlobal

== Television, film, music, and books ==
* Near (Death Note), &quot;Nate River&quot;, a character

== Other uses ==
* Near v. Minnesota, a U.S. press freedom Supreme Court decision
* New England Auto Racers Hall of Fame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q453448" start="0" end="4" title="Near" label="NEAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q453448" start="8" end="12" title="Near" label="Near"/>
<link wikidata="Q21503037" start="42" end="56" title="Thomas J. Near" label="Thomas J. Near"/>
<link wikidata="Q68341644" start="90" end="94" title="Near (programmer)" label="Near"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927356" start="124" end="129" title="higan (emulator)" label="higan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000239" start="204" end="237" title="National Emergency Alarm Repeater" label="National Emergency Alarm Repeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282128" start="382" end="398" title="patient registry" label="patient registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028483" start="438" end="475" title="Nicking enzyme amplification reaction" label="Nicking enzyme amplification reaction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="516" end="529" title="NEAR Protocol" label="NEAR Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q217188" start="554" end="568" title="NEAR Shoemaker" label="NEAR Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252877" start="639" end="654" title="proximity space" label="proximity space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984345" start="692" end="702" title="NearGlobal" label="NearGlobal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453043" start="747" end="764" title="Near (Death Note)" label="Near (Death Note)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984410" start="822" end="839" title="Near v. Minnesota" label="Near v. Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007155" start="887" end="923" title="New England Auto Racers Hall of Fame" label="New England Auto Racers Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962671" wikidata="Q617843" url="?curid=962671" title="Tupolev Tu-334">
<text>The Tupolev Tu-334 () was a Russian short-to-medium range airliner project that was developed to replace the aging Tupolev Tu-134 and Yak-42s in service around the world. The airframe was based on a shortened Tu-204 fuselage and a scaled-down version of that aircraft&#x27;s wing. Unlike the Tu-204, however, the Tu-334 has a T-tail and engines mounted on the sides of the rear fuselage instead of under the wings. With the nationalisation of the Russian aircraft companies in 2009 to form United Aircraft Corporation it was decided not to continue with the programme.

==Development==
The Tupolev Design Bureau introduced the Tu-334 in early 1989 as an eventual propfan-powered airliner to potentially enter service for Aeroflot in 1995. However, it would have an interim turbofan-powered version that would begin airline service around 1991–1992. Consuming about 20 percent less fuel than the best Soviet turbofan, the propfan engine would be a then-unnamed geared powerplant from the Lotarev engine design bureau. The engine would have a thrust specific fuel consumption (TSFC) of , resulting in a per-passenger aircraft fuel consumption rate of . The turbofan-powered version of the Tu-334 would use Lotarev D-436T engines with a TSFC of and a bypass ratio of 6.5, and it would consume per passenger. The propfan Tu-334 would seat 104-137 passengers, compared with 86-102 passengers for the shorter, turbofan Tu-334.

Tupolev confirmed the use of the D-436 for the turbofan version shortly afterward. However, they initiated discussions with International Aero Engines (IAE) at the 1989 Paris Air Show to discuss using a derated version of IAE&#x27;s V2500 engine. The talks, which continued through at least the end of the year, were attributed to worries that the Lotarev could not meet Tupolev&#x27;s timeline or fuel burn targets, or that Tupolev was canceling the propfan version. There was also concern that Tupolev could not meet Soviet state carrier Aeroflot&#x27;s urgent capacity needs quick enough. In this scenario, the Soviet aircraft production ministry could allow the Yakovlev Design Bureau to compete and build the Yak-42M (a Yak-42 airliner derivative) because of its quicker availability, despite the ministry&#x27;s assumed preference for the Tu-334.

Information about the propfan engine began to be revealed during the second quarter of 1990, although the details were often conflicting. In April 1990, while announcing the interim aircraft&#x27;s service entry date of 1993, Tupolev&#x27;s chief designer said that the ultrahigh bypass engine to be used would be a Lotarev (now renamed to the Progress design bureau) propfan resembling the General Electric GE36 UDF, and not the propfan it had been working on. However, the Central Institute of Aviation Motors (CIAM), a Soviet engine research institute, reported that Tupolev expected to have a propfan Tu-334 operating by the 1995-1997 period, probably using a geared propfan instead of gearless. Then a subsequent report named the Tu-334 propfan engine as the Lotarev D-27, a , powerplant with a TSFC of . The D-27 would also power the newly announced Yakovlev Yak-46 propfan airliner, which was similar to the Yak-42M competitor but used two propfans instead of three turbofans in the aft fuselage. Three weeks later, Tupolev said that government officials would decide shortly between two D-27 offshoot engines from the Progress design bureau for the final Tu-334 version in 1996: a Progress D-227 propfan, or a Progress D-527 &quot;super contrafan,&quot; an ungeared but ducted contra-rotating powerplant with a bypass ratio of 18. Days earlier, the Soviet Union premiered a running propfan engine before Western audiences for the first time, flying an Ilyushin Il-76LL testbed aircraft with one installed Progress D-236 engine to the ILA Air Show in Hannover, Germany. Although the Soviets declined in Hannover to name the aircraft that would use the D-236, an October 1990 article named that geared engine as the powerplant for the final Tu-334 variant, which would compete against the D-27-powered Yak-46 for Aeroflot&#x27;s Tupolev Tu-134 replacement order.

Work commenced on the Tu-334 in the early 1990s, but proceeded slowly due to funding problems arising from the breakup of the Soviet Union. A prototype was displayed in 1995, but this was little more than a mockup with few systems installed. A functional aircraft first flew on 8 February 1999, and later that year, agreements were put in place for MiG to undertake part of the production of the airliner. A Russian type certificate was obtained – after some delay – on 30 December 2003.

Development remained slow due to protracted budget problems. In turn, the certification of the aircraft and its planned entry into serial production was delayed multiple times. As of December 2006 there were firm orders for the Tupolev Tu-334 from seven airlines, including Atlant-Soyuz Airlines and there were letters of intent from 24 airlines to obtain another 297 airplanes. The price per unit for the business version is estimated to be around $43–44 million.

One of the projected customers for the type was Iran. The Iran Aviation Industries Organization (IAIO) was in negotiations to purchase licenses to assemble the aircraft in Iran by 2011 and manufacture them completely by 2015 alongside the Tu-214. Nothing concrete became of these negotiations before the cancellation of the Tu-334 programme.

As late as 2008, Tupolev reported that a total of about 100 airlines had expressed an interest in placing orders for Tu-334s; on 31 July 2008, Tupolev Managing Director Sergei Ilyushenkov announced that production was targeted to begin no later than January 2009. However, this date also passed without any reported progress on Tu-334 serial production.

In 2009, with the project years behind the projected schedule and only two examples built and flying ten years after the first flight, the Tu-334 came under review during the rationalisation of the Russian aircraft companies, which led to the formation of United Aircraft Corporation. In mid-2009, the decision was taken to not continue with the Tu-334 programme and instead focus efforts on the Sukhoi Superjet 100, the Antonov An-148, and the Irkut MC-21.

==Variants==
;Tu-334-100: Basic version, with accommodation for 72 passengers in mixed-class configuration (12 first-class and 60 tourist-class) or 102 passengers in high-density layout. Two Progress D-436T1 turbofans.
;Tu-334-100C: Proposed combi (passenger/freight) version of Tu-334-100.
;Tu-334-100D: Planned stretched, extended-range version. Fuselage stretched by and longer span () wing. Powered by two Progress D-436T2 engines.
;Tu-334-120: Planned derivative of Tu-334-100, powered by two Rolls-Royce BR715-55 engines.
;Tu-334-120D: Based on the Tu-334-100D, but with two Rolls-Royce BR-715-55 engines.
;Tu-334C: Production cargo variant.
;Tu-336: Proposed liquid natural gas-fueled version, with cryogenic fuel tanks above the passenger cabin.
;Tu-354: Further stretched version, originally designated Tu-334-200. Stretched by over Tu-334-100, with accommodation for up to 126 passengers. Powered by two Progress D-436T2 or Rolls-Royce BR-715-55 engines, the Tu-354&#x27;s landing gear was strengthened to use four-wheel bogies.

==Specifications (Tu-334-100)==
==See also==

==References== 

==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q617843" start="4" end="18" title="Tupolev Tu-334" label="Tupolev Tu-334"/>
<link wikidata="Q357545" start="36" end="57" title="Short haul" label="short-to-medium range"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="58" end="66" title="airliner" label="airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q159067" start="115" end="129" title="Tupolev Tu-134" label="Tupolev Tu-134"/>
<link wikidata="Q505649" start="134" end="140" title="Yak-42" label="Yak-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q466590" start="209" end="215" title="Tupolev Tu-204" label="Tu-204"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414362" start="326" end="332" title="T-tail" label="T-tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136226" start="490" end="517" title="United Aircraft Corporation" label="United Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194009" start="590" end="611" title="Tupolev Design Bureau" label="Tupolev Design Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634412" start="663" end="670" title="propfan" label="propfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="721" end="729" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="773" end="781" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="960" end="966" title="geared" label="geared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676085" start="987" end="1015" title="Ivchenko Progress" label="Lotarev engine design bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994681" start="1041" end="1073" title="thrust specific fuel consumption" label="thrust specific fuel consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591044" start="1204" end="1218" title="Progress D-436" label="Lotarev D-436T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973494" start="1248" end="1260" title="bypass ratio" label="bypass ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q561130" start="1546" end="1572" title="International Aero Engines" label="International Aero Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174352" start="1591" end="1605" title="Paris Air Show" label="Paris Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599083" start="1655" end="1660" title="V2500" label="V2500"/>
<link wikidata="Q333780" start="2088" end="2110" title="Yakovlev Design Bureau" label="Yakovlev Design Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q505649" start="2147" end="2153" title="Yak-42" label="Yak-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039320" start="2667" end="2688" title="General Electric GE36" label="General Electric GE36"/>
<link wikidata="Q190610" start="2751" end="2787" title="Central Institute of Aviation Motors" label="Central Institute of Aviation Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540226" start="3040" end="3052" title="Progress D-27" label="Lotarev D-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047187" start="3132" end="3147" title="Yakovlev Yak-46" label="Yakovlev Yak-46"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="3270" end="3278" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253262" start="3561" end="3576" title="contra-rotating" label="contra-rotating"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3633" end="3645" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q142549" start="3736" end="3750" title="Ilyushin Il-76" label="Ilyushin Il-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q47147162" start="3753" end="3769" title="testbed aircraft" label="testbed aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16697315" start="3789" end="3803" title="Progress D-236" label="Progress D-236"/>
<link wikidata="Q785990" start="3818" end="3830" title="ILA Berlin Air Show" label="ILA Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="3834" end="3851" title="Hannover, Germany" label="Hannover, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q159067" start="4111" end="4125" title="Tupolev Tu-134" label="Tupolev Tu-134"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="4257" end="4284" title="breakup of the Soviet Union" label="breakup of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188508" start="4495" end="4498" title="MiG" label="MiG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637428" start="4909" end="4930" title="Atlant-Soyuz Airlines" label="Atlant-Soyuz Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="5149" end="5153" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q466590" start="5340" end="5346" title="Tu-214" label="Tu-214"/>
<link wikidata="Q486066" start="6195" end="6214" title="Sukhoi Superjet 100" label="Sukhoi Superjet 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q607355" start="6220" end="6234" title="Antonov An-148" label="Antonov An-148"/>
<link wikidata="Q929769" start="6244" end="6255" title="Irkut MC-21" label="Irkut MC-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591044" start="6449" end="6463" title="Progress D-436" label="Progress D-436"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032623" start="6500" end="6505" title="Combi aircraft" label="combi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032984" start="6756" end="6776" title="Rolls-Royce BR700" label="Rolls-Royce BR715-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="6924" end="6942" title="liquid natural gas" label="liquid natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="6964" end="6973" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962676" wikidata="Q419999" url="?curid=962676" title="Transthyretin">
<text>Transthyretin (TTR or TBPA) is a transport protein in the plasma and cerebrospinal fluid that transports the thyroid hormone thyroxine (T4) and retinol to the liver. This is how transthyretin gained its name: &quot;transports thyroxine and retinol&quot;. The liver secretes TTR into the blood, and the choroid plexus secretes TTR into the cerebrospinal fluid.

TTR was originally called prealbumin (or thyroxine-binding prealbumin) because it migrated faster than albumin on electrophoresis gels. Prealbumin was felt to be a misleading name, it is not a synthetic precursor of albumin. The alternative name TTR was proposed by DeWitt Goodman in 1981. 

Transthyretin protein is encoded by the &quot;TTR&quot; gene located on the 18th chromosome.

==Binding affinities==
It functions in concert with two other thyroid hormone-binding proteins in the serum:

In cerebrospinal fluid TTR is the primary carrier of T4.
TTR also acts as a carrier of retinol (vitamin A) through its association with retinol-binding protein (RBP) in the blood and the CSF.
Less than 1% of TTR&#x27;s T4 binding sites are occupied in blood, which is taken advantage of below to prevent TTRs dissociation, misfolding and aggregation which leads to the degeneration of post-mitotic tissue.

Numerous other small molecules are known to bind in the thyroxine binding sites, including many natural products (such as resveratrol), drugs (tafamidis, diflunisal, and flufenamic acid), and toxicants (PCB).

==Structure==
TTR is a 55kDa homotetramer with a dimer of dimers quaternary structure that is synthesized in the liver, choroid plexus and retinal pigment epithelium for secretion into the bloodstream, cerebrospinal fluid and the eye, respectively. Each monomer is a 127-residue polypeptide rich in beta sheet structure. Association of two monomers via their edge beta-strands forms an extended beta sandwich. Further association of two of these dimers in a face-to-face fashion produces the homotetrameric structure and creates the two thyroxine binding sites per tetramer. This dimer-dimer interface, comprising the two T4 binding sites, is the weaker dimer-dimer interface and is the one that comes apart first in the process of tetramer dissociation.

==Role in disease==
TTR misfolding and aggregation is known to be associated with amyloid diseases including wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis, hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis, familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP), and familial amyloid cardiomyopathy (FAC).

TTR tetramer dissociation is known to be rate-limiting for amyloid fibril formation. However, the monomer also must partially denature in order for TTR to be mis-assembly competent, leading to a variety of aggregate structures, including amyloid fibrils.

At least 114 disease-causing mutations in this gene have been discovered. While wild type TTR can dissociate, misfold, and aggregate, leading to SSA (senile systemic amyloidosis), point mutations within TTR are known to destabilize the tetramer composed of mutant and wild-type TTR subunits, facilitating more facile dissociation and/or misfolding and amyloidogenesis. A replacement of valine by methionine at position 30 (TTR V30M) is the mutation most commonly associated with FAP. A position 122 replacement of valine by isoleucine (TTR V122I) is carried by 3.9% of the African-American population, and is the most common cause of FAC. SSA is estimated to affect over 25% of the population over age 80. Severity of disease varies greatly by mutation, with some mutations causing disease in the first or second decade of life, and others being more benign. Deposition of TTR amyloid is generally observed extracellularly, although TTR deposits are also clearly observed within the cardiomyocytes of the heart.

Treatment of familial (hereditary) TTR amyloid disease has historically relied on liver transplantation as a crude form of gene therapy. Because TTR is primarily produced in the liver, replacement of a liver containing a mutant TTR gene with a normal gene is able to reduce the mutant TTR levels in the body to &lt; 5% of pretransplant levels. Certain mutations, however, cause CNS amyloidosis, and due to their production by the choroid plexus, the CNS TTR amyloid diseases do not respond to gene therapy mediated by liver transplantation.

In 2011, the European Medicines Agency approved tafamidis (Vyndaqel) for the amelioration of FAP. Tafamidis kinetically stabilizes the TTR tetramer, preventing tetramer dissociation required for TTR amyloidogenesis and degradation of the autonomic nervous system and/or the peripheral nervous system and/or the heart.
TTR is also thought to have beneficial side effects, by binding to the infamous beta-amyloid protein, thereby preventing beta-amyloid&#x27;s natural tendency to accumulate into the plaques associated with the early stages of Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. Preventing plaque formation is thought to enable a cell to rid itself of this otherwise toxic protein form and, thus, help prevent and maybe even treat the disease.

There is now strong genetic and pharmacologic data (see European Medicines Agency website for the tafamidis clinical trial results) indicating that the process of amyloid fibril formation leads to the degeneration of post-mitotic tissue causing FAP and likely FAC and SSA. Evidence points to the oligomers generated in the process of amyloidogenicity leading to the observed proteotoxicity.

Transthyretin level in cerebrospinal fluid has also been found to be lower in patients with some neurobiological disorders such as schizophrenia. The reduced level of transthyretin in the CSF may indicate a lower thyroxine transport in brains of patients with schizophrenia.

Transthyretin is known to contain a Gla domain, and thus be dependent for production on post-translational modification requiring vitamin K, but the potential link between vitamin k status and thyroid function has not been explored.

Because transthyretin is made in part by the choroid plexus, it can be used as an immunohistochemical marker for choroid plexus papillomas as well as carcinomas.

As of March 2015, there are two ongoing clinical trials undergoing recruitment in the United States and worldwide to evaluate potential treatments for TTR amyloidosis.

== Interactions ==

Transthyretin has been shown to interact with perlecan.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 


== External links ==
* GeneReviews/NIH/NCBI/UW entry on Familial Transthyretin Amyloidosis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="0" end="13" title="Transthyretin" label="Transthyretin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="15" end="18" title="Transthyretin" label="TTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="22" end="26" title="Transthyretin" label="TBPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111029" start="33" end="50" title="transport protein" label="transport protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="58" end="64" title="blood plasma" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="69" end="88" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q216852" start="125" end="134" title="thyroxine" label="thyroxine"/>
<link wikidata="Q424976" start="144" end="151" title="retinol" label="retinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="209" end="220" title="Transthyretin" label="&amp;quot;trans"/>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="226" end="229" title="Transthyretin" label="thy"/>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="240" end="245" title="Transthyretin" label="retin"/>
<link wikidata="Q926250" start="302" end="316" title="choroid plexus" label="choroid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="339" end="358" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="387" end="397" title="Transthyretin" label="prealbumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169219" start="464" end="471" title="albumin" label="albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185098" start="475" end="490" title="electrophoresis" label="electrophoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419999" start="497" end="507" title="Transthyretin" label="Prealbumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424976" start="944" end="951" title="retinol" label="retinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q904727" start="993" end="1016" title="retinol-binding protein" label="retinol-binding protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q407329" start="1386" end="1397" title="resveratrol" label="resveratrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q519447" start="1407" end="1416" title="tafamidis" label="tafamidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602750" start="1418" end="1428" title="diflunisal" label="diflunisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q416341" start="1434" end="1449" title="flufenamic acid" label="flufenamic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="1467" end="1470" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="1587" end="1592" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q926250" start="1594" end="1608" title="choroid plexus" label="choroid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346242" start="1613" end="1639" title="retinal pigment epithelium" label="retinal pigment epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="1753" end="1764" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q283449" start="1773" end="1783" title="beta sheet" label="beta sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216852" start="2011" end="2020" title="thyroxine" label="thyroxine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740853" start="2312" end="2319" title="amyloid" label="amyloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808179" start="2339" end="2374" title="Wild-type transthyretin amyloid" label="wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844603" start="2376" end="2412" title="Familial amyloid polyneuropathy" label="hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844603" start="2414" end="2445" title="familial amyloid polyneuropathy" label="familial amyloid polyneuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432929" start="2457" end="2488" title="familial amyloid cardiomyopathy" label="familial amyloid cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740853" start="2735" end="2742" title="amyloid" label="amyloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415380" start="2933" end="2947" title="point mutation" label="point mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368191" start="3848" end="3869" title="liver transplantation" label="liver transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="4321" end="4346" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q519447" start="4356" end="4365" title="tafamidis" label="tafamidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q417667" start="4706" end="4718" title="beta-amyloid" label="beta-amyloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="4851" end="4875" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="5099" end="5124" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113512" start="5418" end="5432" title="proteotoxicity" label="proteotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="5532" end="5557" title="Neurobiological brain disorder" label="neurobiological disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="5566" end="5579" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24774909" start="5747" end="5757" title="Gla domain" label="Gla domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182338" start="5841" end="5850" title="vitamin K" label="vitamin K"/>
<link wikidata="Q926250" start="5990" end="6004" title="choroid plexus" label="choroid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q896177" start="6329" end="6337" title="Protein-protein interaction" label="interact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071346" start="6343" end="6351" title="perlecan" label="perlecan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962678" wikidata="Q1385867" url="?curid=962678" title="ESET NOD32">
<text>ESET NOD32 Antivirus, commonly known as NOD32, is an antivirus software package made by the Slovak company ESET. ESET NOD32 Antivirus is sold in two editions, Home Edition and Business Edition. The Business Edition packages add ESET Remote Administrator allowing for server deployment and management, mirroring of threat signature database updates and the ability to install on Microsoft Windows Server operating systems.

==History==

===NOD32===

The acronym NOD stands for &quot;Nemocnica na Okraji Disku&quot; (&quot;Hospital at the end of the disk&quot;), a pun related to the Czechoslovak medical drama series &quot;Nemocnice na kraji města&quot; (&quot;Hospital at the End of the City&quot;). The first version of NOD32 called NOD-ICE was a DOS-based program. It was created in 1987 by Miroslav Trnka and Peter Paško at the time when computer viruses started to become increasingly prevalent on PCs running DOS. Due to the limitations of the OS (lack of multitasking among others) it didn&#x27;t feature any on-demand/on-access protection nor most of the other features of the current versions. Besides the virus scanning and cleaning functionality it only featured heuristic analysis. With the increasing popularity of the Windows environment, advent of 32-bit CPUs, a shift in the PC market and increasing popularity of the Internet came the need for a completely different antivirus approach as well. Thus the original program was re-written and christened &quot;NOD32&quot; to emphasize both the radical shift from the previous version and its Win32 system compatibility.
Initially the program gained popularity with IT workers in Eastern European countries, as ESET was based in Slovakia. Though the program&#x27;s abbreviation was originally pronounced as individual letters, the worldwide use of the program led to the more common single-word pronunciation, sounding like the English word &quot;nod&quot;. Additionally, the &quot;32&quot; portion of the name was added with the release of a 32-bit version in the Windows 9x era. The company reached its 10000th update to virus definitions on June 25, 2014.

===Mail Security for Microsoft Exchange Server===
On March 10, 2010 ESET released ESET Mail Security for Microsoft Exchange Server, which contains both antimalware and antispam modules. It supports Microsoft Exchange 5.5, 2000, 2003, 2007 and 2010.

===Mobile Security===
ESET Mobile Security is the replacement for ESET Mobile Antivirus, which provided anti-malware and antispam functionality. ESET Mobile Security contains all the features of the older product and adds new anti-theft features such as SIM locking and remote wipe as well as a security audit and a firewall. Versions for Windows Mobile and Symbian OS were available as of September 2010, for both home and enterprise users.

===Remote Administrator===
ESET Remote Administrator is a central management console designed to allow network administrators to manage ESET software across a corporate network.

===Smart Security===
On November 5, 2007, ESET released an Internet security suite, ESET Smart Security version 3.0, to compete with other security suites by other companies such as McAfee, Symantec, AVG and Kaspersky. ESET Smart Security incorporates anti-spam and a bidirectional firewall along with traditional anti-malware features of ESET NOD32 Antivirus.

On March 2, 2009, ESET Smart Security version 4.0 was released, adding integration of ESET SysInspector; support for Mozilla Thunderbird and Windows Live Mail; a new self-defense module, an updated firewall module, ESET SysRescue and a wizard for creating bootable CD and USB flash drives. There were initially compatibility problems between ESET Smart Security 4.0 and Windows Vista Service Pack 2 but these were remedied by an update.

On August 17, 2010, ESET Smart Security version 4.2 was released with new features, enhancements and changes.

On September 14, 2011, ESET Smart Security version 5.0 was released.

On January 15, 2013, ESET Smart Security version 6.0 was released. This version included Anti-Theft feature for tracking of lost, misplaced or stolen laptop.

On October 16, 2013, ESET Smart Security version 7.0 was released. It offers enhanced operation memory scanning and blocks misuses of known exploits.

On October 2, 2014, ESET Smart Security version 8.0 was released. It adds exploit blocking for Java and botnet protection.

On October 13, 2015, ESET Smart Security version 9.0 was released.

===SysInspector===
ESET SysInspector is a diagnostic tool which allows in-depth analysis of various aspects of the operating system, including running processes, registry content, startup items and network connections. Anti-Stealth Technology is used to discover hidden objects (rootkits) in the Master Boot Record, boot sector, registry entries, drivers, services and processes. SysInspector Logs are standard XML files and can be submitted to IT experts for further analysis. Two logs can be compared to find a set of items not common to both logs. A log file can be saved as a service script for removing malicious objects from a computer.

===SysRescue Live===
ESET SysRescue Live is a Linux-based bootable Live CD/USB image that can be used to boot and clean heavily infected computers independent of the installed operating system. The program is offered free of charge, and can download updates if a network connection is present.

===Other programs===
ESET has released free standalone removers for malware when they are widespread, such as Mebroot.

==Development==

===File Security for Microsoft Windows Server===
On June 1, 2010, the first release candidate for ESET File Security for Microsoft Windows Server v4.3 was made available to the public. This program is an updated version of ESET NOD32 Antivirus Business Edition designed for Microsoft Windows Server operating systems and contains a revised user interface, automatic exclusions for critical directories and files and unspecified optimizations for operation on servers.

=== Mobile Security ===
On April 22, 2010, ESET Mobile Security for Windows Mobile and Symbian OS went into public beta. The Home Edition was released on September 2, 2010, and on January 20, 2011, the Business Edition went into beta.

On April 29, 2011, ESET a beta test version for Android was released. On August 10, 2011, the release candidate was made available.

===NOD32 for Mac OS X and Linux Desktop===
On December 2, 2009, ESET NOD32 Antivirus 4 for Mac OS X Desktop and ESET NOD32 Antivirus 4 for Linux Desktop were released for public testing. ESET stated the release automatically detects and cleans cross-platform malware, scans archives, automatically scans removable media such as USB flash drives when mounted, performs real-time scanning, provides reports and offers a GUI similar to the Microsoft Windows version. The second beta test versions were released January 9, 2010, and the third on June 10, 2010.

On September 13, 2010, ESET released ESET NOD32 Antivirus for Mac OS X Business Edition. and announced a release candidate for ESET Cybersecurity for Mac OS X

On September 24, 2010, ESET released a Release Candidate for ESET Cybersecurity for Mac OS X and on January 21, 2011, ESET released a Release Candidate for ESET NOD32 Antivirus for Linux Desktop

===Smart Security===
On May 5, 2011, ESET released a beta test version of ESET Smart Security 5.0. The beta version adds parental control, a cloud-based file reputation service, gamer mode, HIPS and improvements to its antispam, firewall and removable media control functions. On June 14, 2011, ESET released a release candidate for ESET Smart Security version 5.0.

On August 5, 2014, ESET Smart Security version 8.0 public beta 1 was released. It offers enhanced exploit blocking and botnet detection.

==Discontinued products==

===Mobile Antivirus===

ESET Mobile Antivirus was aimed at protecting smartphones from viruses, spyware, adware, trojans, worms, rootkits, and other unwanted software. It also provided antispam filtering for SMS messages. Versions for Windows Mobile and Symbian OS were available. ESET discontinued ESET Mobile Antivirus in January 2011 and provides ESET Mobile Security as a free upgrade to licensed users of ESET Mobile Antivirus.

===NOD32 Antivirus v2.7 and older===
On February 1, 2010, ESET discontinued version 2.7 of NOD32 Antivirus and all previous versions of NOD32 Antivirus. They were removed from the ESET website, including product pages and e-Store. Version 2.7 was the last version supporting Microsoft 95/98/ME and Novell NetWare operating systems.
Virus signature database updates and customer support was discontinued on February 1, 2012.

==Technical information==
On a network, NOD32 clients can update from a central &quot;mirror server&quot; on the network.

==Reception==
As of April 21, 2011, NOD32 Antivirus holds ICSA Labs certifications. As of September 29, 2018, NOD32 has accumulated one hundred eleven VB100 awards from Virus Bulletin; it has only failed to receive this award three times.

In comparative report that Virus Bulletin published on September 2, 2008, NOD32 detected 94.4% of all malware and 94.7% of spyware. It stood above competitors like Norton Internet Security and ZoneAlarm but below Windows Live OneCare and Avira AntiVir. In the RAP averages quadrant between December 2011 and June 2012, Virus Bulletin found that ESET was pretty much at the same level, about 94%, but was noted for its ability to block spam and phishing, earning an award, an award only 19 other antivirus companies were able to acquire.

On April 28, 2008, Robert Vamosi of CNET.com reviewed version 3.0 of NOD32 and gave it a score of 3.5 out of 5. On March 6, 2009, Seth Rosenblatt of Download.com reviewed the 4.0 version of NOD32 gave it a rating of 4.6 out of 5. On September 15, 2011, Seth Rosenblatt of CNET reviewed the 5.0 version of NOD32 and gave it a rating of 5 out of 5.

==See also==

* Antivirus software
* List of antivirus software
* Comparison of computer viruses

==References==
==External links==
* Virus Radar, a service run by ESET using NOD32 statistics
* The official German ESET Support Forum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1385867" start="0" end="20" title="ESET NOD32" label="ESET NOD32 Antivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385867" start="40" end="45" title="ESET NOD32" label="NOD32"/>
<link wikidata="Q93249" start="53" end="71" title="antivirus software" label="antivirus software"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="92" end="98" title="Slovakia" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q817209" start="107" end="111" title="ESET" label="ESET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385867" start="228" end="253" title="ESET NOD32" label="ESET Remote Administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11219" start="388" end="402" title="Windows Server" label="Windows Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q875716" start="537" end="552" title="boot sector" label="end of the disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="582" end="594" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786567" start="595" end="608" title="medical drama" label="medical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q683575" start="622" end="646" title="Hospital at the End of the City" label="Nemocnice na kraji města"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="748" end="751" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="841" end="855" title="computer virus" label="computer virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192969" start="961" end="973" title="Computer multitasking" label="multitasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="1262" end="1273" title="32-bit" label="32-bit CPUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="1555" end="1560" title="Windows API" label="Win32"/>
<link wikidata="Q817209" start="1673" end="1677" title="ESET" label="ESET"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="2005" end="2011" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q609733" start="2027" end="2037" title="Windows 9x" label="Windows 9x"/>
<link wikidata="Q223653" start="2227" end="2252" title="Microsoft Exchange Server" label="Microsoft Exchange Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392270" start="2290" end="2298" title="antispam" label="antispam"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="2711" end="2725" title="Windows Mobile" label="Windows Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="2730" end="2740" title="Symbian OS" label="Symbian OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q267313" start="3176" end="3182" title="McAfee" label="McAfee"/>
<link wikidata="Q677085" start="3184" end="3192" title="NortonLifeLock" label="Symantec"/>
<link wikidata="Q209691" start="3194" end="3197" title="AVG (software)" label="AVG"/>
<link wikidata="Q489943" start="3202" end="3211" title="Kaspersky Lab" label="Kaspersky"/>
<link wikidata="Q483604" start="3473" end="3492" title="Mozilla Thunderbird" label="Mozilla Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q186894" start="3497" end="3514" title="Windows Live Mail" label="Windows Live Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="3726" end="3739" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="4380" end="4384" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q317671" start="4389" end="4395" title="botnet" label="botnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q215552" start="5188" end="5195" title="Live CD" label="Live CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804361" start="5526" end="5533" title="Mebroot" label="Mebroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11219" start="5837" end="5851" title="Windows Server" label="Windows Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="6090" end="6104" title="Windows Mobile" label="Windows Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="6109" end="6119" title="Symbian OS" label="Symbian OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="6306" end="6313" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="6482" end="6490" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="6530" end="6535" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="6650" end="6657" title="malware" label="malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="6809" end="6812" title="GUI" label="GUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="6828" end="6845" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q745881" start="7495" end="7499" title="Host-based intrusion-prevention system" label="HIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392270" start="8022" end="8030" title="Anti-spam techniques (e-mail)" label="antispam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="8045" end="8048" title="Short Message Service" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="8072" end="8086" title="Windows Mobile" label="Windows Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="8091" end="8101" title="Symbian OS" label="Symbian OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938536" start="8782" end="8795" title="Web mirror" label="mirror server"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040999" start="8877" end="8886" title="ICSA Labs" label="ICSA Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525392" start="8988" end="9002" title="Virus Bulletin" label="Virus Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370256" start="9223" end="9247" title="Norton Internet Security" label="Norton Internet Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q219866" start="9252" end="9261" title="ZoneAlarm" label="ZoneAlarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q920973" start="9272" end="9292" title="Windows Live OneCare" label="Windows Live OneCare"/>
<link wikidata="Q468381" start="9297" end="9310" title="Avira AntiVir" label="Avira AntiVir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544247" start="9633" end="9641" title="CNET.com" label="CNET.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155881" start="9746" end="9758" title="Download.com" label="Download.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q93249" start="9961" end="9979" title="Antivirus software" label="Antivirus software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202242" start="9982" end="10008" title="List of antivirus software" label="List of antivirus software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763936" start="10011" end="10041" title="Comparison of computer viruses" label="Comparison of computer viruses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962679" wikidata="Q3641662" url="?curid=962679" title="Bojangles">
<text>Bojangles may refer to:
==People nicknamed &quot;Bojangles&quot;==
* Bill Robinson (1877–1949), American dancer and actor
* Ron Atkinson (born 1939), former British football player and manager

==Media==
* &quot;Bojangles&quot; (film), a 2001 TV-movie about Robinson and starring Gregory Hines
* &quot;Bojangles&quot; (song), by rapper Pitbull

==Other uses==
* Bojangles (restaurant), a fast-food restaurant chain
* Bojangles Coliseum, an arena in Charlotte, North Carolina

==See also==
* &quot;Bojangles of Harlem&quot;, a 1936 song from the Fred Astaire movie &quot;Swing Time&quot;
* Mr. Bojangles (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3641662" start="0" end="9" title="Bojangles" label="Bojangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q862416" start="69" end="82" title="Bill Robinson" label="Bill Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q344875" start="124" end="136" title="Ron Atkinson" label="Ron Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938628" start="206" end="234" title="Bojangles (film)" label="&amp;quot;Bojangles&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556765" start="296" end="324" title="Bojangles (song)" label="&amp;quot;Bojangles&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q891163" start="362" end="384" title="Bojangles (restaurant)" label="Bojangles (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938627" start="417" end="435" title="Bojangles Coliseum" label="Bojangles Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191081" start="497" end="516" title="Bojangles of Harlem" label="Bojangles of Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086386" start="589" end="619" title="Mr. Bojangles (disambiguation)" label="Mr. Bojangles (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962680" wikidata="Q4039436" url="?curid=962680" title="Gigolo Aunts">
<text>Gigolo Aunts are an American power pop band, who formed in 1981.

==Biography==
===Early history===
The band was formed by middle school students Steve Hurley, Dave Gibbs, Phil Hurley, and Paul Brouwer in 1981 in Potsdam, New York, United States, originally known as Sniper. In 1986, their name changed to Gigolo Aunts (after the Syd Barrett song, &quot;Gigolo Aunt&quot;, from his 1970 album &quot;Barrett&quot;) and became a staple on the Northern New York music scene, gaining a reputation for frenetic live sets that featured the close harmonies of the Hurley brothers and Gibbs. In the summer of 1987 the band relocated to Boston, Massachusetts, and within a year were signed to Hoboken&#x27;s Coyote Records (then home of the Feelies and Yo La Tengo). Their first album entitled &quot;Everybody Happy&quot; was produced by former Bongo bassist (and late version Velvet Underground member), Rob Norris, and released in 1988. After touring up and down the east coast, the band returned to Boston and began working on their follow up album with producer Paul Q. Kolderie. Early in the sessions, Coyote Records folded, and only a handful of songs were finished. After a year of slugging in out in the Boston clubs and recording new songs with Kolderie, the band completed &quot;Tales from the Vinegar Side&quot;, which was released only in Spain on Impossible Records in 1990. The album produced a modest Boston area radio hit in &quot;Down on Me&quot;.

===Chart success===
In fall 1991, the band released the &quot;Bloom&quot;/&quot;Cope&quot; 7 inch single on their own Summerville Records. The single garnered rave reviews on both sides of the Atlantic and heavy Boston area airplay, which led to a record deal with Fire Records in the UK. An EP, &quot;Full-On Bloom&quot;, was released in July 1993 and an album, &quot;Flippin&#x27; Out&quot;, made with producers Mike Deneen and Adam Lasus, was released in the UK in October 1993. The band supported Suede and the Cranberries on their first major U.S. tour and a tour of Japan. The band toured extensively in Europe in support of &quot;Flippin&#x27; Out&quot;, opening for The Wonder Stuff.

After signing to RCA Records in the US early in 1994, the band released the slightly altered American version of &quot;Flippin&#x27; Out&quot; and spent the year supporting the record in Europe and America. Their biggest commercial success was the single, &quot;Where I Find My Heaven&quot;, which featured in the soundtrack to the film &quot;Dumb and Dumber&quot;, and as the opening music to the British sitcom &quot;Game On&quot;. The single release of &quot;Where I Find My Heaven&quot; broke into the Top 30 in the UK Singles Chart early in 1995. The band also composed the song, &quot;Little Wild One&quot;, for the movie, &quot;That Thing You Do!&quot;

===Later history===
In the winter of 1995, drummer Paul Brouwer left and was replaced by Fred Eltringham, then of the Boston band, Jack Drag. In the fall of 1995, the band entered the studio with producer Fred Maher to record the follow-up to &quot;Flippin&#x27; Out&quot;, tentatively titled &quot;Ultraphonic&quot;. The subsequent recordings were never released and soon after Phil Hurley left the band and was replaced by 6L6 guitarist, Jon Skibic.

In 1996, after getting released from their RCA deal, the band began the long process of ending their relationship with Fire Records. In the meantime, they released an EP, &quot;Learn to Play Guitar&quot;, on the indie Wicked Disc label, which allowed them to tour extensively in support of the Wallflowers and Counting Crows.

After settling their contract status in 1998, the band signed a new deal with E Pluribus Unum Records, a subsidiary of Universal Records owned and led by Counting Crows&#x27; singer, Adam Duritz. The band entered the studio once again with producer Mike Denneen and produced the haunting &quot;Minor Chords and Major Themes&quot;, which featured the minor hit, &quot;Everyone Can Fly&quot;. &quot;Minor Chords And Major Themes&quot; was a hit in Spain and led to the band&#x27;s long-standing popularity in that country and appearance at the Benicassim Festival in 1999.

The Gigolo Aunts played a few shows in 2023 including November 15, 2023 at Brooklyn Made, Brooklyn, NY, USA.

==Members==
;Current Members
*Dave Gibbs (vocals/guitar)
*Steve Hurley (bass/vocals)
*Fred Eltringham (drums, 1995-)
*Jon Skibic (lead guitar/vocals, 1995-)

;Former Members
*Phil Hurley (lead guitar/vocals, 1981–1995)
*Paul Brouwer (drums, 1981–1995)
;Timeline
==Discography==
===Albums===
*&quot;Better Than Fish&quot; (1987, Demo Tape)
*&quot;Everybody Happy&quot; (US - 1988, Coyote Records)
*&quot;Tales from the Vinegar Side&quot; (Spain - 1990, Impossible Records)
*&quot;Full-On Bloom (EP)&quot; (UK - 1993, Fire Records), (US - 1993, Alias Records)
*&quot;Flippin&#x27; Out&quot; (UK - 1993, Fire Records), (US - 1994, RCA/BMG)
*&quot;Learn to Play Guitar (EP)&quot; (US - 1997, Wicked Disc)
*&quot;Minor Chords and Major Themes&quot; (US - 1999, E Pluribus Unum Recordings)
*&quot;Everyone Can Fly (EP)&quot; (US - 1999, E Pluribus Unum Recordings)
*&quot;Pacific Ocean Blues&quot; (Spain/Japan - 2002, Bittersweet Recordings), (US - 2003, Q Division Records)

===Compilation albums===
*&quot;Flippin&#x27; Out + Full-On Bloom&quot; (UK - 1995, Fire Records)
*&quot;Where I Find My Heaven&quot; (UK - 1997, Nectar Masters, UK - 1998, Fire Records)
*&quot;The One Before the Last&quot; (Spain - 2000, Bittersweet Recordings)
*&quot;Where I Find My Heaven + Flippin&#x27; Out&quot; (UK - 2003, Fire Records)
*&quot;The Pride Of Potsdam: 20 Years Of Sonic Splendor&quot; (2006, Love To Art)

===Singles===
*&quot;Bloom&quot; (1991)
*&quot;I Am the Cosmos (Chris Bell Homage)&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Cope&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Bloom&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Gun&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Mrs. Washington&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Shame&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Where I Find My Heaven&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Mrs. Washington&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Cope&quot; (Promo Single) (1994)
*&quot;Bloom&quot; (Promo Single) (1994)
*&quot;Where I Find My Heaven&quot; (1995)
*&quot;Where I Find My Heaven&quot; (Promo Single) (1995)
*&quot;The Big Lie&quot; (Promo Single) (1999)
*&quot;Everyone Can Fly&quot; (Promo Single) (1999)
*&quot;The Girl From Yesterday&quot; (Promo Single - Spain) (2001)
*&quot;Even Though (The One Before the Last)&quot; (Promo Single - Spain) (2002)

===Selected tracks from other compilations===
*&quot;They Don&#x27;t Know&quot;, &quot;Volume 10&quot; (distributed by RTM/Pinnacle) Catalog Number: 10VCD10 (1994)
*&quot;Where I Find My Heaven&quot;, &quot;Dumb and Dumber OST&quot; (RCA) Catalog Number: 07863 66523 2 (22 November 1994)
*&quot;Mr. Woods&quot;, &quot;Safe and Sound: A Benefit in Response to the Brookline Clinic Violence&quot; (Mercury Records) Catalog Number: 314 534 067-2 (1996)
*&quot;Why Can&#x27;t This Be Love?&quot;, &quot;Everybody Wants Some! (of Van Halen)&quot; (CherryDisc Records) Catalog Number: CH 5794-2 (1997)
*&quot;You&#x27;d Better Get Yourself Together, Baby&quot;, &quot;Wicked Good Sampler 05&quot; (Universal Music) Catalog Number: UMG3P-21141 (1998)
*&quot;Alcoholiday&quot;, &quot;What a Concept!: A Salute to Teenage Fanclub&quot; (Not Lame Recordings) Catalog Number: NL-089 (2004)
*&quot;I&#x27;m Not the One&quot;, &quot;Substitution Mass Confusion: A Tribute to The Cars&quot; (Not Lame Recordings) Catalog Number: NL-102 (2005) &quot;attributed to Gigolo Aunts featuring Kid Lightning&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Trouser Press Entry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4039436" start="0" end="12" title="Gigolo Aunts" label="Gigolo Aunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="20" end="28" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="29" end="38" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228820" start="160" end="170" title="Dave Gibbs (musician)" label="Dave Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182031" start="172" end="183" title="Phil Hurley" label="Phil Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022943" start="213" end="230" title="Potsdam, New York" label="Potsdam, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q173061" start="330" end="341" title="Syd Barrett" label="Syd Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q302370" start="399" end="406" title="Barrett (album)" label="Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="628" end="634" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="636" end="649" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544817" start="728" end="739" title="the Feelies" label="the Feelies"/>
<link wikidata="Q221021" start="744" end="755" title="Yo La Tengo" label="Yo La Tengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417711" start="791" end="806" title="Everybody Happy" label="Everybody Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520053" start="836" end="841" title="The Bongos" label="Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="868" end="886" title="Velvet Underground" label="Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645322" start="1057" end="1073" title="Paul Q. Kolderie" label="Paul Q. Kolderie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679304" start="1280" end="1307" title="Tales from the Vinegar Side" label="Tales from the Vinegar Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="1722" end="1734" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507958" start="1759" end="1772" title="Full-On Bloom (EP)" label="Full-On Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459706" start="1826" end="1843" title="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out" label="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1919" end="1921" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q826255" start="1958" end="1963" title="Suede (band)" label="Suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="1968" end="1983" title="the Cranberries" label="the Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459706" start="2094" end="2111" title="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out" label="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q500101" start="2131" end="2147" title="The Wonder Stuff" label="The Wonder Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459706" start="2269" end="2286" title="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out" label="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993277" start="2412" end="2434" title="Where I Find My Heaven" label="Where I Find My Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="2482" end="2486" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q462418" start="2493" end="2508" title="Dumb and Dumber" label="Dumb and Dumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="2556" end="2562" title="situation comedy" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519868" start="2569" end="2576" title="Game On (UK TV series)" label="Game On"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="2656" end="2662" title="Top 40" label="Top 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="2670" end="2686" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q642410" start="2785" end="2803" title="That Thing You Do!" label="That Thing You Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459706" start="3060" end="3077" title="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out" label="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="3383" end="3395" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510055" start="3441" end="3461" title="Learn to Play Guitar" label="Learn to Play Guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q643005" start="3554" end="3569" title="the Wallflowers" label="the Wallflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178549" start="3574" end="3588" title="Counting Crows" label="Counting Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q178549" start="3745" end="3765" title="Counting Crows" label="Counting Crows&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q349204" start="3774" end="3785" title="Adam Duritz" label="Adam Duritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869082" start="3885" end="3914" title="Minor Chords and Major Themes" label="Minor Chords and Major Themes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417884" start="3958" end="3974" title="Everyone Can Fly" label="Everyone Can Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q196148" start="4133" end="4152" title="Festival Internacional de Benicàssim" label="Benicassim Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228820" start="4303" end="4313" title="Dave Gibbs (musician)" label="Dave Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182031" start="4448" end="4459" title="Phil Hurley" label="Phil Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417711" start="4619" end="4634" title="Everybody Happy" label="Everybody Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679304" start="4676" end="4703" title="Tales from the Vinegar Side" label="Tales from the Vinegar Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507958" start="4752" end="4770" title="Full-On Bloom" label="Full-On Bloom (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="4789" end="4801" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725604" start="4816" end="4829" title="Alias Records" label="Alias Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459706" start="4838" end="4855" title="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out" label="Flippin&amp;#x27; Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="4874" end="4886" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="4901" end="4904" title="RCA Records" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="4905" end="4908" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510055" start="4917" end="4942" title="Learn to Play Guitar" label="Learn to Play Guitar (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869082" start="4981" end="5010" title="Minor Chords and Major Themes" label="Minor Chords and Major Themes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417884" start="5064" end="5085" title="Everyone Can Fly" label="Everyone Can Fly (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122602" start="5139" end="5158" title="Pacific Ocean Blues (album)" label="Pacific Ocean Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918861" start="5223" end="5241" title="Q Division Records" label="Q Division Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="5328" end="5340" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066567" start="5349" end="5371" title="Where I Find My Heaven (album)" label="Where I Find My Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="5417" end="5429" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755026" start="5438" end="5461" title="The One Before the Last" label="The One Before the Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993279" start="5514" end="5556" title="Where I Find My Heaven + Flippin&amp;#x27; Out" label="Where I Find My Heaven + Flippin&amp;#x27; Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="5575" end="5587" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976185" start="5719" end="5754" title="I Am the Cosmos (Chris Bell Homage)" label="I Am the Cosmos (Chris Bell Homage)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144568" start="5850" end="5865" title="Mrs. Washington" label="Mrs. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993277" start="5912" end="5934" title="Where I Find My Heaven" label="Where I Find My Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144568" start="5955" end="5970" title="Mrs. Washington" label="Mrs. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993277" start="6072" end="6094" title="Where I Find My Heaven" label="Where I Find My Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993277" start="6115" end="6137" title="Where I Find My Heaven" label="Where I Find My Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417884" start="6220" end="6236" title="Everyone Can Fly" label="Everyone Can Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783694" start="6467" end="6487" title="They Don&amp;#x27;t Know (Kirsty MacColl song)" label="They Don&amp;#x27;t Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196291" start="6537" end="6545" title="Pinnacle Entertainment (UK)" label="Pinnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993277" start="6585" end="6607" title="Where I Find My Heaven" label="Where I Find My Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q462418" start="6621" end="6636" title="Dumb and Dumber" label="Dumb and Dumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="6648" end="6651" title="RCA Records" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="6810" end="6825" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357214" start="6871" end="6899" title="Why Can&amp;#x27;t This Be Love" label="Why Can&amp;#x27;t This Be Love?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092264" start="6957" end="6975" title="CherryDisc Records" label="CherryDisc Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="7106" end="7121" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062122" start="7242" end="7261" title="Not Lame Recordings" label="Not Lame Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q10899407" start="7300" end="7320" title="I&amp;#x27;m Not the One" label="I&amp;#x27;m Not the One"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7334" end="7384" title="Substitution Mass Confusion: A Tribute to The Cars" label="Substitution Mass Confusion: A Tribute to The Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062122" start="7392" end="7411" title="Not Lame Recordings" label="Not Lame Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962683" wikidata="Q1137383" url="?curid=962683" title="Kenya Air Force">
<text>The Kenya Air Force (KAF) or is the national aerial warfare service branch of the Republic of Kenya.

The main airbase operating fighters is Laikipia Air Base in Nanyuki, while Moi Air Base in Eastleigh, Nairobi is the headquarters. Other bases include Forward Operating Base (FOB) Mombasa (Moi International Airport), FOB Mandera, FOB Wajir &amp; FOB Nyeri (mainly helicopters/small planes).

The Kenya Air Force flies some two dozen F-5E/F Tiger II fighters, a dozen Tucano trainers, half a dozen G120A basic trainers.

Kenya also flies small numbers of other different types, such as Pumas, Mi-17s etc. Recent acquisitions include AW139, AS350 FENNEC, UH-1H helicopters, H124M Fennec, MD530Fs and C-27J Spartan transports.

In 2017 Jordan donated 2 confirmed AH-1 Cobra attack helicopters for the air force; these together with the Army&#x27;s 50th Air Cavalry helicopters are controlled by the Joint Helicopter Command based at Embakasi Garrison.

== History ==
The Kenya Air Force was formed on 1 June 1964, soon after independence, with the assistance of the United Kingdom.

Former aircraft in service included de Havilland Canada Chipmunks and Beavers (since 1964), six Hawker Hunters (bought from RAF, in operation from 1974–79), six BAC Strikemaster fighters (in operation from 1971), and 12 BAE Systems Hawks delivered in 1980. All these types have now been withdrawn.

As a result of the war over the Ogaden region between Ethiopia and Somalia and tensions with neighboring Uganda, the Kenya Air Force ordered 10 F-5Es and 2 F-5Fs in 1976. Deliveries took place in 1978 and give Kenya&#x27;s air force an interceptor capability for the first time in its history. Two F-5Fs were delivered as attrition replacements in July 1982. From 1979–1982 President Daniel arap Moi used Northrop F-5 fighter jets to escort his flights in and out of the country; later commentators have pointed out that there was no threat justifying the waste of fuel and the difficult and complex requirements of the escort mission.

After a failed coup by a group of Air Force officers on 1 August 1982, the Air Force was disbanded. Air Force activity was reconstituted and placed under tighter army control as the 82 Air Force. The Air Force regained its independent status in 1994. 
On 10 April 2006 a KAF Harbin Y-12 crashed near Marsabit with 17 on board, of whom 14 died. It was carrying several local and national politicians; Bonaya Godana, a former minister, was among the casualties. The pilot in command was Major David Njoroge.

Since 1978, the F-5 has been the KAF&#x27;s main air defence fighter. A total of 29 were delivered: 12 F-5E &amp; 2 F-5F from the US, and 10 F-5E, 3 F-5EM, &amp; 2 F-5F formerly in service with the Royal Jordanian Air Force (RJAF). The ex-RJAF aircraft were upgraded to F-5EM standard before being delivered to the Kenya Air Force. There was controversy over the purchase of the F-5s from Jordan, which were shipped to Kenya and assembled locally, Currently a F-5 upgrade and procurement program is underway for 10 F-5E, 2 F-5F, and 3 F-5EM from Jordan.

The helicopter fleet has been improved thanks to foreign aid. KAF received up to six Royal Jordanian Air Force (RJAF) AH-1Fs in 2017. In 2016 8 Bell Huey II helicopters were approved to be delivered to Kenya Air Force as part of US security cooperation program in sub-Saharan Africa. One of them, UH-1H-II serial KAF-1503, crashed and was written off. The Kenya Air Force 53 Tactical Helicopter Squadron has taken delivery of 6 out of 8 Huey UH-1H helicopters. Meanwhile, the KAF also received 9 AS550C3 helicopters that will be used for security operations as well as combat search and rescue, casualty and medical evacuation. Originally KAF was expected to purchase former UAE AS350Bs, but the new AS550C3s can be armed and may have been also funded by the UAE. By October 2018 photographs had emerged showing the AS550 Fennecs fitted with weapon pylons and unguided rocket pods.
The US government approved a proposed foreign military sale for twelve Air Tractor AT-802L light-attack aircraft to the government of Kenya. As of August 2017, the Kenyan government has not yet signed a contract for the proposed sale. Also early 2017 Kenya signed contract for 3 C 27j &amp; 3 AW 139 to be delivered this year

The United Arab Emirates&#x27; Global Aerospace Logistics (GAL) signed an agreement in 2019 with the Kenya Air Force to provide maintenance, repair and overhaul (MRO) services for its aircraft.

==Aircraft==
=== Current inventory ===
 
==Rapid Deployment Squadron==
The Rapid Deployment Squadron (RDS) is the newest special forces unit among all three branches of the Kenya Defence Forces. It is predominantly tasked with the recovery of downed airmen in hostile territory but it can carry out other specially assigned tasks. The unit was conceived and developed after a downed pilot went missing in action in Southern Somalia. The F5 fighter jet developed mechanical problems and crashed in Al Shabab held territory, while the wreckage was found the pilot remained unaccounted for despite him managing to eject from the aircraft. This led to the need of a tactical quick response unit to respond in such incidences as the search and rescue mission for the downed airman was hampered by the lack of a dedicated response unit.

This Rapid Deployment Squadron is headquartered at Laikipia Air Base where Kenya&#x27;s main fighter squadron is also based. The unit also maintains a Forward Operating Base at Wajir Airport in North Eastern Kenya.

== See also ==
* Military of Kenya

== References ==
==Bibliography==
*

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1137383" start="4" end="19" title="Kenya Air Force" label="Kenya Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137383" start="21" end="24" title="Kenya Air Force" label="KAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="82" end="99" title="Kenya" label="Republic of Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12693526" start="141" end="158" title="Laikipia Air Base" label="Laikipia Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q123160" start="162" end="169" title="Nanyuki" label="Nanyuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748390" start="177" end="189" title="Moi Air Base" label="Moi Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278269" start="193" end="211" title="Eastleigh, Nairobi" label="Eastleigh, Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q392784" start="291" end="316" title="Moi International Airport" label="Moi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q730791" start="336" end="341" title="Wajir" label="Wajir"/>
<link wikidata="Q219629" start="762" end="772" title="AH-1 Cobra" label="AH-1 Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q900857" start="1118" end="1146" title="de Havilland Canada Chipmunk" label="de Havilland Canada Chipmunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q291804" start="1152" end="1159" title="de Havilland Canada Beaver" label="Beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="1178" end="1191" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hawker Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q795369" start="1243" end="1259" title="BAC Strikemaster" label="BAC Strikemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q687743" start="1302" end="1318" title="BAE Systems Hawk" label="BAE Systems Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q193492" start="1765" end="1780" title="Daniel arap Moi" label="Daniel arap Moi"/>
<link wikidata="Q308940" start="1786" end="1798" title="Northrop F-5" label="Northrop F-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580496" start="2024" end="2037" title="1982 Kenyan coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="a failed coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584925" start="2293" end="2304" title="Harbin Y-12" label="Harbin Y-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709128" start="2318" end="2326" title="Marsabit" label="Marsabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11854485" start="2418" end="2431" title="Bonaya Godana" label="Bonaya Godana"/>
<link wikidata="Q783164" start="2723" end="2748" title="Royal Jordanian Air Force" label="Royal Jordanian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q842161" start="4000" end="4021" title="Foreign Military Sales" label="foreign military sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q407852" start="4033" end="4052" title="Air Tractor AT-802" label="Air Tractor AT-802L"/>
<link wikidata="Q720033" start="5549" end="5566" title="Military of Kenya" label="Military of Kenya"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962686" wikidata="Q411396" url="?curid=962686" title="Muddy">
<text>Muddy most commonly means covered in mud.

Muddy may also refer to:
==Places==
===Canada===
* Muddy Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador
* Muddy Brook, Maberly, Newfoundland and Labrador

===United States===
* Muddy, Illinois, a village
* Muddy, Montana, a census-designated place
* Muddy Branch, Maryland, a tributary stream of the Potomac River
* Muddy Brook (disambiguation)
* Muddy Creek (disambiguation)
* Muddy Fork (Oregon), a tributary of the Sandy River
* Muddy Mountain, near Casper, Wyoming
* Muddy Mountains, Nevada
* Muddy Pass (disambiguation)
* Muddy River (disambiguation)
* Muddy Run (disambiguation)

==Nickname or stage name==
* Muddy Manninen (born 1957), Finnish guitarist
* Muddy Ruel (1896–1963), American professional baseball player
* Muddy Waters (1915–1983), American singer 
* Muddy Wilbury, (born 1950–2017) a stage name of Tom Petty while in the group the Traveling Wilburys

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Muddy&quot; (film), 2021 Malayalam-language film
* Muddy Mole, the main character of the video game &quot;Mole Mania&quot;
* Muddy Mudskipper, a character from &quot;The Ren and Stimpy Show&quot;

==See also==

* Baseball rubbing mud
* 
* Mud (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q411396" start="0" end="5" title="Muddy" label="Muddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170449" start="37" end="40" title="mud" label="mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q411396" start="43" end="48" title="Muddy" label="Muddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931632" start="94" end="103" title="Muddy Bay" label="Muddy Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721566" start="146" end="180" title="Maberly, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Maberly, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581003" start="204" end="219" title="Muddy, Illinois" label="Muddy, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q959317" start="233" end="247" title="Muddy, Montana" label="Muddy, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931635" start="277" end="289" title="Muddy Branch" label="Muddy Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16798822" start="343" end="371" title="Muddy Brook (disambiguation)" label="Muddy Brook (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951711" start="374" end="402" title="Muddy Creek (disambiguation)" label="Muddy Creek (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931657" start="405" end="424" title="Muddy Fork (Oregon)" label="Muddy Fork (Oregon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714809" start="459" end="473" title="Muddy Mountain" label="Muddy Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931684" start="498" end="513" title="Muddy Mountains" label="Muddy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q107790194" start="524" end="551" title="Muddy Pass (disambiguation)" label="Muddy Pass (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951709" start="554" end="582" title="Muddy River (disambiguation)" label="Muddy River (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931683" start="585" end="611" title="Muddy Run (disambiguation)" label="Muddy Run (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q137758" start="642" end="656" title="Muddy Manninen" label="Muddy Manninen"/>
<link wikidata="Q642371" start="690" end="700" title="Muddy Ruel" label="Muddy Ruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q220707" start="754" end="766" title="Muddy Waters" label="Muddy Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="847" end="856" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q110314076" start="929" end="953" title="Muddy (film)" label="&amp;quot;Muddy&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141895" start="986" end="996" title="Muddy Mole" label="Muddy Mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599956" start="1060" end="1076" title="Muddy Mudskipper" label="Muddy Mudskipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866552" start="1148" end="1168" title="Baseball rubbing mud" label="Baseball rubbing mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q345615" start="1174" end="1194" title="Mud (disambiguation)" label="Mud (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962688" wikidata="Q485129" url="?curid=962688" title="Burgo de Osma-Ciudad de Osma">
<text>Burgo de Osma-Ciudad de Osma is the third-largest municipality in the province of Soria, in the autonomous community of Castile and León, Spain. It has a population of about 5,250.
It is made up of two parts:
*the smaller Ciudad de Osma (city of Osma) to the west of the river Ucero, which flows southwards to the river Duero; and
*the larger El Burgo de Osma (the borough of Osma, sometimes just called &quot;El Burgo&quot;) to the east of the river Ucero, the cathedral town of the province.

Osma derives from the Celto-Roman &quot;Uxama&quot;, while Burgo is cognate to the English word &quot;borough&quot;.
== History==
Burgo de Osma is well-known for its cultural heritage that includes the Burgo de Osma Cathedral, the University of Santa Catalina, the Castle, Plaza Mayor and Hospital de San Agustín (baroque architecture) and the Holy Week parade. 
==See also==

* Uxama Argaela

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q485129" start="0" end="28" title="Burgo de Osma-Ciudad de Osma" label="Burgo de Osma-Ciudad de Osma"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="50" end="62" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q55276" start="70" end="87" title="province of Soria" label="province of Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="96" end="116" title="Autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739" start="120" end="136" title="Castile and León" label="Castile and León"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="138" end="143" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q485129" start="222" end="236" title="Burgo de Osma-Ciudad de Osma" label="Ciudad de Osma"/>
<link wikidata="Q14299" start="320" end="325" title="Duero" label="Duero"/>
<link wikidata="Q485129" start="343" end="359" title="Burgo de Osma-Ciudad de Osma" label="El Burgo de Osma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158255" start="535" end="540" title="Uxama" label="Uxama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="597" end="604" title=":wiktionary:borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q509931" start="697" end="720" title="Burgo de Osma Cathedral" label="Burgo de Osma Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896242" start="726" end="754" title="University of Santa Catalina" label="University of Santa Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158255" start="874" end="887" title="Uxama Argaela" label="Uxama Argaela"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962692" wikidata="Q716505" url="?curid=962692" title="Arun Sarin">
<text>Arun Sarin (born 21 October 1954) is an Indian-American telecommunications executive.

Sarin was the former CEO of the telecom giant Vodafone, serving from 2003 until 2008. He drove the integration of Vodafone, Airtouch and Mannesman. He was also the driving force behind the Vodafone&#x27;s strategic move into emerging markets, especially Asia and Africa, through the purchases of Turkish operator Telsim and a controlling stake in Hutchison Essar in India. He was a senior advisor at the private equity firm KKR. He also serves on the board of directors of Ola Electric , Charles Schwab and Accenture. He is currently Chairman of Cerence, a conversational AI public company.

Sarin received an honorary knighthood from the Queen at Buckingham Palace on 10 March 2010.

== Early life and education ==
Sarin was born in Pachmarhi, Madhya Pradesh, India, in 1954. He pursued his secondary education at the Bangalore Military School. Thereafter, he joined the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur and graduated with a B.Tech. degree in metallurgical engineering in 1975. In 1978, he gained a MS in engineering and an MBA from the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley.

== Career ==

=== Early career and AirTouch (1984 - 1999) ===
He started his career as a management consultant before moving in 1984 to Pacific Telesis Group in San Francisco. He was a director of AirTouch from July 1995 and was President and Chief Operating Officer from February 1997.

=== Vodafone (1999 - 2008) ===
AirTouch was sold to Vodafone in 1999 for about $75 billion. He was then appointed Vodafone&#x27;s chief executive officer for the United States and Asia Pacific region until 15 April 2000, when Vodafone&#x27;s U.S. interests were merged into Verizon Wireless. He subsequently became chief executive of InfoSpace in 2000 and of Accel-KKR Telecom based in San Francisco from 2001 to 2003, while serving as a non-executive director of Vodafone. He rejoined Vodafone as chief executive designate on 1 April 2003 and was appointed on a permanent basis after the company&#x27;s annual general meeting on 30 July 2003. On 27 May 2008, he announced his resignation (effective July) as CEO after Vodafone achieved record earnings.

During his tenure as chief executive of Vodafone group plc, he expanded the company geographically into countries like India, Turkey, South Africa etc. increasing the customer base to approximately 300 million. He expanded the product line of the company to include data, internet and broadband services. He streamlined the operations of the company under the Vodafone brand to utilize the global scale while maintaining local customer focus. He increased the dividends per share by 400 percent and returned value to shareholders through buybacks.

Sarin retired from Vodafone immediately after the company&#x27;s annual general meeting on 29 July 2008, and was succeeded by then deputy-CEO Vittorio Colao.

=== After Vodafone (2008 to present) ===
In October 2009, Sarin was appointed as a senior advisor at the private equity firm KKR. He has been a member of the advisory board of Accel KKR from 2010 until 2019. He is currently an investor and adviser to a number of early stage technology companies based in the San Francisco Bay Area and India.

== Board ==
He serves on the board of directors of Ola Electric , Accenture and Charles Schwab. He is the Chairman of Cerence, a conversational AI public company, spun out by Nuance, in October 2019. He also sits on the board of trustees for the Blum Center for Developing Economies at the University of California, Berkeley.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q716505" start="0" end="10" title="Arun Sarin" label="Arun Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="40" end="55" title="Indian-American" label="Indian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="133" end="141" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="413" end="449" title="Vodafone India#Vodafone-Hutchison tax case" label="controlling stake in Hutchison Essar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="511" end="514" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="KKR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="560" end="573" title="Ola Electric " label="Ola Electric "/>
<link wikidata="Q1066028" start="575" end="589" title="Charles Schwab Corporation" label="Charles Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q338825" start="594" end="603" title="Accenture" label="Accenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="697" end="716" title="honorary knighthood" label="honorary knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="735" end="752" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949041" start="821" end="830" title="Pachmarhi" label="Pachmarhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="832" end="846" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855064" start="906" end="931" title="Bangalore Military School" label="Bangalore Military School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661243" start="959" end="1000" title="Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur" label="Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="1096" end="1098" title="Master of Science" label="MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="1121" end="1124" title="Master of Business Administration" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125258" start="1134" end="1157" title="Haas School of Business" label="Haas School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1165" end="1199" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697691" start="1399" end="1407" title="AirTouch" label="AirTouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="1620" end="1643" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="1670" end="1689" title="Asia Pacific region" label="Asia Pacific region"/>
<link wikidata="Q919641" start="1764" end="1780" title="Verizon Wireless" label="Verizon Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928676" start="1824" end="1833" title="InfoSpace" label="InfoSpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q837703" start="1928" end="1950" title="non-executive director" label="non-executive director"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="2199" end="2202" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2364" end="2369" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2371" end="2377" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2379" end="2391" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q981692" start="2936" end="2950" title="Vittorio Colao" label="Vittorio Colao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="3078" end="3081" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="KKR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3348" end="3361" title="Ola Electric " label="Ola Electric "/>
<link wikidata="Q338825" start="3363" end="3372" title="Accenture" label="Accenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066028" start="3377" end="3391" title="Charles Schwab Corporation" label="Charles Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="3587" end="3621" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962694" wikidata="Q911979" url="?curid=962694" title="Am Fear Liath Mòr">
<text>In Scottish folklore, ; ; also known as the Big Grey Man of Ben MacDhui or simply the Greyman) is the name for a presence or creature which is said to haunt the summit and passes of Ben Macdui, the highest peak of the Cairngorms and the second highest peak in British Isles after Ben Nevis.

== Description ==
Although there have been many purported encounters with the Big Grey Man, few eyewitnesses report to have actually seen the creature. It is said to be very thin and over ten feet tall, with dark skin and hair, long arms, and broad shoulders. Most often, the creature remains unseen in the fog of the mountain, with encounters limited to the sound of crunching gravel as it walks behind climbers and a general feeling of unease around the mountain. Tangible evidence of its existence is limited to a few photographs of unusual footprints, so the majority relies on the credibility of eyewitness encounters.

The figure has many similarities with the Brenin Llwyd () of Welsh mythology, this figure is also semi-corporeal, silent and uses the mists as a cloak to prey on unwary travellers. Unlike the Am Fear Liath, Brenin Llwyd is found in mountainous locations across Wales, and is particularly noted to prey on children.

== Sightings ==

In 1925, J. Norman Collie gave the first recorded account of a Grey Man encounter. A noted hiker, professor, and member of the Royal Geographical Society, Collie recounted a terrifying experience he had as he hiked alone near the summit of Ben Macdui years earlier in 1891. &quot;I was returning from the cairn on the summit in a mist when I began to think I heard something else than merely the noise of my own footsteps. Every few steps I took I heard a crunch, and then another crunch, as if someone was walking after me but taking steps three or four times the length of my own. I said to myself, this is all nonsense. I listened and heard it again but could see nothing in the mist. As I walked on and the eerie crunch, crunch sounded behind me, I was seized with terror and took to my heels, staggering blindly among the boulders for four or five miles nearly down to Rothiemurchus Forest. Whatever you make of it, I do not know, but there is something very queer about the top of Ben Macdui and I will not go back there again.&quot;Collie&#x27;s account was reported in the local press, which started a debate between sceptics and believers within the community. Other climbers came forward with their own encounters, which they had previously been afraid to share. One climber, Hugh D. Welsh, said that he hiked the summit with his brother in 1904, where throughout the day and night they heard &quot;slurring footsteps, as if someone was walking through water-saturated gravel.&quot; Both felt &quot;frequently conscious of something near us, an eerie sense of apprehension.&quot;

In 1945, Pete Densham was participating in rescue work in the Cairngorm mountains during World War II. One day, he reported hearing strange noises, mist closing in on his location, and increasing pressure around his neck. He fled before seeing anything concrete. A friend of his, climber Richard Frere, wrote about his sense of &quot;a Presence, utterly abstract but intensely real&quot; on the mountain and heard &quot;an intensely high singing note&quot; a few years later in 1948. Frere also presented the encounter of another mutual friend, who wished to remain anonymous, while he camped on Ben Macdui. He reported waking up feeling an inescapable feeling of dread, and looked out of his tent to see a large figure with dark hair standing in front of the moon in silhouette.

In 1958, naturalist and mountaineer Alexander Tewnion published an article in &quot;The Scots&quot; magazine about an encounter with the Grey Man in 1943. &quot;I spent a 10-day leave climbing alone in the Cairngorms. One afternoon, just as I reached the summit cairn of Ben MacDhui, mist swirled across the Lairig Ghru and enveloped the mountain. The atmosphere became dark and oppressive, a fierce, bitter wind whisked among the boulders, and... an odd sound echoed through the mist – a loud footstep, it seemed. Then another, and another... A strange shape loomed up, receded, came charging at me! Without hesitation I whipped out the revolver and fired three times at the figure. When it still came on I turned and hared down the path, reaching Glen Derry in a time that I have never bettered. You may ask was it really the &quot;Fear Laith Mhor&quot;? Frankly, I think it was.No photographs of the Big Grey Man have ever been taken. Photographer John A. Rennie supposedly found a series of footprints in Spey Valley, measuring 19 inches (48 centimetres) long and 14 inches (36 centimetres) wide. These were published in a book, but he later discovered that they were a natural phenomenon caused by rainfall eroding the snow.

== Explanations ==
Illusions, hallucinations or misinterpretation of natural stimulus brought on by exhaustion or isolation have been proposed by psychologists. Infrasound, which can be generated by wind, can cause feelings of uneasiness and anxiety and is possibly connected to paranormal sightings.

An optical illusion known as the Brocken spectre is a plausible explanation for some visual elements of the Big Grey Man legend. A Brocken spectre, or &quot;mountain spectre,&quot; can occur in certain atmospheric conditions when the sun is at a particular angle. The subject&#x27;s shadow can be cast onto a cloud bank around them, creating the illusion of a large shadowy humanoid figure.

The poet James Hogg encountered a Brocken spectre on Ben MacDui as far back as 1791, describing &quot;a giant blackamoor, at least thirty feet high, and equally proportioned, and very near me. I was actually struck powerless with astonishment and terror.&quot; Hogg&#x27;s terror subsided when he observed the figure making the same gestures as his own, realizing that it was merely his own shadow when he removed his hat. British mountaineer Frank Smythe stated he had observed his shadow cast as a Brocken spectre across the mist on Ben Macdhui as well.

== See also ==
* Brenin Llwyd
* Wild man
* Lubber fiend

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48739341" start="3" end="20" title="Scottish folklore" label="Scottish folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q911979" start="44" end="71" title="Am Fear Liath Mòr" label="Big Grey Man of Ben MacDhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q911979" start="86" end="93" title="Am Fear Liath Mòr" label="Greyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q816560" start="182" end="192" title="Ben Macdui" label="Ben Macdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q747064" start="218" end="228" title="Cairngorms" label="Cairngorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="260" end="273" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="280" end="289" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123111940" start="959" end="971" title="Brenin Llwyd" label="Brenin Llwyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243531" start="978" end="993" title="Welsh mythology" label="Welsh mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="1178" end="1183" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182192" start="1259" end="1275" title="J. Norman Collie" label="J. Norman Collie"/>
<link wikidata="Q816560" start="1490" end="1500" title="Ben Macdui" label="Ben Macdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321974" start="1555" end="1560" title="cairn" label="cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356147" start="2124" end="2144" title="Rothiemurchus Forest" label="Rothiemurchus Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q747064" start="2903" end="2922" title="Cairngorms" label="Cairngorm mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="2930" end="2942" title="European theatre of World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="3609" end="3619" title="silhouette" label="silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899018" start="3930" end="3941" title="Lairig Ghru" label="Lairig Ghru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881325" start="4371" end="4381" title="Beinn Bhreac (Glen Derry)" label="Glen Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q92615" start="4631" end="4642" title="Strathspey, Scotland" label="Spey Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q182593" start="4872" end="4880" title="Illusion" label="Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="4883" end="4896" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="4953" end="4963" title="Fatigue" label="exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010868" start="4967" end="4976" title="solitude" label="isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212082" start="5014" end="5024" title="Infrasound" label="Infrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q776050" start="5188" end="5203" title="Brocken spectre" label="Brocken spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q941810" start="5556" end="5566" title="James Hogg" label="James Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q961983" start="5990" end="6002" title="Frank Smythe" label="Frank Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123111940" start="6121" end="6133" title="Brenin Llwyd" label="Brenin Llwyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071580" start="6136" end="6144" title="Wild man" label="Wild man"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931458" start="6147" end="6159" title="Lubber fiend" label="Lubber fiend"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962701" wikidata="Q796613" url="?curid=962701" title="BMW N42">
<text>The BMW N42 is a DOHC four-cylinder petrol engine which replaced the BMW M43 and was produced from 2001-2004.

The N42 serves as the basis for the smaller N40 engine (which does not have Valvetronic).

The N42B18 won the 1.4-1.8 L category of the International Engine of the Year awards for 2001.

In 2004, the N42 was replaced by the BMW N46 four-cylinder engine.

== Design ==
Compared with its M43 predecessor, the N42 features a DOHC valvetrain, VANOS (variable valve timing) and an aluminium engine block. It was the first BMW engine to have Valvetronic (variable valve lift).

== Versions ==
==N42B18==
The N42B18 has a displacement of , uses Bosch Motronic ME9.2 engine management and 

Applications:
* 2001-2004 E46 316i and 316ti

==N42B20==
The N42B20 has a displacement of , 
The N42B20 revs to 6600 rpm

Applications:
* 2001-2004 E46 318i/318Ci/318ti

== N40 ==
The BMW N40 is a DOHC four-cylinder petrol engine which replaced the 1.6 litre versions of the BMW M43. It was produced from 2001-2004 and only sold in several countries, where taxes favoured cars with smaller displacement engines. The N40 was replaced by the BMW N45.

=== Design ===

The N40 is based on the BMW N42 engine and uses the same crankcase, pistons and bore size of . The redline is 6,500 rpm.

Unlike the N42, the N40 does not have Valvetronic (variable valve lift). The other major difference is a reduction in stroke to , which results in a smaller displacement than the N42.

=== Versions ===

Applications:

* 2001-2005 E46 316i/316ci/316ti (certain markets only)

==See also==
* BMW
* List of BMW engines

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796613" start="4" end="11" title="BMW N42" label="BMW N42"/>
<link wikidata="Q796567" start="69" end="76" title="BMW M43" label="BMW M43"/>
<link wikidata="Q796613" start="155" end="158" title="BMW N40" label="N40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397554" start="187" end="198" title="Valvetronic" label="Valvetronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666521" start="247" end="279" title="International Engine of the Year" label="International Engine of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q796621" start="335" end="342" title="BMW N46" label="BMW N46"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="433" end="437" title="Overhead camshaft#Dual overhead camshaft" label="DOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297093" start="450" end="455" title="VANOS" label="VANOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397554" start="547" end="558" title="Valvetronic" label="Valvetronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431426" start="649" end="663" title="Motronic" label="Bosch Motronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q756792" start="720" end="723" title="BMW E46" label="E46"/>
<link wikidata="Q756792" start="842" end="845" title="BMW E46" label="E46"/>
<link wikidata="Q796567" start="969" end="976" title="BMW M43" label="BMW M43"/>
<link wikidata="Q466511" start="1084" end="1096" title="Engine displacement" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q796618" start="1134" end="1141" title="BMW N45" label="BMW N45"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144090" start="1217" end="1226" title="crankcase" label="crankcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q45227" start="1228" end="1234" title="piston" label="piston"/>
<link wikidata="Q245657" start="1240" end="1249" title="Bore (engine)" label="bore size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397554" start="1320" end="1331" title="Valvetronic" label="Valvetronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q671554" start="1400" end="1406" title="Stroke (engine)" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q756792" start="1512" end="1515" title="BMW E46" label="E46"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="1572" end="1575" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723810" start="1578" end="1597" title="List of BMW engines" label="List of BMW engines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962703" wikidata="Q1418766" url="?curid=962703" title="National Taiwan University Hospital">
<text>The National Taiwan University Hospital (NTUH; ) is a medical facility located in the Zhongzheng District of Taipei, Taiwan. It started operations under Japanese rule in Daitōtei (today&#x27;s Dadaocheng) on 18 June 1895, and moved to its present location in 1898. The hospital was later annexed to the Medical School of Taihoku Imperial University in 1937. The present name was adopted in 1945 upon its affiliation with National Taiwan University.

On 19 October 1991, a large new building complex on the so-called &quot;East Site&quot; was completed. The (new) &quot;East&quot; and (old) &quot;West Sites&quot; together have more than 4,000 employees, serving 2,000 inpatients and 8,000 outpatients daily. Advanced surgical, angiographical, and endoscopic procedures are routinely performed.

==Transportation==
The hospital is accessible within walking distance East from NTU Hospital Station of the Taipei Metro.

==See also==
* Museum of Medical Humanities
* Healthcare in Taiwan
* List of hospitals in Taiwan

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1418766" start="4" end="39" title="National Taiwan University Hospital" label="National Taiwan University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418766" start="41" end="45" title="National Taiwan University Hospital" label="NTUH"/>
<link wikidata="Q175581" start="86" end="105" title="Zhongzheng District" label="Zhongzheng District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="109" end="115" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="147" end="166" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="under Japanese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q392488" start="193" end="203" title="Dadaocheng" label="Dadaocheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q32746" start="321" end="348" title="Taihoku Imperial University" label="Taihoku Imperial University"/>
<link wikidata="Q32746" start="421" end="447" title="National Taiwan University" label="National Taiwan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q698114" start="875" end="895" title="National Taiwan University Hospital Station" label="NTU Hospital Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q714810" start="903" end="915" title="Taipei Metro" label="Taipei Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927230" start="933" end="961" title="Museum of Medical Humanities" label="Museum of Medical Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679133" start="964" end="984" title="Healthcare in Taiwan" label="Healthcare in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623701" start="987" end="1014" title="List of hospitals in Taiwan" label="List of hospitals in Taiwan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962710" wikidata="Q912398" url="?curid=962710" title="Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope">
<text>COAST, the Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope, is a multi-element optical astronomical interferometer with baselines of up to 100 metres, which uses aperture synthesis to observe stars with angular resolution as high as one thousandth of one arcsecond (producing much higher resolution images than individual telescopes, including the Hubble Space Telescope). The principal limitation is that COAST can only image bright stars.

COAST was the first long-baseline interferometer to obtain high-resolution images of the surfaces of stars other than Sun (although the surfaces of other stars had previously been imaged at lower resolution using aperture masking interferometry on the William Herschel Telescope).

The COAST array was conceived by John E. Baldwin and is operated by the Cavendish Astrophysics Group. It is situated at the Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory in Cambridgeshire, England.

==See also==
* List of observatories
* List of telescope types

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q912398" start="0" end="5" title="Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope" label="COAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q912398" start="11" end="57" title="Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope" label="Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004698" start="86" end="113" title="astronomical interferometer" label="astronomical interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961815" start="161" end="179" title="aperture synthesis" label="aperture synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="202" end="220" title="angular resolution" label="angular resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="254" end="263" title="arcsecond" label="arcsecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="347" end="369" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="433" end="437" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634465" start="654" end="685" title="aperture masking interferometry" label="aperture masking interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q541505" start="693" end="719" title="William Herschel Telescope" label="William Herschel Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q952538" start="756" end="771" title="John E. Baldwin" label="John E. Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055012" start="795" end="823" title="Cavendish Astrophysics Group" label="Cavendish Astrophysics Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402680" start="847" end="882" title="Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory" label="Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23112" start="886" end="900" title="Cambridgeshire" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="902" end="909" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344875" start="927" end="948" title="List of observatories" label="List of observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115145" start="951" end="974" title="List of telescope types" label="List of telescope types"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962711" wikidata="Q982605" url="?curid=962711" title="Glenn Hardin">
<text>Glenn Foster &quot;Slats&quot; Hardin (July 1, 1910 – March 6, 1975) was an American athlete, winner of 400 m hurdles at the 1936 Summer Olympics.

Born in Derma, Mississippi, Glenn Hardin was the world&#x27;s dominant 400 m hurdler in the 1930s and was equally tough in the 400 m flat race.

Hardin&#x27;s rise began at the 1932 Summer Olympics, where he finished second in the 400 m hurdles in 52.0 but was given credit for a world record when the winner, Bob Tisdall from Ireland, knocked down a hurdle, an error that in those days disqualified a performance for world record consideration. Hardin lowered the record to 51.8 in the 1934 AAU championships and then bettered it to 50.6 during a meet in Stockholm later that year. That record would stand for the next nineteen years.

Hardin was unbeatable between the 1932 and 1936 Olympics, winning the AAU title in 1933, 1934 and 1936 in 400 m hurdles and NCAA championships title in 1933 and 1934 in hurdles. Hardin finished his career at the Berlin Olympics, beating John Loaring from Canada by 0.3 seconds.

Hardin was a member of the LSU Tigers outdoor track and field team that won the school&#x27;s first ever NCAA Championship in 1933. He won two NCAA individual titles during the meet.

Hardin was inducted into the USTFCCCA Collegiate Athlete Hall of Fame in 2024.

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982605" start="0" end="37" title="Glenn Hardin" label="Glenn Foster &amp;quot;Slats&amp;quot; Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="85" end="92" title="Athletics (sport)" label="athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="125" end="145" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q762124" start="156" end="174" title="Derma, Mississippi" label="Derma, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8143" start="325" end="345" title="1932 Summer Olympics" label="1932 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="428" end="440" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q708625" start="458" end="469" title="Bob Tisdall" label="Bob Tisdall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="475" end="482" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="640" end="643" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="AAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="704" end="713" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="909" end="913" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="997" end="1003" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q731133" start="1022" end="1034" title="John Loaring" label="John Loaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1040" end="1046" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325166" start="1091" end="1101" title="LSU Tigers" label="LSU Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863434" start="1277" end="1285" title="U.S. Track &amp;amp; Field and Cross Country Coaches Association" label="USTFCCCA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962714" wikidata="Q1050317" url="?curid=962714" title="Slovak Academy of Sciences">
<text>The Slovak Academy of Sciences (, or SAV) is the main scientific and research institution in Slovakia fostering basic and strategic basic research. It was founded in 1942, closed after World War II, and then reestablished in 1953.

Its primary mission is to acquire new knowledge of nature, society and technology, specifically targeted at ensuring scientific basis for the advancement in Slovakia. It comprises 58 scientific institutes and 13 ancillary institutions. The SAV edits 44 scientific and scholarly journals and 100–120 monographs per annum. Moreover, 41 scientific and scholarly societies, which associate scientists and scholars from various disciplines, are affiliated with SAV.

== History ==
The commencement of modern science in the 16th and 17th centuries resulted in the establishment of new institutions that supplemented classical universities and created a broader forum for fostering science communication. These institutions, which were built on the ancient Platonic traditions, became the starting point of our present day academies of sciences.

Matej Bel’s project, submitted in 1735, marked the first attempt to establish such an institution on the territory of modern Slovakia. He suggested the founding of a Societas litteraria in Bratislava. His project, however, never materialized. In 1792, upon a proposal issued by a group of patriotic philologists, (The Slovak Learned Society) was founded. In 1844, under the impetus of Ludovit Stur, the nationwide cultural association, Tatrin, was instituted.

A few years later, in 1892, Andrej Kmet published in Narodne noviny (National News) his appeal to establish (Slovak Scientific Association), or (Slovak Academy of Sciences). This idea led to the formation of (Slovak Association of Museums). On 2 July 1942, the Parliament of the Slovak Republic instituted (Slovak Academy of Sciences and Arts), which developed into a representative and, concomitantly, working institution fostering scientific scholarly research. During the post-World War II period the SAVU was transformed into (Slovak Academy of Sciences; hereinafter the Academy or the SAS as an abbreviation). Its establishment was legally grounded in an act passed by the Slovak National Council on 18 June 1953. The arrangement of its operation was regulated further by appurtenant legislation.

On 17 November 1989, significant changes at the Academy were introduced. Since then, far–reaching transformations enabled the Academy to become similar to counterpart organisations of science and research in advanced countries abroad.

== Present ==

Nowadays, the Slovak Academy of Sciences successfully presents itself nationally and worldwide through the results in basic and applied research. It consists of 69 organisations, of which 48 are budgetary and 21 are subsidised. The Academy publishes 57 scientific and professional journals and 8 yearbooks. There are 51 scientific and scholarly associations, societies and unions affiliated with the SAS, which operate in accordance with the Law on Civic Associations. The Assembly, the Scientific Council, and the Presidium are the Academy’s self-governing bodies.

The Assembly is the supreme self-governing Academy’s body. Its members are elected by the academic staff of the respective scientific organisations from the academic staff of the SAS. The Scientific Council is a self-governing body of the Academy that deliberates upon scientific and conceptional tasks. It is composed of the President of the Academy and other members of the Academy’s Presidium, representatives delegated from the higher education sector, and a representative from the sector of business enterprising engaged in scientific research and development. Membership of the Scientific Council also includes representatives from organisations and institutions engaged in scientific research and development outside the Academy, appointed by the Chair of the Academy’s Assembly on the basis of elections of the members in the Scientific Council held by the Assembly.

The Presidium is an executive self-governing body of the Academy. The Presidium is composed of the President, vice-presidents, Scientific Secretary, and other members of the Presidium, appointed by the Chair of the Academy’s Assembly on the basis of the electoral returns for the Academy’s Presidium. The Academy is presided by the President, who is appointed and recalled by the President of the Slovak Republic. The Presidium of the Academy coordinates and supervises the activities of the Academy and the performance of its organisations via the sections for the respective groups of science branches.

== Presidents ==
* 19531955: Ondrej Pavlík
* 19551961: Andrej Sirácky
* 19611965: Dionýz Blaškovič
* 19651970: Štefan Schwarz
* 19701974: Karol Šiška
* 19741989: Vladimír Hajko
* 19901992: Ladislav Macho
* 19921995: Branislav Lichardus
* 19952009: Štefan Luby
* 20092015: Jaromír Pastorek
* Since 2015: Pavol Šajgalík
== See also ==
* Astronomical Institute of Slovak Academy of Sciences
* Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences
* Institute of Political Science of SAS
* Institute of Inorganic Chemistry Slovak Academy of Sciences

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1050317" start="4" end="30" title="Slovak Academy of Sciences" label="Slovak Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050317" start="37" end="40" title="Slovak Academy of Sciences" label="SAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="69" end="89" title="Research institute" label="research institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="93" end="101" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="138" end="146" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="185" end="197" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="283" end="289" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="291" end="298" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="303" end="313" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="485" end="518" title="Scientific journal" label="scientific and scholarly journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="531" end="540" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="618" end="627" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="633" end="640" title="scholar" label="scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="655" end="666" title="Discipline (academia)" label="disciplines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="852" end="864" title="University" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q472328" start="907" end="928" title="science communication" label="science communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q697179" start="1072" end="1081" title="Matthias Bel" label="Matej Bel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="1261" end="1271" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q315222" start="1457" end="1469" title="Ľudovít Štúr" label="Ludovit Stur"/>
<link wikidata="Q765336" start="1561" end="1572" title="Andrej Kmeť" label="Andrej Kmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238495" start="1586" end="1600" title="Narodne novine" label="Narodne noviny"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="1812" end="1827" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q394078" start="2211" end="2234" title="Slovak National Council" label="Slovak National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="2803" end="2813" title="Subsidy" label="subsidised"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358176" start="3085" end="3092" title="Council" label="Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115302" start="3102" end="3111" title="Presidium" label="Presidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428874" start="3244" end="3258" title="Faculty (academic staff)" label="academic staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="3586" end="3602" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468838" start="4411" end="4443" title="President of Slovakia" label="President of the Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4666" end="4679" title="Ondrej Pavlík" label="Ondrej Pavlík"/>
<link wikidata="Q503054" start="4692" end="4706" title="Andrej Sirácky" label="Andrej Sirácky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4719" end="4735" title="Dionýz Blaškovič" label="Dionýz Blaškovič"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4748" end="4762" title="Štefan Schwarz (matematik)" label="Štefan Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4775" end="4786" title="Karol Šiška" label="Karol Šiška"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4799" end="4813" title="Vladimír Hajko" label="Vladimír Hajko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4826" end="4840" title="Ladislav Macho" label="Ladislav Macho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4853" end="4872" title="Branislav Lichardus" label="Branislav Lichardus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4885" end="4896" title="Štefan Luby (fyzik)" label="Štefan Luby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4909" end="4925" title="Jaromír Pastorek" label="Jaromír Pastorek"/>
<link wikidata="Q20493232" start="4940" end="4954" title="Pavol Šajgalík" label="Pavol Šajgalík"/>
<link wikidata="Q751996" start="4972" end="5024" title="Astronomical Institute of Slovak Academy of Sciences" label="Astronomical Institute of Slovak Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040094" start="5027" end="5077" title="Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences" label="Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502624" start="5080" end="5117" title="Institute of Political Science of SAS" label="Institute of Political Science of SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q22914956" start="5120" end="5179" title="Institute of Inorganic Chemistry Slovak Academy of Sciences" label="Institute of Inorganic Chemistry Slovak Academy of Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="962730" wikidata="Q1908291" url="?curid=962730" title="Oracle Application Express">
<text>Oracle APEX (Oracle Application Express) is a low-code application development platform developed by Oracle Corporation. APEX is used for developing and deploying cloud, mobile and desktop applications. It has a web-based integrated development environment (IDE) that includes tools such as wizards, drag-and-drop layout builders, and property editors.

==Background==
APEX is a feature of the Oracle Database. It is a part of the Oracle Cloud within the Autonomous Database Cloud Services and the stand-alone APEX Application Development service.

Oracle APEX has had name changes since its creation in 2000, including:
* Flows
* Oracle Platform
* Project Marvel
* HTML DB
* Application Express (APEX) aka Oracle APEX

== History ==
APEX was created by Oracle developer Michael Hichwa following his earlier project, WebDB. While building an internal web calendar, Hichwa collaborated with fellow Oracle employee Joel Kallman to develop Flows. Together, they co-developed the web calendar, adding features to Flows as they needed them to develop the calendar. Early builds of Flows had no front-end, so all changes to an application were made in SQL Plus via insert, update and delete commands.

With version 5.2, the numbering system was changed to align with the year and quarter of the release, renaming it to 18.1. This change is consistent with Oracle&#x27;s change in numbering nomenclature.

==Low-code environment==
Oracle APEX is a low-code development platform, a type of environment that can trace their origins to fourth-generation programming languages and rapid application development (RAD) tools.

APEX allows users to build web applications with a &quot;no code&quot; graphical user interface. However, when the requirements are more complex, APEX allows the extension of the low-code objects through a declarative framework. This framework lets the developer define custom logic, business rules, and user interfaces. The developer can do this through the inclusion of SQL, PL/SQL, HTML, JavaScript, or CSS as well as APEX plug-ins.

==Security==

APEX applications are subject to the same level of application security risks as other web-based applications built on more direct technologies such as PHP, ASP.NET and Java. However, since APEX 4.0, the Application Builder interface has included a utility called Advisor, which provides a basic assessment of an application’s security posture.

The two main vulnerabilities that affect APEX applications are SQL injection and cross-site scripting (XSS).

SQL Injection

APEX applications inherently use PL/SQL constructs as the base server-side language and access data via PL/SQL blocks. An APEX application will use PL/SQL to implement authorization and to conditionally display web page elements. Because of this, APEX applications can suffer from an SQL injection when these PL/SQL blocks do not correctly validate and handle malicious user input.

Oracle implemented a special variable type for APEX called &quot;Substitution Variables&quot; (with a syntax of &quot;&amp;NAME.&quot;); however, these are insecure and can lead to SQL injections. When an injection occurs within a PL/SQL block, an attacker can inject an arbitrary number of queries or statements to execute. Escaping special characters and using bind variables can reduce, but not remove, XSS and SQL injection vulnerabilities.

Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)

XSS vulnerabilities arise in APEX applications just like in other web application languages. To counteract this, Oracle provides the htf.escape_sc() function to replace literal characters with HTML entity names and avoid undesired behaviors.

A developer can use authorization schemes to manage access to resources like pages and items within an APEX application. To ensure proper security, these schemes must be consistently applied across all relevant resources. An example of inconsistent access control arises when an authorization scheme is applied to a button item but not to the process linked to that button. This inconsistency could allow a user to trigger the process directly via JavaScript, bypassing the button entirely.

==Third-party libraries==
Developers may improve and extend APEX applications by using third-party libraries. Among them are JQuery Mobile (HTML 5-based user interface), JQuery UI (user interface for the web), AnyChart (JavaScript/HTML 5 charts), CKEditor (web text editor), and others. Oracle claims that applying the latest APEX patches ensures that the external libraries bundled with the platform are updated in tandem, which theoretically enhances application stability and security. However, many of the libraries are updated more frequently than APEX patches are released, requiring developers to monitor and manually apply updates as necessary to maintain compatibility and security.

==APEX and Oracle Database Express Edition (XE)==
Oracle APEX can be run inside Oracle Database Express Edition (XE), a free entry-level database. Although the functionality of APEX isn&#x27;t intentionally limited when running on XE, the limitations of the database engine may prevent some APEX features from functioning. Furthermore, Oracle XE has limits for CPU, memory, and disk usage.

==See also==
*Oracle SQL Developer
* Jam.py

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1908291" start="0" end="11" title="Oracle Application Express" label="Oracle APEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589910" start="46" end="87" title="Low-code development platform" label="low-code application development platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="101" end="119" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="163" end="168" title="Cloud computing" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="170" end="176" title="Mobile app" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="189" end="201" title="Application software" label="applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="222" end="256" title="integrated development environment" label="integrated development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q580334" start="291" end="298" title="Wizard (software)" label="wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q558376" start="300" end="313" title="drag-and-drop" label="drag-and-drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q185524" start="394" end="409" title="Oracle Database" label="Oracle Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977048" start="431" end="443" title="Oracle Cloud Platform" label="Oracle Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933820" start="851" end="863" title="web calendar" label="web calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575010" start="1146" end="1154" title="SQL Plus" label="SQL Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q238137" start="1526" end="1564" title="fourth-generation programming language" label="fourth-generation programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q795549" start="1570" end="1599" title="rapid application development" label="rapid application development"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="1641" end="1656" title="web application" label="web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741440" start="1671" end="1678" title="No-code development platform" label="no code"/>
<link wikidata="Q506059" start="1986" end="1989" title="SQL injection" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41574" start="1991" end="1997" title="PL/SQL" label="PL/SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="1999" end="2003" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="2005" end="2015" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="2020" end="2023" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781497" start="2116" end="2136" title="application security" label="application security"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="2217" end="2220" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q178817" start="2222" end="2229" title="ASP.NET" label="ASP.NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="2234" end="2238" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q506059" start="2474" end="2487" title="SQL injection" label="SQL injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q371199" start="2492" end="2518" title="cross-site scripting" label="cross-site scripting (XSS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="2599" end="2610" title="Client–server model" label="server-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="2896" end="2910" title="Security hacker" label="malicious user"/>
<link wikidata="Q371199" start="3393" end="3396" title="XSS" label="XSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="3459" end="3474" title="web application" label="web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955464" start="4253" end="4266" title="JQuery Mobile" label="JQuery Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q285960" start="4298" end="4307" title="JQuery UI" label="JQuery UI"/>
<link wikidata="Q85742148" start="4338" end="4346" title="AnyChart" label="AnyChart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="4348" end="4358" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="4359" end="4365" title="HTML5" label="HTML 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q136559" start="4375" end="4383" title="CKEditor" label="CKEditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="4871" end="4877" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="5182" end="5185" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q931351" start="5226" end="5246" title="Oracle SQL Developer" label="Oracle SQL Developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359958" start="5249" end="5255" title="Jam.py (web framework)" label="Jam.py"/>
</links>
</doc>
