<doc id="969329" wikidata="Q5382247" url="?curid=969329" title="Ephraim Buchwald">
<text>Rabbi Ephraim Buchwald is one of the leaders in the movement of Orthodox Jewish outreach in America today.

==Early life==

Buchwald studied at Yeshiva University, where he was a student of Rabbi Dr. Joseph B. Soloveitchik. He was ordained in 1975. He served from 1973 for 15 years as the Director of Education at Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York City, which became one of the largest and most successful centers for adult Jewish education programs in America. He also established and coordinated Lincoln Square&#x27;s outreach program. Since the early 1980s, Buchwald has led the synagogue’s &quot;Beginners Service,&quot; a special Shabbat service for people with little or no synagogue experience.

==National Jewish Outreach Program==
In July 1987, Buchwald founded the National Jewish Outreach Program (NJOP). NJOP sponsors &quot;Shabbat Across America/Canada&quot; and &quot;Read Hebrew America/Canada&quot; campaigns, establishes Beginners Services and the &quot;Turn Friday Night into Shabbat,&quot; &quot;Passover Across America&quot; and &quot;Sukkot Across America&quot; programs, as well as free &quot;crash courses&quot; in Hebrew reading, basic Judaism and Jewish history. These programs are now offered at more than 4,860 locations across North America and in 40 countries worldwide (as advertised by NJOP as of 12/13). Through these programs and advertising campaigns, NJOP has successfully reached more than 1,428,600 Jews in North America and engaged them in Jewish life. NJOP also has a presence on the web, offering &quot;Jewish Treats: Juicy Bits of Judaism, Daily&quot; (a daily email) and &quot;Jewish Tweets&quot; on twitter.com (as advertised by NJOP as of 12/13).

==AJOP==
Rabbi Buchwald was the founding president and is now the honorary president of the Association of Jewish Outreach Programs (AJOP) (previously known as the Association for Jewish Outreach Professionals), which was established in 1988. Both NJOP and AJOP were initially funded by significant grants from the AVI CHAI Foundation, a Jewish philanthropy established by Sanford Bernstein, a financial investor who had himself become a Baal teshuva (a returnee to traditional Orthodox observance) and sought to further the cause of education and outreach to alienated and assimilated Jews worldwide.

==Honors==

In November 1997 Buchwald was named to the Forward 50, a list of America&#x27;s 50 most influential Jews, and has been part of Newsweek’s list of &quot;top 50 Rabbis in America&quot; the last three years. In May 2001, he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters by Yeshiva University in recognition of his outreach work.

Buchwald is renowned for making complex Jewish topics easier to grasp through his pedagogic skills and quick sense of humor (as noted in Sh’ma Magazine November 26, 1993 as one of several &quot;Master teachers, recognized nationwide for [their] remarkable skills.&quot;) He lectures in the USA and internationally, and leads experiential programs.

==Personal==

Buchwald and his wife, Aidel, reside in New York City and are the parents of four children. They also have 18 grandchildren (including Straus Scholar Gavi Buchwald).

==References==
==Further reading==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5382247" start="6" end="22" title="Ephraim Buchwald" label="Ephraim Buchwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104486" start="64" end="88" title="Orthodox Jewish outreach" label="Orthodox Jewish outreach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048851" start="144" end="162" title="Yeshiva University" label="Yeshiva University"/>
<link wikidata="Q374965" start="200" end="222" title="Joseph B. Soloveitchik" label="Joseph B. Soloveitchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q597147" start="314" end="338" title="Lincoln Square Synagogue" label="Lincoln Square Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="342" end="355" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="638" end="645" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1141" end="1147" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="1163" end="1170" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="1175" end="1189" title="Jewish history" label="Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809469" start="1787" end="1826" title="Association of Jewish Outreach Programs" label="Association of Jewish Outreach Programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655054" start="2010" end="2029" title="AVI CHAI Foundation" label="AVI CHAI Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732268" start="2068" end="2085" title="Sanford Bernstein" label="Sanford Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742872" start="2133" end="2145" title="Baal teshuva" label="Baal teshuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q154301" start="2353" end="2363" title="The Jewish Daily Forward" label="Forward 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="2546" end="2564" title="Honorary Doctorate" label="Honorary Doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301216" start="2568" end="2582" title="Doctor of Humane Letters" label="Humane Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048851" start="2586" end="2604" title="Yeshiva University" label="Yeshiva University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969337" wikidata="Q2251971" url="?curid=969337" title="England in the Middle Ages">
<text>England in the Middle Ages concerns the history of England during the medieval period, from the end of the 5th century through to the start of the early modern period in 1485. When England emerged from the collapse of the Roman Empire, the economy was in tatters and many of the towns abandoned. After several centuries of Germanic immigration, new identities and cultures began to emerge, developing into kingdoms that competed for power. A rich artistic culture flourished under the Anglo-Saxons, producing epic poems such as &quot;Beowulf&quot; and sophisticated metalwork. The Anglo-Saxons converted to Christianity in the 7th century, and a network of monasteries and convents were built across England. In the 8th and 9th centuries, England faced fierce Viking attacks, and the fighting lasted for many decades. Eventually, Wessex was established as the most powerful kingdom and promoted the growth of an English identity. Despite repeated crises of succession and a Danish seizure of power at the start of the 11th century, it can also be argued that by the 1060s England was a powerful, centralised state with a strong military and successful economy.

The Norman invasion of England in 1066 led to the defeat and replacement of the Anglo-Saxon elite with Norman and French nobles and their supporters. William the Conqueror and his successors took over the existing state system, repressing local revolts and controlling the population through a network of castles. The new rulers introduced a feudal approach to governing England, eradicating the practice of slavery, but creating a much wider body of unfree labourers called serfs. The position of women in society changed as laws regarding land and lordship shifted. England&#x27;s population more than doubled during the 12th and 13th centuries, fueling an expansion of the towns, cities, and trade, helped by warmer temperatures across Northern Europe. A new wave of monasteries and friaries was established while ecclesiastical reforms led to tensions between successive kings and archbishops. Despite developments in England&#x27;s governance and legal system, infighting between the Anglo-Norman elite resulted in multiple civil wars and the loss of Normandy. 
The 14th century in England saw the Great Famine and the Black Death, catastrophic events that killed around half of England&#x27;s population, throwing the economy into chaos, and undermining the old political order. Social unrest followed, resulting in the Peasants&#x27; Revolt of 1381, while the changes in the economy resulted in the emergence of a new class of gentry, and the nobility began to exercise power through a system termed bastard feudalism. Nearly 1,500 villages were deserted by their inhabitants and many men and women sought new opportunities in the towns and cities. New technologies were introduced, and England produced some of the great medieval philosophers and natural scientists. English kings in the 14th and 15th centuries laid claim to the French throne, resulting in the Hundred Years&#x27; War. At times England enjoyed huge military success, with the economy buoyed by profits from the international wool and cloth trade, but by 1450 the country was in crisis, facing military failure in France and an ongoing recession. More social unrest broke out, followed by the Wars of the Roses, fought between rival factions of the English nobility. Henry VII&#x27;s victory in 1485 conventionally marks the end of the Middle Ages in England and the start of the Early Modern period.
==Political history==
===Early Middle Ages (600–1066)===

At the start of the Middle Ages, England was a part of Britannia, a former province of the Roman Empire. The local economy had once been dominated by imperial Roman spending on a large military establishment, which in turn helped to support a complex network of towns, roads, and villas. At the end of the 4th century, however, Roman forces had been largely withdrawn, and this economy collapsed. Germanic settlers began to arrive in increasing numbers during the 5th and 6th centuries, establishing small farms and settlements, and their language, Old English, swiftly spread as more settlers arrived and those of the previous inhabitants who had not moved west or to Brittany switched from Common Brittonic and British Latin to the migrants&#x27; language. New political and social identities emerged, including an Anglian culture in the east of England and a Saxon culture in the south, with local groups establishing &quot;regiones&quot;, small polities ruled over by powerful families and individuals. By the 7th century, some rulers, including those of Wessex, East Anglia, Essex, and Kent, had begun to term themselves kings, living in &quot;villae regales&quot;, royal centres, and collecting tribute from the surrounding &quot;regiones&quot;; these kingdoms are often referred to as the Heptarchy.

In the 7th century, the Kingdom of Mercia rose to prominence under the leadership of King Penda. Mercia invaded neighbouring lands until it loosely controlled around 50 &quot;regiones&quot; covering much of England. Mercia and the remaining kingdoms, led by their warrior elites, continued to compete for territory throughout the 8th century. Massive earthworks, such as the defensive dyke built by Offa of Mercia, helped to defend key frontiers and towns. In 789, however, the first Scandinavian raids on England began; these Viking attacks grew in number and scale until in 865 the Danish &quot;micel here&quot; or Great Army, invaded England, captured York and defeated the kingdom of East Anglia. Mercia and Northumbria fell in 875 and 876, and Alfred of Wessex was driven into internal exile in 878.

However, in the same year Alfred won a decisive victory against the Danes at the Battle of Edington, and he exploited the fear of the Viking threat to raise large numbers of men and using a network of defended towns called &quot;burhs&quot; to defend his territory and mobilise royal resources. Suppressing internal opposition to his rule, Alfred contained the invaders within a region known as the Danelaw. Under his son, Edward the Elder, and his grandson, Æthelstan, Wessex expanded further north into Mercia and the Danelaw, and by the 950s and the reigns of Eadred and Edgar, York was finally permanently retaken from the Vikings. The West Saxon rulers were now kings of the &quot;Angelcynn&quot;, that is of the whole English folk.

With the death of Edgar, however, the royal succession became problematic. Æthelred took power in 978 following the murder of his brother Edward, but England was then invaded by Sweyn Forkbeard, the son of a Danish king. Attempts to bribe Sweyn not to attack using danegeld payments failed, and he took the throne in 1013. Swein&#x27;s son, Cnut, liquidated many of the older English families following his seizure of power in 1016. Æthelred&#x27;s son, Edward the Confessor, had survived in exile in Normandy and returned to claim the throne in 1042. Edward was childless, and the succession again became a concern. England became dominated by the Godwin family, who had taken advantage of the Danish killings to acquire huge wealth. When Edward died in 1066, Harold Godwinson claimed the throne, defeating his rival Norwegian claimant, Harald Hardrada, at the battle of Stamford Bridge.

===High Middle Ages (1066–1272)===

In 1066, William, Duke of Normandy, took advantage of the English succession crisis to begin the Norman Conquest. With an army of Norman followers and mercenaries, he defeated Harold at the Battle of Hastings on 14 October 1066 and rapidly occupied the south of England. William used a network of castles to control the major centres of power, granting extensive lands to his main Norman followers and co-opting or eliminating the former Anglo-Saxon elite. Major revolts followed, which William suppressed before intervening in the north-east of England, establishing Norman control of York and devastating the region. Some Norman lords used England as a launching point for attacks into South and North Wales, spreading up the valleys to create new Marcher territories. By the time of William&#x27;s death in 1087, England formed the largest part of an Anglo-Norman empire, ruled over by a network of nobles with landholdings across England, Normandy, and Wales. England&#x27;s growing wealth was critical in allowing the Norman kings to project power across the region, including funding campaigns along the frontiers of Normandy.

Norman rule, however, proved unstable; successions to the throne were contested, leading to violent conflicts between the claimants and their noble supporters. William II inherited the throne but faced revolts attempting to replace him with his older brother Robert or his cousin Stephen of Aumale. In 1100, William II died while hunting. Despite Robert&#x27;s rival claims, his younger brother Henry I immediately seized power. War broke out, ending in Robert&#x27;s defeat at Tinchebrai and his subsequent life imprisonment. Robert&#x27;s son Clito remained free, however, and formed the focus for fresh revolts until his death in 1128. Henry&#x27;s only legitimate son, William, died aboard the &quot;White Ship&quot; disaster of 1120, sparking a fresh succession crisis: Henry&#x27;s nephew, Stephen of Blois, claimed the throne in 1135, but this was disputed by the Empress Matilda, Henry&#x27;s daughter. Civil war broke out across England and Normandy, resulting in a long period of warfare later termed the Anarchy. Matilda&#x27;s son, Henry, finally agreed to a peace settlement at Winchester and succeeded as king in 1154.

Henry II was the first of the Angevin rulers of England, so-called because he was also the Count of Anjou in Northern France. Henry had also acquired the huge duchy of Aquitaine by marriage, and England became a key part of a loose-knit assemblage of lands spread across Western Europe, later termed the Angevin Empire. Henry reasserted royal authority and rebuilt the royal finances, intervening to claim power in Ireland and promoting the Anglo-Norman colonisation of the country. Henry strengthened England&#x27;s borders with Wales and Scotland, and used the country&#x27;s wealth to fund a long-running war with his rivals in France, but arrangements for his succession once again proved problematic. Several revolts broke out, led by Henry&#x27;s children who were eager to acquire power and lands, sometimes backed by France, Scotland and the Welsh princes. After a final confrontation with Henry, his son Richard I succeeded to the throne in 1189.

Richard spent his reign focused on protecting his possessions in France and fighting in the Third Crusade; his brother, John, inherited England in 1199 but lost Normandy and most of Aquitaine after several years of war with France. John fought successive, increasingly expensive, campaigns in a bid to regain these possessions. John&#x27;s efforts to raise revenues, combined with his fractious relationships with many of the English barons, led to confrontation in 1215, an attempt to restore peace through the signing of &quot;Magna Carta&quot;, and finally the outbreak of the First Barons&#x27; War. John died having fought the rebel barons and their French backers to a stalemate, and royal power was re-established by barons loyal to the young Henry III. England&#x27;s power structures remained unstable and the outbreak of the Second Barons&#x27; War in 1264 resulted in the king&#x27;s capture by Simon de Montfort. Henry&#x27;s son, Edward, defeated the rebel factions between 1265 and 1267, restoring his father to power.

===Late Middle Ages (1272–1485)===
On becoming king, Edward I rebuilt the status of the monarchy, restoring and extending key castles that had fallen into disrepair. Uprisings by the princes of North Wales led to Edward mobilising a huge army, defeating the native Welsh and undertaking a programme of English colonisation and castle building across the region. Further wars were conducted in Flanders and Aquitaine. Edward also fought campaigns in Scotland, but was unable to achieve strategic victory, and the costs created tensions that nearly led to civil war. Edward II inherited the war with Scotland and faced growing opposition to his rule as a result of his royal favourites and military failures. The Despenser War of 1321–22 was followed by instability and the subsequent overthrow, and possible murder, of Edward in 1327 at the hands of his French wife, Isabella, and a rebel baron, Roger Mortimer. Isabella and Mortimer&#x27;s regime lasted only a few years before falling to a coup, led by Isabella&#x27;s son Edward III, in 1330.

Like his grandfather, Edward III took steps to restore royal power, but during the 1340s the Black Death arrived in England. The losses from the epidemic, and the recurring plagues that followed it, significantly affected events in England for many years to come. Meanwhile, Edward, under pressure from France in Aquitaine, made a challenge for the French throne. Over the next century, English forces fought many campaigns in a long-running conflict that became known as the Hundred Years&#x27; War. Despite the challenges involved in raising the revenues to pay for the war, Edward&#x27;s military successes brought an influx of plundered wealth to many parts of England and enabled substantial building work by the king. Many members of the English elite, including Edward&#x27;s son the Black Prince, were heavily involved in campaigning in France and administering the new continental territories.

Edward&#x27;s grandson, the young Richard II, faced political and economic problems, many resulting from the Black Death, including the Peasants&#x27; Revolt that broke out across the south of England in 1381. Over the coming decades, Richard and groups of nobles vied for power and control of policy towards France until Henry of Bolingbroke seized the throne with the support of parliament in 1399. Ruling as Henry IV, he exercised power through a royal council and parliament, while attempting to enforce political and religious conformity. His son, Henry V, reinvigorated the war with France and came close to achieving strategic success shortly before his death in 1422. Henry VI became king at the age of only nine months and both the English political system and the military situation in France began to unravel.

A sequence of bloody civil wars, later termed the Wars of the Roses, finally broke out in 1455, spurred on by an economic crisis and a widespread perception of poor government. Edward IV, leading a faction known as the Yorkists, removed Henry from power in 1461 but by 1469 fighting recommenced as Edward, Henry, and Edward&#x27;s brother George, backed by leading nobles and powerful French supporters, vied for power. By 1471 Edward was triumphant and most of his rivals were dead. On his death, power passed to his brother Richard of Gloucester, who initially ruled on behalf of the young Edward V before seizing the throne himself as Richard III. The future Henry VII, aided by French and Scottish troops, returned to England and defeated Richard at the battle of Bosworth in 1485, bringing an end to the majority of the fighting, although lesser rebellions against his Tudor dynasty would continue for several years afterwards.

==Government and society==

===Governance and social structures===
====Early Middle Ages (600–1066)====
The Anglo-Saxon kingdoms were hierarchical societies, each based on ties of allegiance between powerful lords and their immediate followers. At the top of the social structure was the king, who stood above many of the normal processes of Anglo-Saxon life and whose household had special privileges and protection. Beneath the king were &quot;thegns&quot;, nobles, the more powerful of which maintained their own courts and were termed &quot;ealdormen&quot;. The relationship between kings and their nobles was bound up with military symbolism and the ritual exchange of weapons and armour. Freemen, called &quot;churls&quot;, formed the next level of society, often holding land in their own right or controlling businesses in the towns. &quot;Geburs&quot;, peasants who worked land belonging to a &quot;thegn&quot;, formed a lower class still. The very lowest class were slaves, who could be bought and sold and who held only minimal rights.

The balance of power between these different groups changed over time. Early in the period, kings were elected by members of the late king&#x27;s council, but primogeniture rapidly became the norm for succession. The kings further bolstered their status by adopting Christian ceremonies and nomenclature, introducing ecclesiastical coronations during the 8th century and terming themselves &quot;Christ&#x27;s deputy&quot; by the 11th century. Huge estates were initially built up by the king, bishops, monasteries and &quot;thegns&quot;, but in the 9th and 10th centuries these were slowly broken up as a consequence of inheritance arrangements, marriage settlements and church purchases. In the 11th century, the royal position worsened further, as the &quot;ealdormen&quot; rapidly built up huge new estates, making them collectively much more powerful than the king—this contributed to the political instability of the final Anglo-Saxon years. As time went by, the position of the &quot;churls&quot; deteriorated, as their rights were slowly eroded and their duties to their lords increased.

The kingdom of Wessex, which eventually laid claim to England as a whole, evolved a centralised royal administration. One part of this was the king&#x27;s council, the &quot;witenagemot&quot;, comprising the senior clergy, &quot;ealdormen&quot;, and some of the more important &quot;thegns&quot;; the council met to advise the king on policy and legal issues. The royal household included officials, &quot;thegns&quot; and a secretariat of clergy which travelled with the king, conducting the affairs of government as it went. Under the Danish kings, a bodyguard of housecarls also accompanied the court. At a regional level, &quot;ealdormen&quot; played an important part in government, defence and taxation, and the post of sheriff emerged in the 10th century, administering local shires on behalf of an ealdorman. Anglo-Saxon mints were tightly controlled by the kings, providing a high-quality currency, and the whole country was taxed using a system called hidage.

The Anglo-Saxon kings built up a set of written laws, issued either as statutes or codes, but these laws were never written down in their entirety and were always supplemented by an extensive oral tradition of customary law. In the early part of the period local assemblies called moots were gathered to apply the laws to particular cases; in the 10th century these were replaced by hundred courts, serving local areas, and shire moots dealing with larger regions of the kingdom. Many churchmen and &quot;thegns&quot; were also given permission by the king to hold their own local courts. The legal system depended on a system of oaths in which the value of different individuals swearing on behalf of the plaintiff or defendant varied according to their social status – the word of a companion of the king, for example, was worth twelve times that of a &quot;churl&quot;. If fines were imposed, their size similarly varied accord to the oath-value of the individual. The Anglo-Saxon authorities struggled to deal with the bloodfeuds between families that emerged following violent killings, attempting to use a system of &quot;weregild&quot;, a payment of blood money, as a way of providing an alternative to long-running vendettas.

====High Middle Ages (1066–1272)====

Within twenty years of the Norman conquest, the former Anglo-Saxon elite were replaced by a new class of Norman nobility, with around 8,000 Normans and French settling in England. The new earls (successors to the ealdermen), sheriffs and church seniors were all drawn from their ranks. In many areas of society there was continuity, as the Normans adopted many of the Anglo-Saxon governmental institutions, including the tax system, mints and the centralisation of law-making and some judicial matters; initially sheriffs and the hundred courts continued to function as before. The existing tax liabilities were captured in the Domesday Book, produced in 1086.

Changes in other areas soon began to be felt. The method of government after the conquest can be described as a feudal system, in that the new nobles held their lands on behalf of the king; in return for promising to provide military support and taking an oath of allegiance, called homage, they were granted lands termed a fief or an honour. Major nobles in turn granted lands to smaller landowners in return for homage and further military support, and eventually the peasantry held land in return for local labour services, creating a web of loyalties and resources enforced in part by new honorial courts. This system had been used in Normandy and concentrated more power in the king and the upper elite than the former Anglo-Saxon system of government. The practice of slavery declined in the years after the conquest, as the Normans considered the practice backward and contrary to the teachings of the church. The more prosperous peasants, however, lost influence and power as the Normans made holding land more dependent on providing labour services to the local lord. They sank down the economic hierarchy, swelling the numbers of unfree villeins or serfs, forbidden to leave their manor or seek alternative employment.

At the centre of power, the kings employed a succession of clergy as chancellors, responsible for running the royal chancery, while the &quot;familia regis&quot;, the military household, emerged to act as a bodyguard and military staff. England&#x27;s bishops continued to form an important part in local administration, alongside the nobility. Henry I and Henry II both implemented significant legal reforms, extending and widening the scope of centralised, royal law; by the 1180s, the basis for the future English common law had largely been established, with a standing law court in Westminster—an early Common Bench—and travelling judges conducting eyres around the country. King John extended the royal role in delivering justice, and the extent of appropriate royal intervention was one of the issues addressed in the &quot;Magna Carta&quot; of 1215. The emerging legal system reinvigorated the institution of serfdom in the 13th century by drawing an increasingly sharp distinction between freemen and villeins.

Many tensions existed within the system of government. Royal landownings and wealth stretched across England, and placed the king in a privileged position above even the most powerful of the noble elite. Successive kings, though, still needed more resources to pay for military campaigns, conduct building programmes or to reward their followers, and this meant exercising their feudal rights to interfere in the land-holdings of nobles. This was contentious and a frequent issue of complaint, as there was a growing belief that land should be held by hereditary right, not through the favour of the king. Property and wealth became increasingly focused in the hands of a subset of the nobility, the great magnates, at the expense of the wider baronage, encouraging the breakdown of some aspects of local feudalism. As time went by, the Norman nobility intermarried with many of the great Anglo-Saxon families, and the links with the Duchy began to weaken. By the late 12th century, mobilising the English barons to fight on the continent was proving difficult, and John&#x27;s attempts to do so ended in civil war. Civil strife re-emerged under Henry III, with the rebel barons in 1258–59 demanding widespread reforms, and an early version of Parliament was summoned in 1265 to represent the rebel interests.

====Late Middle Ages (1272–1485)====
On becoming king in 1272, Edward I reestablished royal power, overhauling the royal finances and appealing to the broader English elite by using Parliament to authorise the raising of new taxes and to hear petitions concerning abuses of local governance. This political balance collapsed under Edward II and savage civil wars broke out during the 1320s. Edward III restored order once more with the help of a majority of the nobility, exercising power through the exchequer, the common bench and the royal household. This government was better organised and on a larger scale than ever before, and by the 14th century the king&#x27;s formerly peripatetic chancery had to take up permanent residence in Westminster. Edward used Parliament even more than his predecessors to handle general administration, to legislate and to raise the necessary taxes to pay for the wars in France. The royal lands—and incomes from them—had diminished over the years, and increasingly frequent taxation was required to support royal initiatives. Edward held elaborate chivalric events in an effort to unite his supporters around the symbols of knighthood. The ideal of chivalry continued to develop throughout the 14th century, reflected in the growth of knightly orders (including the Order of the Garter), grand tournaments and round table events.

Society and government in England in the early 14th century were challenged by the Great Famine and the Black Death. The economic and demographic crisis created a sudden surplus of land, undermining the ability of landowners to exert their feudal rights and causing a collapse in incomes from rented lands. Wages soared, as employers competed for a scarce workforce. Statute of Labourers 1351 was introduced to limit wages and to prevent the consumption of luxury goods by the lower classes, with prosecutions coming to take up most of the legal system&#x27;s energy and time. A poll tax was introduced in 1377 that spread the costs of the war in France more widely across the whole population. The tensions spilled over into violence in the summer of 1381 in the form of the Peasants&#x27; Revolt; a violent retribution followed, with as many as 7,000 alleged rebels executed. A new class of gentry emerged as a result of these changes, renting land from the major nobility to farm out at a profit. The legal system continued to expand during the 14th century, dealing with an ever-wider set of complex problems.

By the time that Richard II was deposed in 1399, the power of the major noble magnates had grown considerably; powerful rulers such as Henry IV would contain them, but during the minority of Henry VI they controlled the country. The magnates depended upon their income from rent and trade to allow them to maintain groups of paid, armed retainers, often sporting controversial livery, and buy support amongst the wider gentry; this system has been dubbed bastard feudalism. Their influence was exerted both through the House of Lords at Parliament and through the king&#x27;s council. The gentry and wealthier townsmen exercised increasing influence through the House of Commons, opposing raising taxes to pay for the French wars. By the 1430s and 1440s the English government was in major financial difficulties, leading to the crisis of 1450 and a popular revolt under the leadership of Jack Cade. Law and order deteriorated, and the crown was unable to intervene in the factional fighting between different nobles and their followers. The resulting Wars of the Roses saw a savage escalation of violence between the noble leaderships of both sides: captured enemies were executed and family lands attainted. By the time that Henry VII took the throne in 1485, England&#x27;s governmental and social structures had been substantially weakened, with whole noble lines extinguished.

===Women in society===
Medieval England was a patriarchal society and the lives of women were heavily influenced by contemporary beliefs about gender and authority. However, the position of women varied considerably according to various factors, including their social class; whether they were unmarried, married, widowed or remarried; and in which part of the country they lived. Significant gender inequalities persisted throughout the period, as women typically had more limited life-choices, access to employment and trade, and legal rights than men.

In Anglo-Saxon society, noblewomen enjoyed considerable rights and status, although the society was still firmly patriarchal. Some exercised power as abbesses, exerting widespread influence across the early English Church, although their wealth and authority diminished with the monastic reforms of the 9th century. Anglo-Saxon queens began to hold lands in their own right in the 10th century and their households contributed to the running of the kingdom. Although women could not lead military forces, in the absence of their husbands some noblewomen led the defence of manors and towns. Most Anglo-Saxon women, however, worked on the land as part of the agricultural community, or as brewers or bakers.

After the Norman invasion, the position of women in society changed. The rights and roles of women became more sharply defined, in part as a result of the development of the feudal system and the expansion of the English legal system; some women benefited from this, while others lost out. The rights of widows were formally laid down in law by the end of the 12th century, clarifying the right of free women to own property, but this did not necessarily prevent women from being forcibly remarried against their wishes. The growth of governmental institutions under a succession of bishops reduced the role of queens and their households in formal government. Married or widowed noblewomen remained significant cultural and religious patrons and played an important part in political and military events, even if chroniclers were uncertain if this was appropriate behaviour. As in earlier centuries, most women worked in agriculture, but here roles became more clearly gendered, with ploughing and managing the fields defined as men&#x27;s work, for example, and dairy production becoming dominated by women.

The years after the Black Death left many women widows; in the wider economy labour was in short supply and land was suddenly readily available. In rural areas peasant women could enjoy a better standard of living than ever before, but the amount of work being done by women may have increased. Many other women travelled to the towns and cities, to the point where they outnumbered men in some settlements. There they worked with their husbands, or in a limited number of occupations, including spinning, making clothes, victualling and as servants. Some women became full-time ale brewers, until they were pushed out of business by the male-dominated beer industry in the 15th century. Higher status jobs and apprenticeships, however, remained closed to women. As in earlier times, noblewomen exercised power on their estates in their husbands&#x27; absence and again, if necessary, defended them in sieges and skirmishes. Wealthy widows who could successfully claim their rightful share of their late husband&#x27;s property could live as powerful members of the community in their own right.

===Identity===
An English cultural identity first emerged from the interaction of the Germanic immigrants of the 5th and 6th centuries and the indigenous Romano-British inhabitants. Although early medieval chroniclers described the immigrants as Angles and Saxons, they came from a much wider area across Northern Europe, and represented a range of different ethnic groups. Over the 6th century, however, these different groups began to coalesce into stratified societies across England, roughly corresponding to the later Angle and Saxon kingdoms recorded by Bede in the 8th century. By the 9th century, the term the &quot;Angelcynn&quot; was being officially used to refer to a single English people, and promoted for propaganda purposes by chroniclers and kings to inspire resistance to the Danish invasions.

The Normans and French who arrived after the conquest saw themselves as different from the English. They had close family and economic links to the Duchy of Normandy, spoke Norman French and had their own distinctive culture. For many years, to be English was to be associated with military failure and serfdom. During the 12th century, the divisions between the English and Normans began to dissolve as a result of intermarriage and cohabitation. By the end of the 12th century, and possibly as early as the 1150, contemporary commentators believed the two peoples to be blending, and the loss of the Duchy in 1204 reinforced this trend. The resulting society still prized wider French cultural values, however, and French remained the language of the court, business and international affairs, even if Parisians mocked the English for their poor pronunciation. By the 14th century, however, French was increasingly having to be formally taught, rather than being learnt naturally in the home, although the aristocracy would typically spend many years of their lives in France and remained entirely comfortable working in French.

During the 12th and 13th centuries, the English began to consider themselves superior to the Welsh, Scots and Bretons. The English perceived themselves as civilised, economically prosperous and properly Christian, while the Celtic fringe was considered lazy, barbarous and backward. Following the invasion of Ireland in the late 12th century, similar feelings were expressed about the Irish, with the distinctions clarified and reinforced in 14th-century English legislation. The English also felt strongly about the foreign traders who lived in the special enclaves in London in the Late Middle Ages; the position of the Jews is described below, but Italian and Baltic traders were also regarded as aliens and were frequently the targets of violence during economic downturns. Even within England, different identities abounded, each with their own sense of status and importance. Regional identities could be important – men and women from Yorkshire, for example, had a clear identity within English society, and professional groups with a distinct identity, such as lawyers, engaged in open fighting with others in cities such as London.

===Jews===
The Jewish community played an important role in England throughout much of the period. The first Jews arrived in England in the aftermath of the Norman invasion, when William the Conqueror brought over wealthy members of the Rouen community in Normandy to settle in London. The Jewish community expanded out across England and provided essential money-lending and banking services that were otherwise banned by the usury laws. During the 12th century, the Jewish financial community grew richer still, operating under royal protection and providing the king with a source of ready credit. All major towns had Jewish centres, and even the smaller towns saw visits by travelling Jewish merchants. Towards the end of Henry II&#x27;s reign, however, the king ceased to borrow from the Jewish community and instead turned to extracting money from them through arbitrary taxation and fines. The Jews became vilified and accusations were made that they conducted ritual child murder, encouraging the pogroms carried out against Jewish communities in the reign of Richard I. After an initially peaceful start to John&#x27;s reign, the king again began to extort money from the Jewish community and, with the breakdown in order in 1215, the Jews were subject to fresh attacks. Henry III restored some protection and Jewish money-lending began to recover. Despite this, the Jewish community became increasingly impoverished and was finally expelled from England in 1290 by Edward I, being replaced by foreign merchants.

==Religion==
===Rise of Christianity===
Christianity had been the official imperial religion of the Roman Empire, and the first churches were built in England in the second half of the 4th century, overseen by a hierarchy of bishops and priests. Many existing pagan shrines were converted to Christian use and few pagan sites still operated by the 5th century. The collapse of the Roman system in the late 5th century, however, brought about the end of formal Christian religion in the east of England, and the new Germanic immigrants arrived with their own polytheistic gods, including Woden, Thunor and Tiw, still reflected in various English place names. Despite the resurgence of paganism in England, Christian communities still survived in more western areas such as Gloucestershire and Somerset.

The movement towards Christianity began again in the late 6th and 7th centuries, helped by the conversion of the Franks in Northern France, who carried considerable influence in England. Pope Gregory I sent a team of missionaries to convert King Æthelberht of Kent and his household, starting the process of converting Kent. Augustine became the first Archbishop of Canterbury and started to build new churches across the South-East, reusing existing pagan shrines. Oswald and Oswiu, kings of Northumbria, were converted in the 630s and 640s, and the wave of change carried on through the middle of the 7th century across the kingdoms of Mercia, the South Saxons and the Isle of Wight. The process was largely complete by the end of the 7th century, but left a confusing and disparate array of local practices and religious ceremonies. This new Christianity reflected the existing military culture of the Anglo-Saxons: as kings began to convert in the 6th and 7th centuries, conversion began to be used as a justification for war against the remaining pagan kingdoms, for example, while Christian saints were imbued with martial properties.

The Viking invasions of the 8th and 9th centuries reintroduced paganism to North-East England, leading in turn to another wave of conversion. Indigenous Scandinavian beliefs were very similar to other Germanic groups, with a pantheon of gods including Odin, Thor and Ullr, combined with a belief in a final, apocalyptic battle called Ragnarok. The Norse settlers in England were converted relatively quickly, assimilating their beliefs into Christianity in the decades following the occupation of York, which the Archbishop had survived. The process was largely complete by the early 10th century and enabled England&#x27;s leading Churchmen to negotiate with the warlords. As the Norse in mainland Scandinavia started to convert, many mainland rulers recruited missionaries from England to assist in the process.

===Religious institutions===

With the conversion of much of England in the 6th and 7th centuries, there was an explosion of local church building. English monasteries formed the main basis for the church, however, and were often sponsored by local rulers, taking various forms, including mixed communities headed by abbesses, bishop-led communities of monks, and others formed around married priests and their families. Cathedrals were constructed, staffed either with secular canons in the European tradition or, uniquely to England, chapters of monks. These institutions were badly affected in the 9th century by Viking raids and predatory annexations by the nobility. By the start of the 10th century, monastic lands, financial resources and the quality of monasteries&#x27; religious work had been much diminished. Reforms followed under the kings of Wessex who promoted the Benedictine rule then popular on the Continent. A reformed network of around 40 monastic institutions across the south and east of England, under the protection of the king, helped re-establish royal control over the reconquered Danelaw.

The 1066 Norman conquest brought a new set of Norman and French churchmen to power; some adopted and embraced aspects of the former Anglo-Saxon religious system, while others introduced practices from Normandy. Extensive English lands were granted to monasteries in Normandy, allowing them to create daughter priories and monastic cells across the kingdom. The monasteries were brought firmly into the web of feudal relations, with their holding of land linked to the provision of military support to the crown. The Normans adopted the Anglo-Saxon model of monastic cathedral communities, and within seventy years the majority of English cathedrals were controlled by monks; every English cathedral, however, was rebuilt to some extent by the new rulers. England&#x27;s bishops remained powerful temporal figures, and in the early 12th-century raised armies against Scottish invaders and built up extensive holdings of castles across the country.

New orders began to be introduced into England. As ties to Normandy waned, the French Cluniac order became fashionable and their houses were introduced in England. The Augustinians spread quickly from the beginning of the 12th century onwards, while later in the century the Cistercians reached England, creating houses with a more austere interpretation of the monastic rules and building the great abbeys of Rievaulx and Fountains. By 1215, there were over 600 monastic communities in England, but new endowments slowed during the 13th century, creating long-term financial problems for many institutions. The Dominican and Franciscan friars arrived in England during the 1220s, establishing 150 friaries by the end of the 13th century; these mendicant orders rapidly became popular, particularly in towns, and heavily influenced local preaching. The religious military orders that became popular across Europe from the 12th century onwards acquired possessions in England, including the Templars, Teutons and Hospitallers.

===Church, state and heresy===
The Church had a close relationship with the English state throughout the Middle Ages. The bishops and major monastic leaders played an important part in national government, having key roles on the king&#x27;s council. Bishops often oversaw towns and cities, managing local taxation and government. This frequently became untenable with the Viking incursions of the 9th century, and in locations such as Worcester the local bishops came to new accommodations with the local &quot;ealdormen&quot;, exchanging some authority and revenue for assistance in defence. The early English church was racked with disagreement on doctrine, which was addressed by the Synod of Whitby in 664; some issues were resolved, but arguments between the archbishops of Canterbury and York as to which had primacy across Britain began shortly afterwards and continued throughout most of the medieval period.

William the Conqueror acquired the support of the Church for the invasion of England by promising ecclesiastical reform. William promoted celibacy amongst the clergy and gave ecclesiastical courts more power, but also reduced the Church&#x27;s direct links to Rome and made it more accountable to the king. Tensions arose between these practices and the reforming movement of Pope Gregory VII, which advocated greater autonomy from royal authority for the clergy, condemned the practice of simony and promoted greater influence for the papacy in church matters. Despite the bishops continuing to play a major part in royal government, tensions emerged between the kings of England and key leaders within the English Church. Kings and archbishops clashed over rights of appointment and religious policy, and successive archbishops including Anselm, Theobald of Bec, Thomas Becket and Stephen Langton were variously forced into exile, arrested by royal knights or even killed. By the early 13th century, however, the church had largely won its argument for independence, answering almost entirely to Rome.

In the 1380s, several challenges emerged to the traditional teachings of the Church, resulting from the teachings of John Wycliffe, a member of Oxford University. Wycliffe argued that scripture was the best guide to understanding God&#x27;s intentions, and that the superficial nature of the liturgy, combined with the abuses of wealth within the Church and the role of senior churchmen in government, distracted from that study. A loose movement that included many members of the gentry pursued these ideas after Wycliffe&#x27;s death in 1384 and attempted to pass a Parliamentary bill in 1395: the movement was rapidly condemned by the authorities and was termed &quot;Lollardy&quot;. The English bishops were charged to control and counter this trend, disrupting Lollard preachers and to enforcing the teaching of suitable sermons in local churches. By the early 15th century, combating Lollard teachings had become a key political issue, championed by Henry IV and his Lancastrian followers, who used the powers of both the church and state to combat the heresy.

===Pilgrimages and Crusades===

Pilgrimages were a popular religious practice throughout the Middle Ages in England, with the tradition dating back to the Roman period. Typically pilgrims would travel short distances to a shrine or a particular church, either to do penance for a perceived sin, or to seek relief from an illness or other condition. Some pilgrims travelled further, either to more distant sites within Britain or, in a few cases, onto the continent.

During the Anglo-Saxon period, many shrines were built on former pagan sites which became popular pilgrimage destinations, while other pilgrims visited prominent monasteries and sites of learning. Senior nobles or kings would travel to Rome, which was a popular destination from the 7th century onwards; sometimes these trips were a form of convenient political exile. Under the Normans, religious institutions with important shrines, such as Glastonbury, Canterbury and Winchester, promoted themselves as pilgrimage destinations, maximising the value of the historic miracles associated with the sites. Accumulating relics became an important task for ambitious institutions, as these were believed to hold curative powers and lent status to the site. Indeed, by the 12th century reports of posthumous miracles by local saints were becoming increasingly common in England, adding to the attractiveness of pilgrimages to prominent relics.

Participation in the Crusades was also seen as a form of pilgrimage, and indeed the same Latin word, &quot;peregrinatio&quot;, was sometimes applied to both activities. While English participation in the First Crusade between 1095 and 1099 was limited, England played a prominent part in the Second, Third and Fifth Crusades over the next two centuries, with many crusaders leaving for the Levant during the intervening years. The idea of undertaking a pilgrimage to Jerusalem was not new in England, however, as the idea of religiously justified warfare went back to Anglo-Saxon times. Many of those who took up the Cross to go on a Crusade never actually left, often because the individual lacked sufficient funds to undertake the journey. Raising funds to travel typically involved crusaders selling or mortgaging their lands and possessions, which affected their families and, at times, considerably affected the economy as a whole.

==Economy and technology==

===Geography===
England had a diverse geography in the medieval period, from the Fenlands of East Anglia or the heavily wooded Weald, through to the upland moors of Yorkshire. Despite this, medieval England broadly formed two zones, roughly divided by the rivers Exe and Tees: the south and east of England had lighter, richer soils, able to support both arable and pastoral agriculture, while the poorer soils and colder climate of the north and west produced a predominantly pastoral economy. Slightly more land was covered by trees than in the 20th century, and bears, beavers and wolves lived wild in England, bears being hunted to extinction by the 11th century and beavers by the 12th. Of the 10,000 miles of roads that had been built by the Romans, many remained in use and four were of particular strategic importance—the Icknield Way, the Fosse Way, Ermine Street and Watling Street—which criss-crossed the entire country. The road system was adequate for the needs of the period, although it was significantly cheaper to transport goods by water. The major river networks formed key transport routes, while many English towns formed navigable inland ports.

For much of the Middle Ages, England&#x27;s climate differed from that in the 21st century. Between the 9th and 13th centuries England went through the Medieval Warm Period, a prolonged period of warmer temperatures; in the early 13th century, for example, summers were around 1 °C warmer than today and the climate was slightly drier. These warmer temperatures allowed poorer land to be brought into cultivation and for grapevines to be cultivated relatively far north. The Warm Period was followed by several centuries of much cooler temperatures, termed the Little Ice Age; by the 14th century spring temperatures had dropped considerably, reaching their coldest in the 1340s and 1350s. This cold end to the Middle Ages significantly affected English agriculture and living conditions.

Even at the start of the Middle Ages the English landscape had been shaped by human occupation over many centuries. Much woodland was new, the result of fields being reclaimed by brush after the collapse of the Roman Empire. Human intervention had established wood pastures, an ancient system for managing woods and animals, and coppicing, a more intensive approach to managing woodlands. Other agricultural lands included arable fields and pastorage, while in some parts of the country, such as the South-West, waste moorland remained testament to earlier over-farming in the Bronze Age. England&#x27;s environment continued to be shaped throughout the period, through the building of dykes to drain marshes, tree clearance and the large-scale extraction of peat. Managed parks for hunting game, including deer and boars, were built as status symbols by the nobility from the 12th century onwards, but earlier versions of parks, such as hays, may have originated as early as the 7th century.

===Economy and demographics===
The English economy was fundamentally agricultural, depending on growing crops such as wheat, barley and oats on an open field system, and husbanding sheep, cattle and pigs. In the late Anglo-Saxon period many peasants moved away from living in isolated hamlets and instead came together to form larger villages engaged in arable cultivation. Agricultural land became typically organised around manors, and was divided between some fields that the landowner would manage directly, called demesne land, and the majority of the fields that would be cultivated by local peasants. These peasants would pay rent to the landowner either through agricultural labour on the lord&#x27;s demesne fields or through rent in the form of cash and produce. By the 11th century, a market economy was flourishing across much of England, while the eastern and southern towns were heavily involved in international trade. Around 6,000 watermills were built to grind flour, freeing up labour for other more productive agricultural tasks.

Although the Norman invasion caused some damage as soldiers looted the countryside and land was confiscated for castle building, the English economy was not greatly affected. Taxes were increased, however, and the Normans established extensive forests that were exploited for their natural resources and protected by royal laws. The next two centuries saw huge growth in the English economy, driven in part by the increase in the population from around 1.5 million in 1086 to between 4 and 5 million in 1300. More land, much of it at the expense of the royal forests, was brought into production to feed the growing population and to produce wool for export to Europe. Many hundreds of new towns, some of them planned communities, were built across England, supporting the creation of guilds, charter fairs and other medieval institutions which governed the growing trade. Jewish financiers played a significant role in funding the growing economy, along with the new Cistercian and Augustinian religious orders that emerged as major players in the wool trade of the north. Mining increased in England, with a silver boom in the 12th century helping to fuel the expansion of the money supply.

Economic growth began to falter at the end of the 13th century, owing to a combination of overpopulation, land shortages and depleted soils. The Great Famine shook the English economy severely and population growth ceased; the first outbreak of the Black Death in 1348 then killed around half the English population. The agricultural sector shrank rapidly, with higher wages, lower prices and diminishing profits leading to the final demise of the old demesne system and the advent of the modern farming system centring on the charging of cash rents for lands. As returns on land fell, many estates, and in some cases entire settlements, were simply abandoned, and nearly 1,500 villages were deserted during this period. A new class of gentry emerged who rented farms from the major nobility. Unsuccessful government attempts were made to regulate wages and consumption, but these largely collapsed in the decades following the Peasants&#x27; Revolt of 1381.

The English cloth industry grew considerably at the start of the 15th century, and a new class of international English merchant emerged, typically based in London or the South-West, prospering at the expense of the older, shrinking economies of the eastern towns. These new trading systems brought about the end of many of the international fairs and the rise of the chartered company. Fishing in the North Sea expanded into deeper waters, backed by commercial investment from major merchants. Between 1440 and 1480, however, Europe entered a recession and England suffered the Great Slump: trade collapsed, driving down agricultural prices, rents and ultimately the acceptable levels of royal taxation. The resulting tensions and discontent played an important part in Jack Cade&#x27;s popular uprising in 1450 and the subsequent Wars of the Roses. By the end of Middle Ages the economy had begun to recover and considerable improvements were being made in metalworking and shipbuilding that would shape the Early Modern economy.

===Technology and science===
Technology and science in England advanced considerably during the Middle Ages, driven in part by the Greek and Islamic thinking that reached England from the 12th century onwards. Many advances were made in scientific ideas, including the introduction of Arabic numerals and a sequence of improvements in the units used for measuring time. Clocks were first built in England in the late 13th century, and the first mechanical clocks were certainly being installed in cathedrals and abbeys by the 1320s. Astrology, magic and palm reading were also considered important forms of knowledge in medieval England, although some doubted their reliability.

The period produced some influential English scholars. Roger Bacon, a philosopher and Franciscan friar, produced works on natural philosophy, astronomy and alchemy; his work set out the theoretical basis for future experimentation in the natural sciences. William of Ockham helped to fuse Latin, Greek and Islamic writing into a general theory of logic; &quot;Ockham&#x27;s Razor&quot; was one of his oft-cited conclusions. English scholars since the time of Bede had believed the world was probably round, but Johannes de Sacrobosco estimated the circumference of the earth in the 13th century. Despite the limitations of medieval medicine, Gilbertus Anglicus published the &quot;Compendium Medicinae&quot;, one of the longest medical works ever written in Latin. Prominent historical and science texts began to be translated into English for the first time in the second half of the 14th century, including the &quot;Polychronicon&quot; and &quot;The Travels of Sir John Mandeville&quot;. The universities of Oxford and Cambridge were established during the 11th and 12th centuries, drawing on the model of the University of Paris.

Technological advances proceeded in a range of areas. Watermills to grind grain had existed during most of the Anglo-Saxon period, using horizontal mill designs; from the 12th century on many more were built, eliminating the use of hand mills, with the older horizontal mills gradually supplanted by a new vertical mill design. Windmills began to be built in the late 12th century and slowly became more common. Water-powered fulling mills and powered hammers first appeared in the 12th century; water power was harnessed to assist in smelting by the 14th century, with the first blast furnace opening in 1496. New mining methods were developed and horse-powered pumps were installed in English mines by the end of the Middle Ages. The introduction of hopped beer transformed the brewing industry in the 14th century, and new techniques were invented to better preserve fish. Glazed pottery became widespread in the 12th and 13th centuries, with stoneware pots largely replacing wooden plates and bowls by the 15th century. William Caxton and Wynkyn de Worde began using the printing press during the late 15th century. Transport links were also improved; many road bridges were either erected or rebuilt in stone during the long economic boom of the 12th and 13th centuries. England&#x27;s maritime trade benefited from the introduction of cog ships, and many docks were improved and fitted with cranes for the first time.

==Warfare==

===Armies===
Warfare was endemic in early Anglo-Saxon England, and major conflicts still occurred approximately every generation in the later period. Groups of well-armed noblemen and their households formed the heart of these armies, supported by larger numbers of temporary troops levied from across the kingdom, called the fyrd. By the 9th century, armies of 20,000 men could be called up for campaigns, with another 28,000 men available to guard urban defences. The most common weapon was the spear, with swords used by the wealthier nobles; cavalry was probably less common than in wider Europe, but some Anglo-Saxons did fight from horseback. The Viking attacks on England in the 9th century led to developments in tactics, including the use of shield walls in battle, and the Scandinavian seizure of power in the 11th century introduced housecarls, a form of elite household soldier who protected the king.

Anglo-Norman warfare was characterised by attritional military campaigns, in which commanders tried to raid enemy lands and seize castles in order to allow them to take control of their adversaries&#x27; territory, ultimately winning slow but strategic victories. Pitched battles were occasionally fought between armies but these were considered risky engagements and usually avoided by prudent commanders. The armies of the period comprised bodies of mounted, armoured knights, supported by infantry. Crossbowmen become more numerous in the 12th century, alongside the older shortbow. At the heart of these armies was the &quot;familia regis&quot;, the permanent military household of the king, which was supported in war by feudal levies, drawn up by local nobles for a limited period of service during a campaign. Mercenaries were increasingly employed, driving up the cost of warfare considerably, and adequate supplies of ready cash became essential for the success of campaigns.

In the late 13th century Edward I expanded the &quot;familia regis&quot; to become a small standing army, forming the core of much larger armies up to 28,700 strong, largely comprising foot soldiers, for campaigns in Scotland and France. By the time of Edward III, armies were smaller in size, but the troops were typically better equipped and uniformed, and the archers carried the longbow, a potentially devastating weapon. Cannons were first used by English forces at battles such as Crécy in 1346. Soldiers began to be contracted for specific campaigns, a practice which may have hastened the development of the armies of retainers that grew up under bastard feudalism. By the late 15th century, however, English armies were somewhat backward by wider European standards; the Wars of the Roses were fought by inexperienced soldiers, often with outdated weapons, allowing the European forces which intervened in the conflict to have a decisive effect on the outcomes of battles.

===Navies===
The first references to an English navy occur in 851, when chroniclers described Wessex ships defeating a Viking fleet. These early fleets were limited in size but grew in size in the 10th century, allowing the power of Wessex to be projected across the Irish Sea and the English Channel; Cnut&#x27;s fleet had as many as 40 vessels, while Edward the Confessor could muster 80 ships. Some ships were manned by sailors called lithesmen and bustsecarls, probably drawn from the coastal towns, while other vessels were mobilised as part of a national levy and manned by their regular crews. Naval forces played an important role during the rest of the Middle Ages, enabling the transportation of troops and supplies, raids into hostile territory and attacks on enemy fleets. English naval power became particularly important after the loss of Normandy in 1204, which turned the English Channel from a friendly transit route into a contested and critical border region. English fleets in the 13th and 14th centuries typically comprised specialist vessels, such as galleys and large transport ships, and pressed merchant vessels conscripted into action; the latter increasingly included cogs, a new form of sailing ship. Battles might be fought when one fleet found another at anchor, such as the English victory at Sluys in 1340, or in more open waters, as off the coast of Winchelsea in 1350; raiding campaigns, such as the French attacks on the south of England between 1338 and 1339, could cause devastation from which some towns never fully recovered.

===Fortifications===
Many of the fortifications built by the Romans in England survived into the Middle Ages, including the walls surrounding their military forts and cities. These defences were often reused during the unstable post-Roman period. The Anglo-Saxon kings undertook significant planned urban expansion in the 8th and 9th centuries, creating &quot;burhs&quot;, often protected with earth and wood ramparts. &quot;Burh&quot; walls sometimes utilised older Roman fortifications, both for practical reasons and to bolster their owners&#x27; reputations through the symbolism of former Roman power.

Although a small number of castles had been built in England during the 1050s, after the conquest the Normans began to build timber motte and bailey and ringwork castles in large numbers to control their newly occupied territories. During the 12th century the Normans began to build more castles in stone, with characteristic square keeps that supported both military and political functions. Royal castles were used to control key towns and forests, whilst baronial castles were used by the Norman lords to control their widespread estates; a feudal system called the castle-guard was sometimes used to provide garrisons. Castles and sieges continued to grow in military sophistication during the 12th century, and in the 13th century new defensive town walls were constructed across England.

By the 14th century, castles were combining defences with luxurious, sophisticated living arrangements and landscaped gardens and parks. Early gunpowder weapons were used to defend castles by the end of the 14th century and gunports became an essential feature for a fashionable castle. The economics of maintaining castles meant that many were left to decline or abandoned; in contrast, a small number of castles were developed by the very wealthy into palaces that hosted lavish feasts and celebrations amid elaborate architecture. Smaller defensible structures called tower houses emerged in the north of England to protect against the Scottish threat. By the late medieval period, town walls were increasingly less military in character and more often expressions of civic pride or part of urban governance: many grand gatehouses were built in the 14th and 15th centuries for these purposes.

==Arts==

===Art===
Medieval England produced art in the form of paintings, carvings, books, fabrics and many functional but beautiful objects. A wide range of materials was used, including gold, glass and ivory, the art usually drawing overt attention to the materials utilised in the designs. Anglo-Saxon artists created carved ivories, illuminated manuscripts, embroidered cloths, crosses and stone sculpture, although relatively few of these have survived to the modern period. They produced a wide range of metalwork, frequently using gold and garnets, with brooches, buckles, sword hilts and drinking horns particularly favoured designs. Early designs, such as those found at the Sutton Hoo burial, used a zoomorphic style, heavily influenced by Germanic fashions, in which animal shapes were distorted into flowing shapes and positioned alongside geometric patterns. From the 7th century onwards more naturalistic designs became popular, showing a plasticity of form and incorporating both animals and people into the designs. In the 10th century, Carolingian styles, inspired by Classical imagery, began to enter from the continent, becoming widely used in the reformed Benedictine monasteries across the south and east of England.

The Norman conquest introduced northern French artistic styles, particular in illuminated manuscripts and murals, and reduced the demand for carvings. In other artistic areas, including embroidery, the Anglo-Saxon influence remained evident into the 12th century, and the famous Bayeux Tapestry is an example of older styles being reemployed under the new regime. Stained glass became a distinctive form of English art during this later medieval period, although the coloured glass for these works was almost entirely imported from Europe. Little early stained glass in England has survived, but it typically had both an ornamental and educational function, while later works also commemorated the sponsors of the windows into the designs. English tapestry making and embroidery in the early 14th century were of an especially high quality; works produced by nuns and London professionals were exported across Europe, becoming known as the &quot;opus anglicanum&quot;. English illuminated books, such as the Queen Mary Psalter, were also famous in this period, featuring rich decoration, a combination of grotesque and natural figures and rich colours. The quality of illuminated art in England declined significantly in the face of competition from Flanders in the 14th century, and later English illuminated medieval pieces generally imitated Flemish styles.

===Literature, drama and music===

The Anglo-Saxons produced extensive poetry in Old English, some of which was written down as early as the 9th century, although most surviving poems were compiled in the 10th and early 11th century. &quot;Beowulf&quot;, probably written between 650 and 750, is typical of these poems, portraying a vivid, heroic tale, ending with the protagonist&#x27;s death at the hands of a dragon, but still showing signs of the new Christian influences in England. Old English was also used for academic and courtly writing from the 9th century onwards, including translations of popular foreign works, including &quot;The Pastoral Care&quot;.

Poetry and stories written in French were popular after the Norman conquest, and by the 12th century some works on English history began to be produced in French verse. Romantic poems about tournaments and courtly love became popular in Paris and this fashion spread into England in the form of &quot;lays&quot;; stories about the court of King Arthur were also fashionable, due in part to the interest of Henry II. English continued to be used on a modest scale to write local religious works and some poems in the north of England, but most major works were produced in Latin or French. In the reign of Richard II there was an upsurge in the use of Middle English in poetry, sometimes termed &quot;Ricardian poetry&quot;, although the works still emulated French fashions. The work of Geoffrey Chaucer from the 1370s onwards, however, culminating in the influential &quot;Canterbury Tales&quot;, was uniquely English in style. Major pieces of courtly poetry continued to be produced into the 15th century by Chaucer&#x27;s disciples, and Thomas Malory compiled the older Arthurian tales to produce &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;.

Music and singing were important in England during the medieval period, being used in religious ceremonies, court occasions and to accompany theatrical works. Singing techniques called gymel were introduced in England in the 13th century, accompanied by instruments such as the guitar, harp, pipes and organ. Henry IV sponsored an extensive range of music in England, while his son Henry V brought back many influences from occupied France. Carols became an important form of music in the 15th century; originally these had been a song sung during a dance with a prominent refrain — the 15th century form lost the dancing and introduced strong religious overtones. Ballads were also popular from the late 14th century onwards, including the &quot;Ballad of Chevy Chase&quot; and others describing the activities of Robin Hood. Miracle plays were performed to communicate the Bible in various locations. By the late 14th century, these had been extended into vernacular mystery plays which performed annually over several days, broken up into various cycles of plays; a handful have survived into the 21st century. Guilds competed to produce the best plays in each town and performances were often an expression of civic identity.

===Architecture===
In the century after the collapse of the Romano-British economy, very few substantial buildings were constructed and many villas and towns were abandoned. New long- and round-houses were constructed in some settlements, while in others timber buildings were built imitating the older Roman styles. The Germanic immigrants constructed small rectangular buildings from wood, and occasionally grander halls. However, the conversion to Christianity in the 6th and 7th centuries reintroduced Italian and French masons, and these craftsmen built stone churches, low in height, following a narrow, rectangular plan, plastered inside and fitted with glass and colourful vestments. This Romanesque style developed throughout the period, featuring characteristic circular arches. By the 10th and 11th centuries, much larger churches and monastery buildings were being built, featuring square and circular towers after the contemporary European fashion. The palaces constructed for the nobility centred on great timber halls, while manor houses began to appear in rural areas.

The Normans brought with them architectural styles from their own duchy, where austere stone churches were preferred. Under the early Norman kings this style was adapted to produce large, plain cathedrals with ribbed vaulting. During the 12th century the Anglo-Norman style became richer and more ornate, with pointed arches derived from French architecture replacing the curved Romanesque designs; this style is termed Early English Gothic and continued, with variation, throughout the rest of the Middle Ages. In the early 14th century the Perpendicular Gothic style was created in England, with an emphasis on verticality, immense windows and soaring arcades. Fine timber roofs in a variety of styles, but in particular the hammerbeam, were built in many English buildings. In the 15th century the architectural focus turned away from cathedrals and monasteries in favour of parish churches, often decorated with richly carved woodwork; in turn, these churches influenced the design of new chantry chapels for existing cathedrals.

Meanwhile, domestic architecture had continued to develop, with the Normans, having first occupied the older Anglo-Saxon dwellings, rapidly beginning to build larger buildings in stone and timber. The elite preferred houses with large, ground-floor halls but the less wealthy constructed simpler houses with the halls on the first floor; master and servants frequently lived in the same spaces. Wealthier town-houses were also built using stone, and incorporated business and domestic arrangements into a single functional design. By the 14th century grander houses and castles were sophisticated affairs: expensively tiled, often featuring murals and glass windows, these buildings were often designed as a set of apartments to allow greater privacy. Fashionable brick began to be used in some parts of the country, copying French tastes. Architecture that emulated the older defensive designs remained popular. Less is known about the houses of peasants during this period, although many peasants appear to have lived in relatively substantial, timber-framed long-houses; the quality of these houses improved in the prosperous years following the Black Death, often being built by professional craftsmen.

==Legacy==

===Historiography===
The first history of medieval England was written by Bede in the 8th century; many more accounts of contemporary and ancient history followed, usually termed chronicles. In the 16th century, the first academic histories began to be written, typically drawing primarily on the chroniclers and interpreting them in the light of current political concerns. Edward Gibbon&#x27;s 18th-century writings were influential, presenting the medieval period as a dark age between the glories of Rome and the rebirth of civilisation in the Early Modern period. Late Victorian historians continued to use the chroniclers as sources, but also deployed documents such as &quot;Domesday Book&quot; and &quot;Magna Carta&quot;, alongside newly discovered financial, legal and commercial records. They produced a progressive account of political and economic development in England. The growth of the British Empire spurred interest in the various periods of English hegemony during the Middle Ages, including the Angevin Empire and the Hundred Years&#x27; War.

By the 1930s, older historical analyses were challenged by a range of neo-positivist, Marxist and econometric approaches, supported by a widening body of documentary, archaeological and scientific evidence. Marxist and Neo-Marxist analyses continued to be popular in the post-war years, producing seminal works on economic issues and social protests. Post-modern analysis became influential in the 1970s and 1980s, focusing on identity, gender, interpretation and culture. Many studies focused on particular regions or groups, drawing on new records and new scientific approaches, including landscape and environmental archaeology. Fresh archaeological finds, such as the Staffordshire Hoard, continue to challenge previous interpretations, and historical studies of England in the Middle Ages have never been so diverse as in the early 21st century.

===Popular representations===
The period has also been used in a wide range of popular culture. William Shakespeare&#x27;s plays on the lives of the medieval kings have proved to have had long lasting appeal, heavily influencing both popular interpretations and histories of figures such as King John and Henry V. Other playwrights have since taken key medieval events, such as the death of Thomas Becket, and used them to draw out contemporary themes and issues. The medieval mystery plays continue to be enacted in key English towns and cities. Film-makers have drawn extensively on the medieval period, often taking themes from Shakespeare or the Robin Hood ballads for inspiration. Historical fiction set in England during the Middle Ages remains persistently popular, with the 1980s and 1990s seeing a particular growth of historical detective fiction. The period has also inspired fantasy writers, including J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s stories of Middle-earth. English medieval music was revived from the 1950s, with choral and musical groups attempting to authentically reproduce the original sounds. Medieval living history events were first held during the 19th and early 20th centuries, and the period has inspired a considerable community of historical re-enactors, part of England&#x27;s growing heritage industry.

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
===Surveys===

* Bartlett, Robert. &quot;England Under the Norman and Angevin Kings, 1075–1225&quot; (New Oxford History of England) (2002) excerpt and text search
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Kings===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Architecture, castles, churches, landscape===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
===Specialized studies===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Historiography===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2251971" start="0" end="26" title="England in the Middle Ages" label="England in the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="40" end="58" title="history of England" label="history of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="70" end="85" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326880" start="147" end="166" title="Early modern Britain" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="222" end="234" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087872" start="240" end="247" title="Economy of England in the Middle Ages" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q958255" start="447" end="463" title="Anglo-Saxon art" label="artistic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="485" end="497" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="509" end="519" title="Epic poetry" label="epic poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="534" end="541" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="566" end="575" title="metalwork" label="metalwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="657" end="668" title="monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="673" end="680" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="760" end="766" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="830" end="836" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q877429" start="974" end="980" title="Danes (Germanic tribe)" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1166" end="1192" title="Norman invasion of England" label="Norman invasion of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="1312" end="1333" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1454" end="1474" title="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland#Norman Invasion" label="a network of castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446027" start="1504" end="1519" title="Feudalism in England" label="feudal approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="1570" end="1577" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="1637" end="1641" title="serf" label="serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028597" start="1648" end="1676" title="Women in the Middle Ages" label="position of women in society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400412" start="1730" end="1755" title="Demographics of England" label="England&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q498819" start="1874" end="1893" title="Medieval Warm Period" label="warmer temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140335" start="1979" end="2001" title="Gregorian Reform" label="ecclesiastical reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="2047" end="2057" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="2114" end="2126" title="English law" label="legal system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2210" end="2226" title="John, King of England#Loss of Normandy, 1202–04" label="loss of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988505" start="2265" end="2277" title="Great Famine of 1315–1317" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="2286" end="2297" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="2488" end="2509" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="2596" end="2602" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468683" start="2669" end="2686" title="bastard feudalism" label="bastard feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21751582" start="2701" end="2723" title="Deserted medieval village" label="villages were deserted"/>
<link wikidata="Q192292" start="2891" end="2912" title="Medieval philosophy" label="medieval philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="2917" end="2934" title="natural science" label="natural scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="3000" end="3013" title="Kingdom of France" label="French throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="3032" end="3055" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="3330" end="3347" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="3404" end="3413" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3473" end="3484" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="3517" end="3536" title="Early Modern period" label="Early Modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="3651" end="3660" title="Roman Britain" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3687" end="3699" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333670" start="3705" end="3718" title="English Economy" label="local economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="3876" end="3882" title="Roman villa" label="villas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4145" end="4156" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417345" start="4158" end="4172" title="Celtic language-death in England" label="swiftly spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="4265" end="4273" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="4288" end="4304" title="Common Brittonic" label="Common Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832963" start="4309" end="4322" title="British Latin" label="British Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="4413" end="4420" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="4458" end="4463" title="Saxon" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="4655" end="4661" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q837998" start="4663" end="4674" title="Kingdom of East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110888" start="4676" end="4681" title="Kingdom of Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q328818" start="4687" end="4691" title="Kingdom of Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q237945" start="4888" end="4901" title="the Heptarchy" label="the Heptarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="4928" end="4945" title="Kingdom of Mercia" label="Kingdom of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332123" start="4989" end="4999" title="Penda of Mercia" label="King Penda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127343" start="5279" end="5293" title="Offa&amp;#x27;s Dyke" label="defensive dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q233573" start="5303" end="5317" title="Offa of Mercia" label="Offa of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="5388" end="5399" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="5431" end="5437" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q877429" start="5488" end="5494" title="Danes (Germanic tribe)" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419965" start="5521" end="5531" title="Great Heathen Army" label="Great Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="5559" end="5563" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="5616" end="5627" title="Kingdom of Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="5653" end="5669" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305651" start="5791" end="5809" title="Battle of Edington" label="Battle of Edington"/>
<link wikidata="Q88034" start="5939" end="5943" title="burh" label="burh"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="6109" end="6116" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q187114" start="6133" end="6149" title="Edward the Elder" label="Edward the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170017" start="6169" end="6178" title="Æthelstan" label="Æthelstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191767" start="6273" end="6279" title="Eadred" label="Eadred"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="6284" end="6289" title="Edgar the Peaceful" label="Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183499" start="6524" end="6532" title="Æthelred the Unready" label="Æthelred"/>
<link wikidata="Q192920" start="6587" end="6593" title="Edward the Martyr" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="6627" end="6642" title="Sweyn Forkbeard" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q301742" start="6714" end="6722" title="danegeld" label="danegeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="6790" end="6794" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="6903" end="6923" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089021" start="7098" end="7111" title="House of Godwin" label="Godwin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="7210" end="7226" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203647" start="7287" end="7302" title="Harald Hardrada" label="Harald Hardrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q203225" start="7311" end="7336" title="battle of Stamford Bridge" label="battle of Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="7384" end="7409" title="William the Conqueror" label="William, Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="7472" end="7487" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="7505" end="7521" title="Normans" label="Norman followers"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="7565" end="7583" title="Battle of Hastings" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="7672" end="7678" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703402" start="7970" end="7992" title="Harrying of the North" label="devastating the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="8063" end="8068" title="South Wales" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="8073" end="8084" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394805" start="8086" end="8110" title="Norman conquest of Wales" label="spreading up the valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756973" start="8125" end="8132" title="Marcher Lord" label="Marcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q102005" start="8669" end="8679" title="William II of England" label="William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q220994" start="8768" end="8774" title="Robert Curthose" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344017" start="8789" end="8806" title="Stephen of Aumale" label="Stephen of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="8904" end="8911" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587893" start="8987" end="8997" title="Battle of Tinchebray" label="Tinchebrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q378249" start="9054" end="9059" title="William Clito" label="Clito"/>
<link wikidata="Q362113" start="9182" end="9189" title="William Adelin" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q756846" start="9213" end="9223" title="White Ship" label="White Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="9305" end="9321" title="Stephen, King of England" label="Stephen of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q150872" start="9380" end="9395" title="Empress Matilda" label="Empress Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q743768" start="9520" end="9531" title="the Anarchy" label="the Anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="9553" end="9558" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q967289" start="9600" end="9610" title="Treaty of Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q836484" start="9673" end="9680" title="Angevin kings of England" label="Angevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q770768" start="9734" end="9748" title="Counts and dukes of Anjou" label="Count of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703611" start="9802" end="9820" title="duchy of Aquitaine" label="duchy of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="9947" end="9961" title="Angevin Empire" label="Angevin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="10028" end="10065" title="Norman invasion of Ireland" label="intervening to claim power in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="10556" end="10565" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="10692" end="10705" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="10720" end="10724" title="John, King of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="11129" end="11140" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="11180" end="11202" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="11350" end="11359" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q657967" start="11435" end="11458" title="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="11506" end="11523" title="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="Simon de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="11543" end="11549" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11878" end="11904" title="Edward I of England#Welsh wars" label="defeating the native Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="12027" end="12035" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242848" start="12070" end="12091" title="First War of Scottish Independence" label="campaigns in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="12199" end="12208" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778609" start="12345" end="12358" title="Despenser War" label="Despenser War"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="12500" end="12508" title="Isabella of France" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q312990" start="12529" end="12543" title="Roger Mortimer, 1st Earl of March" label="Roger Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="12658" end="12668" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="12773" end="12784" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="13156" end="13179" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="13467" end="13483" title="Edward, the Black Prince" label="the Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="13618" end="13628" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="13720" end="13741" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="13906" end="13926" title="Henry IV of England" label="Henry of Bolingbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="13965" end="13975" title="Parliament of England" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="14137" end="14144" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="14260" end="14268" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="14456" end="14473" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="14583" end="14592" title="Edward IV of England" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="14625" end="14633" title="House of York" label="Yorkists"/>
<link wikidata="Q356173" start="14745" end="14751" title="George Plantagenet, 1st Duke of Clarence" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="14932" end="14953" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q170470" start="14998" end="15006" title="Edward V of England" label="Edward V"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="15068" end="15077" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q222013" start="15164" end="15182" title="battle of Bosworth" label="battle of Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="15280" end="15293" title="Tudor dynasty" label="Tudor dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="15474" end="15486" title="Social stratification" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234429" start="15786" end="15792" title="thegns" label="thegns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114438" start="15885" end="15894" title="Ealdorman" label="ealdormen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739270" start="16056" end="16062" title="churls" label="churls"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="16547" end="16560" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="17659" end="17670" title="witenagemot" label="witenagemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q859482" start="17910" end="17921" title="Secretariat (administrative office)" label="secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362652" start="18051" end="18060" title="housecarl" label="housecarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="18211" end="18218" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="18268" end="18273" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="18314" end="18318" title="Mint (coin)" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q521994" start="18447" end="18453" title="hidage" label="hidage"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="18737" end="18741" title="folkmoot" label="moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="18839" end="18852" title="hundred court" label="hundred court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498357" start="18880" end="18890" title="shire moot" label="shire moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q381045" start="19086" end="19090" title="oath" label="oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q467033" start="19479" end="19488" title="bloodfeud" label="bloodfeud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="19584" end="19592" title="weregild" label="weregild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="19917" end="19921" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="20357" end="20370" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446027" start="20503" end="20516" title="Feudalism in England" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="20674" end="20680" title="Homage (feudal)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="20715" end="20719" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378545" start="20726" end="20732" title="Honour (feudal land tenure)" label="honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477473" start="21538" end="21545" title="villein" label="villein"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="21550" end="21555" title="serfs" label="serfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="21690" end="21700" title="Lord Chancellor" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143386" start="21763" end="21776" title="familia regis" label="familia regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q264236" start="22016" end="22028" title="legal reform" label="legal reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="22130" end="22137" title="English law" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="22138" end="22148" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q206634" start="22229" end="22241" title="Common Bench" label="Common Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422978" start="22275" end="22280" title="Eyre (legal term)" label="eyres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408803" start="24454" end="24463" title="exchequer" label="exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570373" start="24645" end="24653" title="Chancery (medieval office)" label="chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="24692" end="24703" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="25141" end="25149" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003221" start="25227" end="25242" title="chivalric order" label="knightly orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="25258" end="25277" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q500834" start="25286" end="25296" title="tournament" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371132" start="25302" end="25313" title="Round Table (tournament)" label="round table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988505" start="25406" end="25418" title="Great Famine of 1315–1317" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413849" start="25690" end="25715" title="Statute of Labourers 1351" label="Statute of Labourers 1351"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308177" start="25734" end="25745" title="Incomes policy" label="limit wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q760113" start="25753" end="25792" title="sumptuary laws" label="prevent the consumption of luxury goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q721368" start="25902" end="25910" title="Tax per head" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="26216" end="26222" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468683" start="26893" end="26910" title="bastard feudalism" label="bastard feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="26957" end="26971" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="27100" end="27116" title="House of Commons of England" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126349" start="27327" end="27336" title="Jack Cade" label="Jack Cade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="27637" end="27646" title="attainted" label="attainted"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="27867" end="27886" title="Patriarchy" label="patriarchal society"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="28083" end="28095" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="29065" end="29071" title="brewer" label="brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160131" start="29076" end="29081" title="baker" label="baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="29565" end="29573" title="Forced marriage" label="forcibly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="30070" end="30079" title="ploughing" label="ploughing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="30149" end="30165" title="Dairy farming" label="dairy production"/>
<link wikidata="Q59172" start="30692" end="30700" title="Spinning (textiles)" label="spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704694" start="30718" end="30729" title="victualling" label="victualling"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="30775" end="30778" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="30849" end="30853" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="31853" end="31857" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="32279" end="32292" title="Norman French" label="Norman French"/>
<link wikidata="Q309197" start="33348" end="33355" title="Bretons" label="Bretons"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="33462" end="33475" title="Celtic fringe" label="Celtic fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="34180" end="34189" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="34617" end="34622" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="34807" end="34816" title="usury law" label="usury law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097923" start="35348" end="35367" title="child sacrifice" label="ritual child murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="35385" end="35391" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29662" start="35822" end="35843" title="Edict of Expulsion" label="expelled from England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="35943" end="35955" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="36163" end="36168" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="36461" end="36473" title="polytheistic" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="36490" end="36495" title="Woden" label="Woden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="36497" end="36503" title="Thunor" label="Thunor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172713" start="36508" end="36511" title="Týr" label="Tiw"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="36675" end="36690" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="36695" end="36703" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="36819" end="36825" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="36898" end="36907" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Gregory I"/>
<link wikidata="Q272173" start="36952" end="36970" title="Æthelberht of Kent" label="Æthelberht of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q32520" start="37031" end="37040" title="Augustine of Canterbury" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="37058" end="37082" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q336016" start="37172" end="37178" title="Oswald of Northumbria" label="Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q468847" start="37183" end="37188" title="Oswiu of Northumbria" label="Oswiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="37377" end="37390" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="37990" end="38021" title="Norse religion" label="Indigenous Scandinavian beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="38100" end="38104" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="38106" end="38110" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q213479" start="38115" end="38119" title="Ullr" label="Ullr"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="38182" end="38190" title="Ragnarok" label="Ragnarok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="38361" end="38371" title="Archbishop of York" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965826" start="38559" end="38577" title="Christianization of Scandinavia" label="started to convert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="38980" end="38986" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="39016" end="39020" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="39056" end="39062" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="39084" end="39093" title="Cathedral" label="Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="39133" end="39146" title="secular canon" label="secular canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216285" start="39199" end="39207" title="Chapter (religion)" label="chapters"/>
<link wikidata="Q852724" start="39543" end="39559" title="Benedictine rule" label="Benedictine rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q220301" start="40816" end="40829" title="Cluniac order" label="Cluniac order"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="40898" end="40910" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="41005" end="41016" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247496" start="41140" end="41148" title="Rievaulx Abbey" label="Rievaulx"/>
<link wikidata="Q540237" start="41153" end="41162" title="Fountains Abbey" label="Fountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="41342" end="41351" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="41356" end="41366" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="41367" end="41372" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q987168" start="41475" end="41484" title="mendicant" label="mendicant"/>
<link wikidata="Q474717" start="41593" end="41608" title="Military order (society)" label="military orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="41720" end="41728" title="Templars" label="Templars"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="41730" end="41737" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutons"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="41742" end="41754" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Hospitallers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="42076" end="42086" title="local government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646181" start="42193" end="42202" title="Worcester, England" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42408" end="42416" title="Catholic Church#Theology" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265740" start="42445" end="42460" title="Synod of Whitby" label="Synod of Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140335" start="43030" end="43048" title="Gregorian Reforms" label="reforming movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="43057" end="43068" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q205302" start="43166" end="43172" title="simony" label="simony"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939" start="43516" end="43522" title="Anselm of Canterbury" label="Anselm"/>
<link wikidata="Q267065" start="43524" end="43539" title="Theobald of Bec" label="Theobald of Bec"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="43541" end="43554" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q465329" start="43559" end="43574" title="Stephen Langton" label="Stephen Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q173893" start="43898" end="43911" title="John Wycliffe" label="John Wycliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="43925" end="43942" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="43965" end="43974" title="scripture" label="scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="44073" end="44080" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="44349" end="44367" title="Act of Parliament" label="Parliamentary bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q731652" start="44452" end="44460" title="Lollardy" label="Lollardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="44840" end="44846" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="44881" end="44891" title="Pilgrimage" label="Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="45115" end="45122" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420463" start="45150" end="45161" title="Faith healing" label="seek relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="45552" end="45556" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q544113" start="45759" end="45770" title="Glastonbury Abbey" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q476529" start="45787" end="45797" title="Winchester Cathedral" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="45933" end="45938" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="46119" end="46126" title="miracle" label="miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="46277" end="46285" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="46460" end="46473" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="46548" end="46554" title="Second Crusade" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="46556" end="46561" title="Third Crusade" label="Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q51659" start="46566" end="46579" title="Fifth Crusade" label="Fifth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="46642" end="46652" title="the Levant" label="the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="46723" end="46732" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="47303" end="47311" title="Fenlands" label="Fenlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="47315" end="47326" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298322" start="47349" end="47354" title="Weald" label="Weald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="47378" end="47383" title="moorland" label="moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="47387" end="47396" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238790" start="47485" end="47488" title="River Exe" label="Exe"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="47493" end="47497" title="River Tees" label="Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="47577" end="47583" title="Arable land" label="arable"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="47588" end="47596" title="Pastoralism" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="47787" end="47791" title="Brown bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="47794" end="47800" title="European beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="47806" end="47812" title="Gray wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656432" start="48052" end="48064" title="Icknield Way" label="Icknield Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233334" start="48070" end="48079" title="Fosse Way" label="Fosse Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355961" start="48081" end="48094" title="Ermine Street" label="Ermine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="48099" end="48113" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="48375" end="48386" title="inland port" label="inland port"/>
<link wikidata="Q498819" start="48542" end="48562" title="Medieval Warm Period" label="Medieval Warm Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="48811" end="48820" title="grapevine" label="grapevine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="48951" end="48965" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517181" start="49440" end="49452" title="wood pasture" label="wood pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360410" start="49509" end="49518" title="coppicing" label="coppicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="49737" end="49749" title="over-farming" label="over-farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="49757" end="49767" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048319" start="49866" end="49871" title="Ditch" label="dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="49939" end="49943" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662247" start="49953" end="49957" title="Medieval deer park" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50118" end="50122" title="Medieval deer park#History" label="hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333578" start="50243" end="50255" title="Economics of English Agriculture in the Middle Ages" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="50292" end="50297" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="50299" end="50305" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="50310" end="50314" title="oats" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142845" start="50321" end="50338" title="open field system" label="open field system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="50355" end="50360" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="50362" end="50368" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="50373" end="50376" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="50600" end="50605" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="50693" end="50700" title="demesne" label="demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="50970" end="50984" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="51121" end="51130" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="51468" end="51474" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51541" end="51551" title="Royal forest#Forest law" label="royal laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="51866" end="51870" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="51934" end="51953" title="Planned community" label="planned communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="52009" end="52014" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086757" start="52017" end="52029" title="charter fair" label="charter fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333580" start="52298" end="52304" title="Economics of English Mining in the Middle Ages" label="Mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="52334" end="52340" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869390" start="52386" end="52415" title="History of the English penny (1154–1485)" label="expansion of the money supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="52508" end="52522" title="Human overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="52543" end="52557" title="Land degradation" label="depleted soils"/>
<link wikidata="Q21751582" start="53096" end="53118" title="Deserted medieval village" label="villages were deserted"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="53390" end="53395" title="cloth" label="cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139056" start="53746" end="53763" title="Livery Company" label="chartered company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599967" start="53957" end="53968" title="Great Slump (15th century)" label="Great Slump"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="54337" end="54349" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="54354" end="54366" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="54542" end="54547" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q785426" start="54552" end="54559" title="Science in the medieval Islamic world" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="54696" end="54711" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790144" start="54750" end="54779" title="Unit of time" label="units used for measuring time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54856" end="54873" title="Clock#History of clocks" label="mechanical clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="54944" end="54953" title="Astrology" label="Astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="54955" end="54960" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182687" start="54965" end="54977" title="palm reading" label="palm reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="55146" end="55157" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="55213" end="55231" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="55233" end="55242" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="55247" end="55254" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="55306" end="55321" title="Scientific method" label="experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43936" start="55347" end="55364" title="William of Ockham" label="William of Ockham"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="55451" end="55470" title="Ockham&amp;#x27;s Razor" label="Ockham&amp;#x27;s Razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q433841" start="55602" end="55624" title="Johannes de Sacrobosco" label="Johannes de Sacrobosco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571080" start="55714" end="55731" title="Medieval medicine of Western Europe" label="medieval medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q593223" start="55733" end="55751" title="Gilbertus Anglicus" label="Gilbertus Anglicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q770348" start="56010" end="56023" title="Polychronicon of Ranulf Higden" label="Polychronicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766" start="56040" end="56074" title="The Travels of Sir John Mandeville" label="The Travels of Sir John Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="56113" end="56122" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="56204" end="56223" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56363" end="56378" title="Watermill#Operation" label="horizontal mill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56532" end="56545" title="Watermill#Operation" label="vertical mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="56554" end="56562" title="Windmill" label="Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585730" start="56652" end="56664" title="fulling mill" label="fulling mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446739" start="56670" end="56684" title="Power hammer" label="powered hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="56761" end="56769" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="56806" end="56819" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="56978" end="56984" title="hops" label="hopped"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="56985" end="56989" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q830894" start="57172" end="57181" title="stoneware" label="stoneware"/>
<link wikidata="Q94608" start="57250" end="57264" title="William Caxton" label="William Caxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q725733" start="57269" end="57284" title="Wynkyn de Worde" label="Wynkyn de Worde"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="57301" end="57315" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q164057" start="57567" end="57576" title="cog (ship)" label="cog ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997910" start="57990" end="57994" title="fyrd" label="fyrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="58161" end="58166" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="58173" end="58178" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426285" start="58415" end="58426" title="shield wall" label="shield wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="58621" end="58630" title="Attrition warfare" label="attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="59049" end="59055" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="59071" end="59079" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="59081" end="59089" title="Crossbow" label="Crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137956" start="59155" end="59163" title="shortbow" label="shortbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="59305" end="59311" title="feudal" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10729167" start="59948" end="59955" title="longbow" label="longbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="59991" end="59997" title="Cannon" label="Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="60052" end="60057" title="Battle of Crécy" label="Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="60588" end="60600" title="English navy" label="English navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="60815" end="60824" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="60833" end="60848" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="61621" end="61627" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="61660" end="61667" title="Impressment" label="pressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q164057" start="61743" end="61747" title="Cog (ship)" label="cogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q871366" start="61861" end="61877" title="Battle of Sluys" label="victory at Sluys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985934" start="61914" end="61941" title="Battle of Les Espagnols sur Mer" label="off the coast of Winchelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484069" start="61982" end="61996" title="English Channel naval campaign (1338–1339)" label="French attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="62854" end="62870" title="motte and bailey" label="motte and bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335033" start="62875" end="62883" title="ringwork" label="ringwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q91165" start="63055" end="63059" title="keep" label="keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="63180" end="63185" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="63357" end="63362" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q452734" start="63741" end="63748" title="gunport" label="gunport"/>
<link wikidata="Q351853" start="64744" end="64751" title="Ivory carving" label="ivories"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="64753" end="64775" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="64926" end="64935" title="metalwork" label="metalwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="64963" end="64969" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192771" start="65012" end="65025" title="drinking horn" label="drinking horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q503256" start="65100" end="65117" title="Sutton Hoo burial" label="Sutton Hoo burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q576717" start="65126" end="65136" title="Animal style" label="zoomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="65268" end="65277" title="geometric" label="geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="65322" end="65334" title="Naturalism (arts)" label="naturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078913" start="65369" end="65379" title="Plastic arts" label="plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q614082" start="65469" end="65487" title="Carolingian art" label="Carolingian styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q187483" start="65934" end="65949" title="Bayeux Tapestry" label="Bayeux Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="66019" end="66032" title="Stained glass" label="Stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="66403" end="66411" title="tapestry" label="tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884257" start="66601" end="66616" title="opus anglicanum" label="opus anglicanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q838564" start="66663" end="66681" title="Queen Mary Psalter" label="Queen Mary Psalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="67098" end="67109" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="67257" end="67264" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="67429" end="67435" title="dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q743813" start="67659" end="67676" title="Pastoral Care" label="The Pastoral Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="68025" end="68036" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="68336" end="68350" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="68472" end="68488" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="68559" end="68575" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="68725" end="68738" title="Thomas Malory" label="Thomas Malory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136104" start="68791" end="68813" title="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur" label="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247870" start="69007" end="69012" title="gymel" label="gymel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="69100" end="69106" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="69108" end="69112" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q750934" start="69114" end="69119" title="Pipe (instrument)" label="pipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="69124" end="69129" title="Organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653344" start="69263" end="69269" title="Carol (music)" label="Carols"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="69487" end="69493" title="Ballad" label="Ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985773" start="69569" end="69590" title="Ballad of Chevy Chase" label="Ballad of Chevy Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="69637" end="69647" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="69649" end="69661" title="Miracle play" label="Miracle play"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="70194" end="70200" title="Roman villa" label="villas"/>
<link wikidata="Q504106" start="70231" end="70235" title="longhouse" label="long"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="70578" end="70584" title="Stonemasonry" label="masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501052" start="70734" end="70742" title="vestment" label="vestment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="70750" end="70760" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="71356" end="71364" title="Vault (architecture)" label="vaulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="71559" end="71579" title="English Gothic architecture" label="Early English Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71681" end="71701" title="English Gothic architecture#Perpendicular Gothic" label="Perpendicular Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573737" start="71866" end="71876" title="Hammerbeam roof" label="hammerbeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q575842" start="72132" end="72139" title="chantry" label="chantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="73573" end="73582" title="chronicle" label="chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="73769" end="73782" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="74209" end="74220" title="Progress (history)" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="74297" end="74311" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="74529" end="74543" title="Neopositivism" label="neo-positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="74545" end="74552" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160039" start="74557" end="74568" title="econometric" label="econometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058263" start="74678" end="74689" title="Neo-Marxist" label="Neo-Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="74810" end="74821" title="Post-modern" label="Post-modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621486" start="75050" end="75059" title="Landscape archaeology" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532901" start="75064" end="75089" title="environmental archaeology" label="environmental archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135210" start="75131" end="75150" title="Staffordshire Hoard" label="Staffordshire Hoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="75407" end="75426" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="75997" end="76015" title="Historical fiction" label="Historical fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="76150" end="76167" title="detective fiction" label="detective fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="76225" end="76241" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="76260" end="76272" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q355646" start="76424" end="76438" title="living history" label="living history"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="76560" end="76582" title="Historical reenactment" label="historical re-enactors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969338" wikidata="None" url="?curid=969338" title="Cowabunga">
<text></text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969340" wikidata="Q1483981" url="?curid=969340" title="F♯ A♯ ∞">
<text>F♯ A♯ ∞ (pronounced &quot;F-sharp, A-sharp, Infinity&quot;) is the debut studio album by Canadian post-rock band Godspeed You! Black Emperor. It was first released on August 14, 1997, through Constellation Records on a single LP and on June 8, 1998, through Kranky on CD. The CD version and the LP version have substantial differences between them. Recorded at the Hotel2Tango in the Mile End of Montreal, the album, as became common for the band, is devoid of traditional lyrics and is mostly instrumental, featuring lengthy songs segmented into movements. It was initially released in limited quantities and distributed through live performances, developing a cult following via word of mouth.

==Background==
In 1995, Mauro Pezzente moved into a loft with his then-girlfriend in Mile End, Montreal. Pezzente used the flat as a performance venue, dubbing it the Gallery Quiva. Around 1996, fumes from the mechanic&#x27;s garage below the loft forced them to vacate it. Shortly after their departure, Efrim Menuck moved into the space and established Hotel2Tango, serving both as a recording studio and practice space. There, in 1997, the original recording of &quot;F♯ A♯ ∞&quot; took place. By this time, the band had reached an unwieldy 15 members. In preparation of the album, they trimmed their numbers to ten.

The culmination of material spanning back to 1993 resulted in two lengthy songs, each about 20 minutes in length. After the record&#x27;s release, the band became interested in touring the United States. In order to make headway, they sent a copy of their album to the Chicago-based record label Kranky. Impressed by the recording, Kranky offered to re-release the album on compact disc. The re-worked version of the album included several new sections, resulting in three movements and slightly over an hour of music, nearly doubling the previous runtime. This new version was released in June 1998.

==Music==
Each track features field recordings and sampled sounds, once referred to by David Keenan of &quot;The Wire&quot; as &quot;eschatological tape loops&quot;. The overall theme of the album is often pinned as apocalyptic. Indeed, English director Danny Boyle was heavily inspired by the album during the making of &quot;28 Days Later&quot;. During an interview with &quot;The Guardian&quot;, he explained, &quot;I always try to have a soundtrack in my mind [when creating a film]. Like when we did &quot;Trainspotting&quot;, it was Underworld. For me, the soundtrack to &quot;28 Days Later&quot; was Godspeed. The whole film was cut to Godspeed in my head.&quot;

The CD version and the LP version have substantial differences between them. Note that the following track descriptions describe the tracks of the CD version and will not accurately reflect the music of the LP version.
The opening track, &quot;The Dead Flag Blues&quot;, begins with an ominous spoken word introduction, which originates from an unfinished screenplay by guitarist Efrim Menuck. Backed by a string melody, the speaker describes a derelict city, where the government is corrupt and the inhabitants are drunks. The introduction is followed by the sounds of a train and high-volume suspended noise. This eventually develops into a Western-themed melody, and is capped off by an upbeat section which includes glockenspiel, violin, and slide guitar.

The second track, &quot;East Hastings&quot;, is named after East Hastings Street in Vancouver&#x27;s blighted Downtown Eastside. It begins with bagpipes reprising the theme of &quot;The Dead Flag Blues&quot; and backing the shouts of a street preacher. The sermon slowly quiets, and is replaced with the movement &quot;The Sad Mafioso...&quot;, an edited version of which appeared in the film &quot;28 Days Later&quot;. The movement also contains a brief portion where the band quietly sings in a rare occurrence of vocals. The track concludes with a series of electronic noises and buzzing until throbbing bass takes over.

The final track, &quot;Providence&quot;, is considerably longer than the first two, coming in at 29 minutes in length, though with 3 minutes and 30 seconds of complete silence. James Oldham of &quot;NME&quot; described it as &quot;part &quot;The Good, the Bad and the Ugly&quot; and part Spiritualized drone freakout&quot;. The introduction features a vox pop interviewee by the name of &quot;Blaise Bailey Finnegan III,&quot; who references &quot;A Country Boy Can Survive&quot; by Hank Williams Jr. The speaker is quickly replaced with a cello piece accompanied by glockenspiel, violin, and horn. Percussion is added to the melody which peaks, and is continued by a sample of Hazel Dickens singing &quot;Gathering Storm&quot;, written by Mason Daring for the film &quot;Matewan&quot;. A quasi-military movement titled, &quot;Kicking Horse on Broken Hill&quot;, follows, and is eventually taken over by the sung phrase &quot;Where are you going? Where are you going?&quot; The voice is sampled from the song &quot;By My Side&quot;, from the 1970 musical &quot;Godspell&quot;. A collage of sounds and drones then round off the track. After a period of silence, a brief coda named for the American musician John Lee Hooker is performed.

==Packaging==
The title of the album is pronounced &quot;F-sharp, A-sharp, Infinity&quot;. This is a reference to the tuning of the guitars used by the band and to the loop at the end. The compact disc version does not contain the loop.

The original five-hundred records&#x27; jackets were handmade by the band, their record label, and local Montreal artists. One of three original photographs—depicting a watertower, train, or road sign—was glued onto the cover. The sleeve and jacket made no mention of the track titles. They were instead scratched into the run-off groove of the record, accompanied by the catalog number and side indication.

Inside of the jacket was an envelope filled with inserts. The contents included an old handbill, the album&#x27;s credit sheet, a picture drawn by guitarist Efrim Menuck, and a Canadian penny crushed by a train. A silk-screened image dedicated to the blues musician Reverend Gary Davis was also included in the jacket. Barb Stewart of &quot;Stylus Magazine&quot; and Mike Galloway of &quot;NOW&quot; called the packaging and inserts &quot;beautiful&quot;. After numerous re-pressings, the assembly process was streamlined. However, the record still ships, to this day, with virtually the same packaging elements as the originals. Modern pressings include a United States penny rather than a Canadian one, as Canadian pennies are no longer minted.

The compact disc version of the album is much simpler artistically. Guitarist David Bryant once referred to the packaging as a &quot;jewel-cased CD monstrosity&quot;, preferring the original handcrafted record. The photograph of a road sign was chosen as the cover image, and was enlarged and darkened significantly from the original. Inside of the case are liner notes and images, including the &quot;Faulty Schematics of a Ruined Machine&quot;, the hand drawn picture by Efrim Menuck present in the record.

==Reception==
Originally, the band had planned to self-release the album as a double 7-inch record set. The idea was scrapped after Don Wilkie and Ian Ilavsky, founders of the independent record label Constellation and co-producers of the album, offered to release it as their third record. The album was released in August 1997, and was initially limited to five-hundred hand-packaged and numbered LPs. The first release of &quot;F♯ A♯ ∞&quot; was reviewed by a scant number of critics. &quot;Stylus Magazine&quot; wrote that the record was &quot;innovative and inventive&quot; and that it &quot;stakes out unique territory in a world overrun with hackneyed experimentation&quot;. Gordon Krieger of &quot;Exclaim!&quot; described it as a &quot;slow soundtrack of regret and desire, equal parts morose and expectant&quot;. Montreal-based &quot;Hour&quot; magazine said the lengthy tracks &quot;could be really pretentious but the sounds [the band] make are way too cool to be merely coldly superior&quot;. &quot;Chart Attack&quot; magazine went on to rank the two-track record as #46 on their list of the top 50 Canadian albums of all time.
Reviews of the second release were generally positive and more widespread. The album placed fourth in &quot;The Wire&quot;″s 1998 critics&#x27; poll. Marc Gilman of AllMusic said that &quot;the music on [the] album is unique and powerful&quot; and that someone &quot;would be hard-pressed to find any imitators of [Godspeed&#x27;s] revolutionary musical form&quot;. &quot;Magnet&quot; commented that the three tracks can be &quot;served up as staggering psychedelia for a headphone or surround-sound context&quot;, voting it number 38 on their list of the best albums from 1993 to 2003. The &quot;NME&quot; called it a &quot;genuine classic&quot;, noting the variety of sounds present in the album. &quot;Pitchfork&quot; founder and critic Ryan Schreiber remarked that, of the many experimental bands around, Godspeed You! Black Emperor were &quot;one of the few that [haven&#x27;t] left out beauty and emotion in their pieces&quot;. &quot;Pitchfork&quot; later ranked the album number 45 on their list of the top 100 albums of the 1990s.

==Track listing==


===Notes===
====LP====
*Names of movements are not actually given anywhere in the LP release; these are extrapolated from the CD release.
*The final movement on side one does not have a corresponding segment on the CD release.
*Time lengths given are approximations due to the record&#x27;s locked groove.

====CD====
*&quot;J.L.H. Outro&quot; was named in honor of John Lee Hooker. On the CD edition it is a hidden track that begins after approximately 3 minutes and 30 seconds of silence after the end of &quot;Providence&quot;.

==Personnel==
===Godspeed You! Black Emperor===
*Aidan Girt – drums
*Bruce Cawdron – percussion
*Christophe Comte – violin
*David Bryant – guitar
*Efrim Menuck – electric guitar
*Peter Harry Hill – bag pipes
*Mauro Pezzente – bass guitar
*Mike Moya – guitar, banjo
*Norsola Johnson – cello
*Thea Pratt – French horn
*Thierry Amar – bass guitar

===Guest musicians===

*Amanda
*Colin
*D.
*Dan O.
*Jesse
*Peter
*Shnaeberg
*Steph
*Sylvain

===Production and design===
*Ian Ilavsky – production, mixing
*Godspeed You! Black Emperor – production, mixing
*Arthur John Tinholt – locomotive etching
*Don Wilkie – production, mixing

==Notes==


==References==
==External links==
*&quot;F♯ A♯ ∞&quot; at MusicBrainz</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="73" end="85" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q209137" start="98" end="107" title="post-rock" label="post-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q181341" start="113" end="140" title="Godspeed You! Black Emperor" label="Godspeed You! Black Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128185" start="192" end="213" title="Constellation Records (Canada)" label="Constellation Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="226" end="228" title="LP record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144907" start="258" end="264" title="Kranky (record label)" label="Kranky"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="268" end="270" title="Compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911118" start="365" end="376" title="Hotel2Tango" label="Hotel2Tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314040" start="384" end="392" title="Mile End, Montreal" label="Mile End"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="396" end="404" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q929848" start="547" end="556" title="Movement (music)" label="movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="681" end="694" title="word of mouth" label="word of mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793918" start="721" end="735" title="Mauro Pezzente" label="Mauro Pezzente"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314040" start="782" end="790" title="Mile End, Montreal" label="Mile End"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="792" end="800" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q454876" start="1002" end="1014" title="Efrim Menuck" label="Efrim Menuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911118" start="1052" end="1063" title="Hotel2Tango" label="Hotel2Tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1587" end="1594" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144907" start="1614" end="1620" title="Kranky (record label)" label="Kranky"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="1692" end="1704" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q360982" start="1950" end="1965" title="field recording" label="field recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="1971" end="1985" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampled sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q937350" start="2029" end="2037" title="The Wire (magazine)" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="2053" end="2067" title="Eschatology" label="eschatological"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="2136" end="2147" title="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="2174" end="2185" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221075" start="2247" end="2260" title="28 Days Later" label="28 Days Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="2299" end="2311" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q109135" start="2431" end="2444" title="Trainspotting (film)" label="Trainspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q849429" start="2459" end="2469" title="Underworld (band)" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q454876" start="2971" end="2983" title="Efrim Menuck" label="Efrim Menuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="3234" end="3248" title="Western (genre)" label="Western-themed"/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="3311" end="3323" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="3325" end="3331" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q428152" start="3337" end="3349" title="slide guitar" label="slide guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070696" start="3376" end="3389" title="East Hastings (song)" label="East Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484338" start="3412" end="3432" title="Hastings Street (Vancouver)" label="East Hastings Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="3436" end="3445" title="Vancouver, British Columbia" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068356" start="3462" end="3479" title="Downtown Eastside" label="Downtown Eastside"/>
<link wikidata="Q221075" start="3751" end="3764" title="28 Days Later" label="28 Days Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="4176" end="4179" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q41483" start="4219" end="4249" title="The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" label="The Good, the Bad and the Ugly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144015" start="4265" end="4278" title="Spiritualized" label="Spiritualized"/>
<link wikidata="Q310834" start="4329" end="4336" title="Vox populi" label="vox pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849370" start="4370" end="4396" title="Slow Riot for New Zero Kanada" label="Blaise Bailey Finnegan III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656135" start="4425" end="4450" title="A Country Boy Can Survive" label="A Country Boy Can Survive"/>
<link wikidata="Q552819" start="4460" end="4477" title="Hank Williams Jr." label="Hank Williams Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="4544" end="4556" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="4558" end="4564" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163759" start="4570" end="4574" title="French horn" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687875" start="4655" end="4668" title="Hazel Dickens" label="Hazel Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851789" start="4749" end="4756" title="Matewan" label="Matewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533927" start="5038" end="5046" title="Godspell" label="Godspell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44570" start="5183" end="5198" title="John Lee Hooker" label="John Lee Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5382" end="5386" title="Unusual types of gramophone records#Unusual grooves" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128185" start="5533" end="5545" title="Constellation Records (Canada)" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007467" start="5557" end="5573" title="Culture of Montreal" label="Montreal artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q454876" start="6018" end="6030" title="Efrim Menuck" label="Efrim Menuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944287" start="6038" end="6052" title="Canadian penny" label="Canadian penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="6112" end="6117" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q159098" start="6127" end="6146" title="Reverend Gary Davis" label="Reverend Gary Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039873" start="6202" end="6217" title="Stylus Magazine" label="Stylus Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065275" start="6251" end="6254" title="Now (newspaper)" label="NOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q161604" start="6518" end="6537" title="Penny (United States coin)" label="United States penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="6613" end="6625" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q37764783" start="6687" end="6699" title="David Bryant (musician)" label="David Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="6967" end="6978" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="7204" end="7217" title="7-inch record" label="7-inch record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="7295" end="7319" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="7518" end="7521" title="LP records" label="LPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q664232" start="7825" end="7833" title="Exclaim!" label="Exclaim!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141327" start="7963" end="7967" title="Hour (magazine)" label="Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846511" start="8131" end="8143" title="Chart Attack" label="Chart Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q937350" start="8368" end="8376" title="The Wire (magazine)" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="8425" end="8433" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864914" start="8632" end="8638" title="Magnet (magazine)" label="Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="8857" end="8860" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="8965" end="8974" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q44570" start="9686" end="9701" title="John Lee Hooker" label="John Lee Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q927803" start="9729" end="9741" title="hidden track" label="hidden track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696692" start="9901" end="9911" title="Aidan Girt" label="Aidan Girt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37764783" start="9976" end="9988" title="David Bryant (musician)" label="David Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q454876" start="9999" end="10011" title="Efrim Menuck" label="Efrim Menuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793918" start="10061" end="10075" title="Mauro Pezzente" label="Mauro Pezzente"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848128" start="10091" end="10100" title="Mike Moya" label="Mike Moya"/>
<link wikidata="Q163759" start="10156" end="10167" title="French horn" label="French horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784025" start="10169" end="10181" title="Thierry Amar" label="Thierry Amar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="10332" end="10342" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="10344" end="10350" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14005" start="10547" end="10558" title="MusicBrainz" label="MusicBrainz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969351" wikidata="Q7121043" url="?curid=969351" title="PTSA">
<text>PTSA may refer to:

* Kosrae International Airport, an airport serving Kosrae, the easternmost state of the Federated States of Micronesia by ICAO code
* p-Toluenesulfonic acid
* Parent-Teacher-Student Association
* Philippine Tiong Se Academy, the oldest Chinese school in the Philippines. (est. 1899)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q598642" start="22" end="50" title="Kosrae International Airport" label="Kosrae International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q285878" start="154" end="176" title="p-Toluenesulfonic acid" label="p-Toluenesulfonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q706242" start="179" end="213" title="Parent-Teacher-Student Association" label="Parent-Teacher-Student Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185263" start="216" end="243" title="Philippine Tiong Se Academy" label="Philippine Tiong Se Academy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969353" wikidata="Q761731" url="?curid=969353" title="Thesmophoriazusae">
<text>Thesmophoriazusae (; &quot;Thesmophoriazousai&quot;, ), or Women at the Thesmophoria (sometimes also called The Poet and the Women), is one of eleven surviving comedy plays by Aristophanes. It was first produced in 411 BC, probably at the City Dionysia. The play&#x27;s focuses include the subversive role of women in a male-dominated society; the vanity of contemporary poets, such as the tragic playwrights Euripides and Agathon; and the shameless, enterprising vulgarity of an ordinary Athenian, as represented in this play by the protagonist, Mnesilochus. The work is also notable for Aristophanes&#x27; free adaptation of key structural elements of Old Comedy and for the absence of the anti-populist and anti-war comments that pepper his earlier work. It was produced in the same year as &quot;Lysistrata&quot;, another play with sexual themes.

How &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot; fared in the City Dionysia drama competition is unknown, but the play has been considered one of Aristophanes&#x27; most brilliant parodies of Athenian society.

==Plot==
:&quot;Today the women at the festival&quot;
:&quot;Are going to kill me for insulting them!&quot;
This bold statement by Euripides is the absurd premise upon which the whole play depends. The women are incensed by his plays&#x27; portrayal of the female sex as mad, murderous, and sexually depraved, and they are using the festival of the Thesmophoria (an annual fertility celebration dedicated to Demeter) as an opportunity to debate a suitable choice of revenge.

Fearful of their powers, Euripides seeks out a fellow tragedian, Agathon, in the hope of persuading him to spy for him and to be his advocate at the festival – a role that would require him to go disguised as a woman. Agathon is already dressed as a woman, in preparation for a play, but he believes that the women of Athens are jealous of him and he refuses to attend the festival for fear of being discovered. Euripides&#x27; aged in-law (never named within the play but recorded in the &#x27;dramatis personae&#x27; as Mnesilochus) then offers to go in Agathon&#x27;s place. Euripides shaves him, dresses him in women&#x27;s clothes borrowed from Agathon and finally sends him off to the Thesmophorion, the venue of the women&#x27;s secret rites.

There, the women are discovered behaving like citizens of a democracy, conducting an assembly much as men do, with appointed officials and carefully maintained records and procedures. Top of the agenda for that day is Euripides. Two women – Micca and a myrtle vendor – summarize their grievances against him. According to Micca, Euripides has taught men not to trust women, this has made them more vigilant and that in turn makes it impossible for women to help themselves to the household stores. According to the myrtle vendor, his plays promote atheism and this makes it difficult for her to sell her myrtle wreaths. Mnesilochus then speaks up, declaring that the behaviour of women is in fact far worse than Euripides has represented it. He recites in excruciating detail his own (imaginary) sins as a married woman, including a sexual escapade with a boyfriend in a tryst involving a laurel tree and a statue of Apollo.

The assembly is outraged but order is restored when a female messenger is seen approaching. It turns out to be Cleisthenes, a notoriously effeminate homosexual, represented in this play as the Athenian &#x27;ambassador&#x27; for women. He has come with the alarming news that a man disguised as a woman is spying upon them on behalf of Euripides. Suspicion immediately falls upon Mnesilochus, being the only member of the group whom nobody can identify. After they remove his clothes, they discover that he is indeed a man. In a scene that parodies the famous hostage scene from Euripides&#x27; &quot;Telephus&quot;, Mnesilochus grabs Micca&#x27;s baby and threatens to kill it unless the women release him. After closer inspection, however, Mnesilochus discovers that the &#x27;baby&#x27; is in fact a wineskin fitted with booties. Undeterred, he still threatens it with a knife. Micca (a devout tippler) pleads for its release but the assembly will not negotiate with Mnesilochus and he stabs the baby anyway. Micca catches its precious blood in a pan.

At this point, the action pauses briefly for a parabasis. Meanwhile, the male authorities are notified of the illegal presence of a man at a women-only festival. Mnesilochus is subsequently arrested and strapped to a plank by a Scythian archer (Athenian equivalent of a policeman) on the orders of a prytanis. There then follows a series of farcical scenes in which Euripides, in a desperate attempt to rescue Mnesilochus, comes and goes in various disguises, first as Menelaus, a character from his own play &quot;Helen&quot; – to which Mnesilochus responds by playing out the role of Helen – and then as Perseus, a character from another Euripidean play, &quot;Andromeda&quot;, in which role he swoops heroically across the stage on a theatrical crane (frequently used by Greek playwrights to allow for a &quot;deus ex machina&quot;) – to which Mnesilochus responds by acting out the role of Andromeda. Improbably, Euripides impersonates Echo in the same scene as he impersonates Perseus. All these mad schemes fail.

The tragic poet then decides to appear as himself and in this capacity he quickly negotiates a peace with the Chorus of women, securing their co-operation with a promise not to insult them in his future plays. The women decline to help him release Mnesilochus (now a prisoner of the Athenian state) but they do agree not to interfere with plans for his escape. Disguised finally as an old lady and attended by a dancing girl and flute player, Euripides distracts the Scythian archer long enough to set Mnesilochus free. The Scythian attempts to apprehend them before they can get clean away but he is steered in the wrong direction by the Chorus and the comedy ends happily.

==Historical background==
Old Comedy is a highly topical genre and all Aristophanes&#x27; plays were written specifically for their original productions at either the Lenaia or City Dionysia. Significant dates and events that might have impacted on the writing of &#x27;Thesmophoriazusae&#x27; (411 BC) would include:
* 425 BC: Aristophanes won first prize at the Lenaia with his third play &quot;The Acharnians&quot;. In that play, the character Euripides lends the protagonist, Dicaiopolis, some theatrical costumes from his plays. In &quot;Thesmophoria&quot;, on the other hand, the character Euripides dresses Mnesilochus in a costume borrowed from Agathon.
* 415 BC: Euripides&#x27; play &quot;Palamedes&quot; was produced. It is parodied in &quot;Thesmophoria&quot;.
* 413 BC: The Athenians and their allies suffered a catastrophic defeat in the Sicilian Expedition, a turning-point in the long-running Peloponnesian War. Among those who died in the Sicilian campaign was Lamachus, satirized in The Acharnians as a maniacal war-monger. In &#x27;Thesmophoriazusae&#x27; he is mentioned briefly but with respect as a war hero whose mother deserves to be publicly feted.
* 412 BC: Euripides&#x27; plays &quot;Helen&quot; and &quot;Andromeda&quot; were produced. Both plays are parodied at length in &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;.
* 411 BC: Both &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot; and &quot;Lysistrata&quot; were produced; an oligarchic revolution (one of the consequences of the Sicilian disaster) proved briefly successful and the demagogue Hyperbolus (a frequent target of the earlier plays) was assassinated by oligarchic conspirators in Samos. Hyperbolus receives a brief, derogatory mention in &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot; as someone whose mother does not deserve to share a table with the honoured mother of Lamachus.

Literary traditions and fashions, and the poets identified with them, are subject to comment and parody in all of Aristophanes&#x27; plays. In this play, Euripides is the main target. Others:
* Agathon: A contemporary of Aristophanes and a successful tragedian, he is represented in this play as a clownish aesthete who believes that beautiful people write beautifully.
* Phrynicus: A celebrated tragedian of an older generation (early 5th century BC), he is mentioned favourably by Agathon as a beautiful man (&quot;kalos&quot;) who dressed beautifully and who wrote beautiful plays (&quot;kal&#x27; dramata&quot;).
* Ibycus, Anacreon and Alcaeus: 6th-century BC lyrical poets, mentioned favourably by Agathon as examples of poets who dressed and behaved as effetely as himself.
* Philocles, Xenocles, and Theognis: Dramatic poets and contemporaries of Aristophanes, frequently lampooned in other plays, they receive a derogatory though brief mention here too.

==Discussion==
&quot;The Poet and the Women&quot; is notable for its reversal of sexual stereotypes, where men dress as women and the women appear to be the equal of men, particularly in their imitation of the ecclesia or democratic assembly (in fact the herald&#x27;s opening of the women&#x27;s assembly with a paean-like cry has been taken as evidence that the ecclesia itself might have begun with a paean). However, tragic and comic poets in classical Athens reinforced sexual stereotyping even when they seemed to demonstrate empathy with the female condition, and women typically were considered to be irrational creatures in need of protection from themselves and from others. Mica&#x27;s wine-skin baby is a demonstration of the irrational and subversive nature of women but so also is the female assembly – it represents a state within the Athenian state and its assumed jurisdiction over Euripides is in fact illegal.

The sexual role-reversals can be understood to have a broad, political significance. The warrior ethos of an older generation versus the effete intellectualism of a younger generation is a debate or &quot;agon&quot; that recurs in various forms throughout the plays of Aristophanes. In &quot;The Frogs&quot;, for example, the agon is between Aeschylus, who values Homer for the warrior ethos he inculcates in his audience, and Euripides who values the intellectual and philosophical quibbling of a legalistic society. The agon in &quot;The Frogs&quot; is won by Aeschylus and he is brought back from the dead to reform the polis with his instructive poetry. In &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot; the Chorus of women makes the point that they are better than their men because they have preserved their heritage (as represented by the weaving shuttle, the wool-basket and the parasol) whereas the men have lost their spears and shields. The loss of the shield is expressed by the Chorus metaphorically and contemptuously as &#x27;the parasol is thrown away&#x27; (erriptai to skiadeion), a reference to the word &#x27;rhipsaspis&#x27; (shield-thrower), a derogatory term whose use was considered in Athens to be actionable slander. Thus the message behind the sexual role-reversals in &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot; is not that women are equal to men but rather that the present generation of men is behaving no better than the women (the same message is delivered in Lysistrata). The stupidity of the war with Sparta, the criminal motives behind it and the desire for peace are major themes in Aristophanes&#x27; earlier plays. There is almost no mention of The Peloponnesian War in this play yet the peace that Euripides very easily negotiates with the women at the end of the play (after all his combative schemes have failed) could be interpreted as a pro-peace message.

==&quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot; and Old Comedy==
Aristophanes observed the conventions of Old Comedy in his earlier plays and gradually abandoned them in favour of a simpler approach, a trend that was continued by other dramatists until it reached its fulfilment in the New Comedy of Menander. In &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;, variations from Old Comedy conventions include:
* Parodos: In Old Comedy, the parodos or entry of the Chorus was an important element in the entertainment, accomplished with music, dance and extravagant spectacle. In this play, there are two Choruses – one appears briefly while accompanying Agathon in a song outside his house, and later the Chorus proper enters the stage as the women of the festival. The Women enter quietly, performing devotional tasks in which Mnesilochus, disguised as a woman, participates. This quiet entry is uncharacteristic of a parodos. The doubling of the Chorus is a phenomenon that is repeated in The Frogs, where the Chorus briefly assumes the identity of frogs before it takes on its main role as The Blessed. In Lysistrata, produced at the same time as &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;, there are also two choruses (Old Men and Old Women) but they appear on stage together after entering separately.
* Parabasis: In a parabasis the Chorus directly addresses the audience. Typically there are two parabases in a play and, during the first, the Chorus speaks out of character, acting as a mouthpiece for the author. In &quot;Thesmophoria&quot; however the Chorus never speaks out of character, the first parabasis is shortened and there is no second parabasis.
* Agon: A debate or argument between protagonist and antagonist is another important element in Old Comedy. Usually it is conducted in long verses of anapests divided into two symmetrical sections (&quot;epirrhema&quot; and &quot;antepirrhema&quot;) and the protagonist is triumphant, as for example in The Knights, The Clouds and The Wasps. In &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;, there is no such agon. There is a formal debate between Mnesilochus and Mica but it is conducted in shorter lines of ordinary dialogue (iambic trimeter). It has something of the symmetrical structure typical of a conventional agon, with a long speech (by Mica), a long reply (by Mnesilochus) and a pair of symmetrical songs from the Chorus, &quot;but&quot; a small speech by a third party (the myrtle vendor) is inserted in the middle, along with another song, and this disturbs the symmetry. Unlike a conventional agon, the debate doesn&#x27;t produce a victor and it is followed by a heated argument in long, iambic verses between Mnesilochus and Mica.
* Concluding episodes: In Old Comedy, dramatic tension is sacrificed quite early in the play with the protagonist&#x27;s victory in the agon and thereafter the action is simply a celebration or affirmation of that victory in a loose series of farcical episodes in which &quot;unwanted visitors&quot; are driven off. In this play tension is maintained until the very end, when Euripides negotiates a peace and Mnesilochus is released from his bonds, yet the play is still typical of an Old Comedy in its introduction of &#x27;unwanted visitors&#x27; in the latter part of the play – here they include Menelaus, Perseus and Echo i.e. Euripides disguized as characters from his own plays. This use of the &#x27;unwanted visitors&#x27; convention is anticipated in The Knights, where Paphlagonian (i.e. Cleon) is defeated by the protagonist in a variety of roles.
* Exodos: Old Comedy conventionally ends with a celebration of the protagonist&#x27;s victory and it features a sexual conquest, as represented for example by the flute girl in The Wasps and the Muse of Euripides in The Frogs. In &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;, female entertainment is supplied by a dancing girl but it is not the protagonist who wins her favours – that pleasure falls into the lap of the Scythian archer. Euripides and Mnesilochus are too busy making good their escape to have time for a proper exodus (a joke that would not have been lost on the original audience).

==Standard edition (in Greek)==
The most recent critical edition of the Attic Greek language text of the play (with commentary) is:
* Colin Austin and S. Douglas Olson, &quot;Aristophanes Thesmophorizusae&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2004) 

==Translations==

* B. B. Rogers: verse: full text
* Arthur S. Way, 1934 – verse
* Eugene O&#x27;Neill, Jr, 1938 – prose: full text
* Dudley Fitts, 1959 – prose and verse
* David Barrett, 1964 – prose and verse
* Alan H. Sommerstein, 1994 – prose 
* Unknown translator – prose: full text
* Jeffrey Henderson, 2000 – prose 
* George Theodoridis, 2007 – prose: full text

== See also ==
* Codex Ravennas 429

==References==
==Further reading==
* Zeitlin, Froma (1996). &#x27;Travesties of gender and genre in Aristophanes&#x27; &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;&#x27;, in Froma Zeitlin, &quot;Playing the Other: Gender and Society in Classical Greek Literature&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 375–416.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1100736" start="160" end="166" title="Ancient Greek comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="176" end="188" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="239" end="252" title="Dionysia#City Dionysia" label="City Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="409" end="418" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q380482" start="423" end="430" title="Agathon" label="Agathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132537" start="654" end="664" title="Old Comedy" label="Old Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q753907" start="800" end="810" title="Lysistrata" label="Lysistrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1029" end="1045" title="Athens" label="Athenian society"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="1179" end="1188" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029939" start="1397" end="1409" title="Thesmophoria" label="Thesmophoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="1421" end="1430" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="1456" end="1463" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q380482" start="1589" end="1596" title="Agathon" label="Agathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131112" start="3312" end="3323" title="Cleisthenes (Athenian)" label="Cleisthenes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3796" end="3816" title="Telephus#Tragic tradition" label="&amp;quot;Telephus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q21094365" start="4004" end="4012" title="wineskin" label="wineskin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4304" end="4313" title="Aristophanes#Parabasis" label="parabasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12884611" start="4485" end="4500" title="Scythian archer" label="Scythian archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q456334" start="4557" end="4565" title="prytanis" label="prytanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="4726" end="4734" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248812" start="4772" end="4777" title="Helen (play)" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="4843" end="4848" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="4863" end="4870" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q371093" start="4920" end="4929" title="Andromeda (play)" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="5070" end="5085" title="deus ex machina" label="deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q161582" start="5151" end="5160" title="Andromeda (mythology)" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q207368" start="5197" end="5201" title="Echo (mythology)" label="Echo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5979" end="5989" title="Aristophanes#Aristophanes and Old Comedy" label="Old Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6002" end="6009" title="Aristophanes#Topicality" label="topical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600879" start="6120" end="6126" title="Lenaia" label="Lenaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="6130" end="6143" title="City Dionysia" label="City Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059987" start="6350" end="6364" title="The Acharnians" label="The Acharnians"/>
<link wikidata="Q380482" start="6606" end="6613" title="Agathon" label="Agathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="6805" end="6824" title="Sicilian Expedition" label="Sicilian Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="6862" end="6879" title="The Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q523070" start="6931" end="6939" title="Lamachus" label="Lamachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059987" start="6954" end="6968" title="The Acharnians" label="The Acharnians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248812" start="7165" end="7170" title="Helen (play)" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q371093" start="7187" end="7196" title="Andromeda (play)" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q753907" start="7341" end="7351" title="Lysistrata" label="Lysistrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716388" start="7376" end="7397" title="Athenian coup of 411 BC" label="oligarchic revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264925" start="7483" end="7492" title="demagogue" label="demagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278644" start="7493" end="7503" title="Hyperbolus" label="Hyperbolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="7592" end="7597" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="7931" end="7940" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q380482" start="7971" end="7978" title="Agathon" label="Agathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q317061" start="8149" end="8158" title="Phrynichus (tragic poet)" label="Phrynicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332802" start="8396" end="8402" title="Ibycus" label="Ibycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213484" start="8404" end="8412" title="Anacreon" label="Anacreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212872" start="8417" end="8424" title="Alcaeus of Mytilene" label="Alcaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186040" start="8559" end="8568" title="Philocles" label="Philocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024531" start="8570" end="8578" title="Xenocles" label="Xenocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891440" start="8584" end="8592" title="Theognis (tyrant)" label="Theognis"/>
<link wikidata="Q730392" start="8950" end="8958" title="Ekklesia (ancient Athens)" label="ecclesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q600094" start="9144" end="9149" title="paean" label="paean"/>
<link wikidata="Q815376" start="9962" end="9971" title="The Frogs" label="The Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="10012" end="10021" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="10034" end="10039" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="10097" end="10106" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q753907" start="11131" end="11141" title="Lysistrata" label="Lysistrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="11322" end="11343" title="The Peloponnesian War" label="The Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11614" end="11639" title="Aristophanes#Aristophanes and Old Comedy" label="conventions of Old Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100736" start="11809" end="11819" title="New Comedy" label="New Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q118992" start="11823" end="11831" title="Menander" label="Menander"/>
<link wikidata="Q815376" start="12496" end="12505" title="The Frogs" label="The Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q753907" start="12614" end="12624" title="Lysistrata" label="Lysistrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215817" start="13461" end="13472" title="The Knights" label="The Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q868447" start="13474" end="13484" title="The Clouds" label="The Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217552" start="13489" end="13498" title="The Wasps" label="The Wasps"/>
<link wikidata="Q966479" start="13670" end="13685" title="iambic trimeter" label="iambic trimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215817" start="14950" end="14961" title="The Knights" label="The Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217552" start="15226" end="15235" title="The Wasps" label="The Wasps"/>
<link wikidata="Q815376" start="15265" end="15274" title="The Frogs" label="The Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800630" start="15932" end="15945" title="Arthur S. Way" label="Arthur S. Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407585" start="15962" end="15985" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill, Jr" label="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill, Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311872" start="16013" end="16025" title="Dudley Fitts" label="Dudley Fitts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16052" end="16065" title="David Barrett (translator)" label="David Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q98079024" start="16266" end="16284" title="Codex Ravennas 429" label="Codex Ravennas 429"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969363" wikidata="Q4792103" url="?curid=969363" title="Arlberg technique">
<text>The Arlberg technique is a progressive system that takes the skier from the snowplough turn to the parallel christie through measured stages of improvement. The system, or slightly modified versions, remains in widespread use to this day. Modern ski equipment is also capable of a more efficient turning style known as carving that uses entirely different techniques and movements. Some ski schools have started moving students directly from the snowplough to carving as early as possible, avoiding learning stemming habits that may be difficult to un-learn.

The system was developed by Hannes Schneider while working as an instructor in the Arlberg mountains in Austria. His methods were popularized in Europe in a series of films in the 1920s and 30s. It became popular in the United States after Schneider moved there in 1939, having been jailed during the Anschluss.

==History==
Hannes Schneider took a job as a ski instructor at the Hotel Post in Sankt Anton am Arlberg in Austria in 1907. He started developing various modifications to current ski techniques during this time, and the Arlberg technique developed through this process. During World War I he used the technique to train the Austria&#x27;s alpine troops, and fought with the Austrian army in Russia and on the Italian front. With the ending of the war, he returned to Hotel Post and continued to develop the Arlberg technique.
In 1920 the German filmmaker Arnold Fanck visited Arlberg and produced an early instructional ski film, &quot;&quot;. This introduced the Arlberg technique to the world, and it was quickly taken up by ski schools. A follow-up film in 1931, &quot;The White Ecstasy&quot;, followed the tribulations of two friends who travel to Arlberg to learn how to ski. This film was produced along with an instructional book, which was featured in the film. Stills from the film were also used to illustrate the book.

By 1925 Schneider&#x27;s technique had become known as the &quot;Arlberg Technique&quot;. He trained Otto Schneibs and Hannes Schroll to become emissaries to the United States for the now-certified technique, as described in Schneib&#x27;s book, &quot;Modern Ski Technique&quot;. The book and technique helped underpin the success of the Dartmouth College ski team, where Schneibs was a ski coach.

Schneider travelled to the United States in 1936 to demonstrate his techniques at a winter sports show in the Boston Garden. The demonstrations were held on a wooden slide that was covered with shaved ice. He repeated these demonstrations Madison Square Garden two weeks later. The techniques were soon taken up by US instructors.

Schneider was jailed during the Anschluss, but his US contacts led to his freedom. These efforts were led by Harvey Dow Gibson, president of the Manufacturer&#x27;s Trust. Gibson had started the Cranmore Mountain Resort, a ski resort in his home town of North Conway, New Hampshire. Carol Reed ran a ski school in the town (at the time, schools and rentals were often 3rd party services, as opposed to being owned by the resort itself) and had hired one of Schneider&#x27;s students to run it, Benno Rybizka.

Gibson bought the school from Reed, moving Reed to a newly formed Saks Fifth Avenue Ski Shop. He then wrote to the German Minister of Finance, Hjalmar Schacht, requesting that Schneider be freed to take the now-vacant lead instructor position. Schancht agreed, and Schneider arrived in the US in 1939. He continued to teach the Arlberg technique personally, while also introducing it at schools across the country.

==Basic concepts==
Downhill skiing focusses much of its attention on the development of skier techniques for smoothly turning the skis. This is used both for directional control as well as the primary method for controlling speed. When the skier is pointed down the hill, or &quot;along the fall line&quot;, they will accelerate. If the same skier points the skis across the fall line, or more radically, uphill, speed will be reduced. Using turns, the skier can control the amount of time the skis are pointed down the fall line, and thereby control their speed.

Early downhill techniques were based on two techniques, the telemark style or stemming. Over time, the latter became much more popular, and the more athletic telemark has remained a niche technique since the 1900s. Stemming is based on creating turning forces by the edge of the ski over the snow at an angle to the forward movement of the skier. The angle between the ski and the motion over the snow creates sideways forces that cause the skier to turn. In general, the skier angles the ski by keeping the tip roughly in-line with their shoulders, while pushing the tail of the ski out and to the side. The various styles of stemming turns differ primarily in form;

* the snowplough places both skis at roughly the same angle throughout a ski run, moving the ski on the inside of the desired turn toward the body.
* the stem or stem Christie turn is similar, but the skis are kept parallel when they are not being turned, and the ski on the outside of the turn is pushed away from the body to initiate the turn (stemming). This is sometimes known as the &quot;wedge Christie&quot;.
* further refinement of the basic Christie turn continues through development of &quot;weighting&quot;, moving the skis into the turn by moving weight from one ski to the other, as opposed to pushing the skis directly.

The Arlberg technique is based on the similarly of these concepts, introducing each stage as a series of modifications on the previous concepts. The snowplough is typically introduced to beginners by having them move their legs to produce a &quot;pizza slice&quot; shape, tips together and tails apart. Speed along the fall line can be controlled by adjusting the angle of the slice; with the tails far apart more drag is created, slowing the skier. Turns are accomplished through brute force, having the skier rotate the ski on the inside of the turn so it moves inward through sideways pressure from the leg and rotation of the foot.

As the skier gains confidence and can increase their speed, the angle of the snowplough is reduced until it devolves into the skis lying parallel to each other. At this point turning is initiated not by moving the inside ski toward the body, but moving the outside ski outward. This is the classic &quot;stemming&quot; motion, developing directly from the snowplough. Christy turning is essentially a technique for easily stemming, an active method that involves motion of the upper body, hips and knees.

==Later developments==
The Arlberg technique remained essentially unchanged into the 1960s. This was due largely to the limitations of the equipment of the era. Ski boots were stiff only in the sole, and offered little or no support laterally above the ski - moving the legs to the side would simply cause the upper portion of the boot to bend, it would not transmit this force to the ski. The only forces that could be transmitted were those that were parallel to the top of the ski (or more specifically, the bottom of the boot), namely rotating the toe in or out, or pushing the entire foot to one side or the other. As the ski can only be pushed inward until it meets the other ski, most of the control movements were accomplished by pushing the skis outward to the sides - the stemming motion.

During the 1950s and 60s, several developments in downhill ski equipment dramatically changed the sport. These changes were first introduced by the Head Standard ski, the Look Nevada ski binding, and the Lange and Rosemount plastic ski boots. Each of these further, and dramatically, improved the ability to transmit rotational forces to the ski, and from the ski to the snow. This allowed the ski to be turned by directly rotating it onto its edge, exposing the curved sidecut to the snow, bending the ski into an arc, and causing it to naturally turn along that arced path. The parallel turn developed from what was essentially a weight-balanced version of the stem Christy into a much less athletic version, today known as carving.

Early versions of the parallel turn can be taught as modifications of the stem Christy, and this became a popular addition to the Arlberg technique through the 1960s and especially in the 1970s. By the late 1970s, the upper echelon of ski technique was based on a series of short, rapid parallel turns with the upper body remaining aligned down the fall line as long as possible, similar to modern mogul skiing technique. Turn initiation was based on weighting and rotating the ski, like carving, but the power of the turn remained in the skidding. However, as equipment continued to improve, especially the introduction of the &quot;parabolic&quot; skis in the 1990s (today known as &quot;shaped&quot;), the ratio of skidding to carving continued to change, and techniques along with it. Modern technique is based largely on carving, adding skidding only as needed to tighten the turn.

Modern skis make carving turns so simple that the Arlberg technique of gradual progression is no longer universal. Many ski schools graduate advancing students directly from the snowplough to the carving turn. These are taught as two entirely separate techniques, one using stemming and the other using the movement of the knees, so the progressive connection emphasized in the Arlberg technique is no longer maintained. This is by no means universal, and many schools continue to follow the classic Arlberg progression.

==References==

* Fanck, Arnold; Schneider, Hannes (1925) &quot;Wunder des Schneeschuhs; ein System des richtigen Skilaufens und seine Anwendung im alpinen Geländelauf&quot; Hamburg: Gebrüder Enoch OCLC 10252521
* &quot;Modern Ski Technique&quot; (1931) film
* Schniebs, Otto and McCrillis, John W. (1932) &quot;Modern Ski Technique&quot; Brattleboro, Vt: Stephen Daye Press OCLC 702560034
* Lang, Otto (1936) &quot;Downhill Skiing&quot; New York: H. Holt and company OCLC 2105449
* Rybizka, Benno (1938) &quot;The Hannes Schneider Ski Technique&quot; New York: Harcourt, Brace OCLC 6217443
* &quot;The Hannes Schneider Ski Technique&quot; (1938) Pathescope film
* Laurie Puliafico, &quot;The Father of Modern Skiing- Hannes Schneider&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4792103" start="4" end="21" title="Arlberg technique" label="Arlberg technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q137273" start="76" end="91" title="snowplough turn" label="snowplough turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q137193" start="108" end="116" title="stem christie" label="christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046182" start="319" end="326" title="Carve turn" label="carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q213857" start="588" end="604" title="Hannes Schneider" label="Hannes Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q665816" start="643" end="650" title="Arlberg" label="Arlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="664" end="671" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="780" end="793" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="861" end="870" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q213857" start="885" end="901" title="Hannes Schneider" label="Hannes Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q659996" start="954" end="976" title="Sankt Anton am Arlberg" label="Sankt Anton am Arlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="980" end="987" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1150" end="1161" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q71253" start="1428" end="1440" title="Arnold Fanck" label="Arnold Fanck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534919" start="1493" end="1501" title="ski film" label="ski film"/>
<link wikidata="Q872972" start="1645" end="1662" title="The White Ecstasy (film)" label="The White Ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q700979" start="2023" end="2037" title="Hannes Schroll" label="Hannes Schroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="2413" end="2426" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="2542" end="2563" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="2667" end="2676" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677141" start="2744" end="2761" title="Harvey Dow Gibson" label="Harvey Dow Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753088" start="2780" end="2805" title="Manufacturers Hanover Corporation" label="Manufacturer&amp;#x27;s Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182225" start="2830" end="2854" title="Cranmore Mountain Resort" label="Cranmore Mountain Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q774849" start="2889" end="2916" title="North Conway, New Hampshire" label="North Conway, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q151691" start="3288" end="3303" title="Hjalmar Schacht" label="Hjalmar Schacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q50620" start="4186" end="4194" title="Telemark skiing" label="telemark"/>
<link wikidata="Q137193" start="4204" end="4212" title="Stem (skiing)" label="stemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661777" start="6735" end="6744" title="Ski boots" label="Ski boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689224" start="7522" end="7535" title="Head Standard" label="Head Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155709" start="7545" end="7556" title="Look Nevada" label="Look Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892020" start="7557" end="7568" title="ski binding" label="ski binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485834" start="7578" end="7583" title="Lange Ski Boots" label="Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368500" start="7588" end="7597" title="Rosemount Ski Boots" label="Rosemount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661777" start="7606" end="7614" title="ski boot" label="ski boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q137075" start="7954" end="7967" title="parallel turn" label="parallel turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046182" start="8100" end="8107" title="Carve turn" label="carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q877236" start="9912" end="9922" title="Otto Lang (film producer)" label="Lang, Otto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969369" wikidata="Q6264275" url="?curid=969369" title="John William Wallace">
<text>John William Wallace (February 17, 1815 – January 12, 1884) was an American lawyer and the seventh reporter of decisions of the United States Supreme Court, serving from 1863 to 1874.

==Formative years==
Born in Philadelphia on February 17, 1815, Wallace graduated from the University of Pennsylvania in 1833. He then studied law under his father and John Sergeant and was admitted to the Philadelphia bar in 1836. 

==Career==
While working as librarian to the Law Association of Philadelphia, he compiled three volumes of decisions of the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, which sat in that city. He wrote The Reporters on English reporters and cases, first as an article in the &quot;American Law Magazine&quot; (1844), and then as a book in multiple editions (1845, 1855, 1882) that made his reputation. 

His twenty-three volumes of reports of the Supreme Court&#x27;s cases (volumes 68-90) are highly respected for their quality. He also served as president of the Historical Society of Pennsylvania (April 13, 1868 – January 12, 1884). 

==Death==
Wallace died in Philadelphia, his hometown, on January 12, 1884.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6264275" start="0" end="20" title="John William Wallace" label="John William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="99" end="120" title="Supreme Court of the United States Reporter of Decisions" label="reporter of decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="128" end="155" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="213" end="225" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="275" end="301" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q250438" start="542" end="572" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit" label="Third Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144061" start="607" end="620" title="The Reporters (book)" label="The Reporters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773954" start="970" end="1004" title="Historical Society of Pennsylvania" label="Historical Society of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1070" end="1082" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969371" wikidata="Q2262830" url="?curid=969371" title="Birthplace of Richard Nixon">
<text>The Richard Nixon Birthplace is the birthplace and early childhood home of Richard Nixon, the 37th president of the United States. It is located on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum in Yorba Linda, California, and serves as a historic house museum.

The house was built in 1912 on family ranchland; Nixon was born there the following year. He and his family stayed there until 1922, when they moved to Whittier, California. The former home was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1973, and a California Historical Landmark in 1994.

==Description and history==
The Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum is located on the north side of Yorba Linda Boulevard at its junction with Eureka Avenue, west of downtown Yorba Linda. The property is dominated by the museum complex and parking lot; the Birthplace is located in a slightly secluded setting east of the main building, in a grove of trees. It is a story Craftsman-style bungalow, with a gabled roof and clapboarded exterior. The north roof face has a broad shed-roof dormer projecting, and a gabled hood shelters the main entrance. Some of its windows feature diamond-pane sashes or panels.

The house was built in 1912 from a mail-order construction kit by Francis A. Nixon, on ranchland owned by the family. Richard Nixon was born in this house the following year, and the family remained here until 1922, when they moved to Whittier. Francis Nixon sold off portions of the property in 1922 and 1925, with the largest part going to the Yorba Linda School District for the construction of a school. The district purchased the rest of the tract in 1948, using the house as employee housing.

Nixon formed a nonprofit library organization in 1968, after winning his first election as president. The school district deeded the property over to that organization in 1988. The school was torn down, and the museum established on the premises.

==See also==
*List of residences of presidents of the United States
*List of National Historic Landmarks in California
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Orange County, California
*Presidential memorials in the United States

==References==
==External links==
*Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum: Richard Nixon Birthplace
*National Park Service: The Nixon Birthplace
*Richard Nixon Foundation
*Sears-homes: &quot;The Unknown Origin of Richard Nixon&#x27;s Mail-Order House.&quot;
* Huell Howser. &quot;Nixon Boyhood Home&quot;. &quot;California&#x27;s Gold&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2262830" start="4" end="28" title="Birthplace of Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon Birthplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="75" end="88" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="94" end="98" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="37th"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="99" end="129" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754354" start="167" end="212" title="Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum" label="Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q493518" start="216" end="239" title="Yorba Linda, California" label="Yorba Linda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087181" start="257" end="278" title="historic house museum" label="historic house museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q838791" start="433" end="453" title="Whittier, California" label="Whittier, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="488" end="514" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933979" start="530" end="560" title="California Historical Landmark" label="California Historical Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417500" start="1237" end="1253" title="kit house" label="construction kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479914" start="1257" end="1273" title="Francis A. Nixon" label="Francis A. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q838791" start="1426" end="1434" title="Whittier, California" label="Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q185726" start="1953" end="2006" title="List of residences of presidents of the United States" label="List of residences of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208170" start="2008" end="2057" title="List of National Historic Landmarks in California" label="List of National Historic Landmarks in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977091" start="2059" end="2133" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Orange County, California" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Orange County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108855" start="2135" end="2178" title="Presidential memorials in the United States" label="Presidential memorials in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837916" start="2447" end="2459" title="Huell Howser" label="Huell Howser"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969373" wikidata="Q11683841" url="?curid=969373" title="Star Island (New Hampshire)">
<text>Star Island is one of the Isles of Shoals that straddle the border between New Hampshire and Maine, approximately from the mainland. It is the largest of the four islands that are located in New Hampshire at and the second largest overall, after Appledore Island. It was named by sailors who imagined the shape of the island as points of a star. The island was annexed to the town of Rye, New Hampshire, in 1876. It has been owned and operated by the Star Island Corporation since 1915.

==History==
Captain John Smith mapped the Isles of Shoals in 1614 and named them &quot;Smyth&#x27;s Isles&quot;. There is a monument remaining today on Star Island, built in 1864 to commemorate the 250th anniversary of John Smith&#x27;s trip. The islands were settled in the early 17th century by seasonal fishermen working the North Atlantic coast. Many were settlers from the colonies of the Virginia companies.

The first permanent settlement of Star Island began in 1677 when the Province of Maine was under the authority of the Province of Massachusetts Bay. Maine increased taxes on nearby Hog Island (now Appledore Island); Star Island, on the other hand, was in New Hampshire. This tax increase caused a mass migration, and the township of Gosport was established on Star Island in 1715.

The town and the island flourished until the American Revolutionary War, when the Americans ordered the Shoals evacuated, believing that it posed a threat to have a group of questionable loyalty just off the coast, and many shoalers abandoned their island homes. After the war, some moved back to Gosport, but it never regained its former population.

The islands were sparsely inhabited until the middle of the 19th century when Thomas Laighton established a hotel on Smuttynose Island. He eventually opened the Appledore Hotel on Hog with Levi Thaxter, which he renamed Appledore Island. Laighton&#x27;s daughter Celia married Thaxter, and she became a popular poet. She hosted an arts community on the island frequented by Nathaniel Hawthorne, John Greenleaf Whittier, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sarah Orne Jewett, and Impressionist painter Childe Hassam. Sarah Orne Jewett wrote &quot;On Star Island&quot; about her visit to Star Island and the Gosport church, which was published in &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot; in September 1881.

Thomas Elliott and his wife Lilla established the Shoals Summer Meeting Association in 1896 as a summer conference center. The Meeting Association bought the hotel and the island in 1945, forming the Star Island Corporation. Today conference goers still sleep in the Oceanic Hotel and utilize other historic buildings, such as the stone Gosport Chapel built in 1800.

==Present day==
Star Island has become increasingly self-sufficient. As of 2015, it contained the largest off-grid solar farm in New England. This solar grid provides all of the power necessary for the island during the off season and 60-percent during full conference season. The island produces its own water and electricity through solar and diesel generators. It has its own septic treatment plant, one of the few capable of handling salt water, and a reverse osmosis water purification system for converting sea water to drinking water. There are three separate water systems on the island for drinking water, cistern water for washing, and sea water for sanitary use.

==Star Island Corporation==
Star Island has been owned and operated by the Star Island Corporation since 1915 as a place for family, youth, and individual conferences and retreats. The Star Island Corporation has close ties to the Unitarian Universalist Association and the United Church of Christ. Conferences vary from a week to a few days, with some focused on religious themes and others on secular subjects (photography, arts, yoga, writing, science, etc.). In 2008, &quot;personal retreats&quot; were created to allow members of the public to stay on the island for up to one week. In 2015, Star Island Corporation held a year-long centennial celebration with both island and mainland events, a ribbon cutting and historical reenactments.

Star Island Corporation is a not-for-profit United States Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) membership organization and incorporated in the state of Massachusetts.

==Conferences==
Star Island hosts various conferences, which typically last from two days to a full week and may overlap with other conferences. A number of them tend to have a Unitarian Universalist orientation, while others are affiliated with the United Church of Christ. Other conferences may or may not have a particular religious orientation.

==Getting to the island==
Several ferry companies have provided transportation to Star Island. The Isles of Shoals Steamship Company, Island Cruises, and We Like Whales bring visitors for day trips and overnights or run tours around the island and the rest of the Isles of Shoals.

Gosport Harbor, which is created by the islands and connecting breakwaters, is deep and fairly protected, and moorings are available for visiting boats.

==See also==
* Tucke Monument, located on Star Island
* New Hampshire Historical Marker No. 18, located in Rye Harbor State Park

==References==
==External links==
* Star Island Corporation website
* Video of Star Island in winter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11683841" start="0" end="11" title="Star Island (New Hampshire)" label="Star Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674262" start="26" end="41" title="Isles of Shoals" label="Isles of Shoals"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="75" end="88" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="93" end="98" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781330" start="246" end="262" title="Appledore Island" label="Appledore Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q523619" start="384" end="402" title="Rye, New Hampshire" label="Rye, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="508" end="518" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="882" end="890" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620150" start="972" end="989" title="Province of Maine" label="Province of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="1021" end="1050" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1330" end="1356" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278271" start="1754" end="1771" title="Smuttynose Island" label="Smuttynose Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664258" start="1900" end="1905" title="Celia Thaxter" label="Celia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="2011" end="2030" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q458372" start="2032" end="2055" title="John Greenleaf Whittier" label="John Greenleaf Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="2057" end="2078" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="2080" end="2101" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q444995" start="2103" end="2120" title="Sarah Orne Jewett" label="Sarah Orne Jewett"/>
<link wikidata="Q737635" start="2148" end="2161" title="Childe Hassam" label="Childe Hassam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="2298" end="2320" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003207" start="2830" end="2840" title="solar farm" label="solar farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q272175" start="3171" end="3186" title="reverse osmosis" label="reverse osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="3330" end="3337" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q671506" start="3621" end="3655" title="Unitarian Universalist Association" label="Unitarian Universalist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="3664" end="3687" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084016" start="4165" end="4179" title="not-for-profit corporation" label="not-for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4180" end="4193" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666281" start="4194" end="4215" title="Internal Revenue Code" label="Internal Revenue Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q240625" start="4224" end="4233" title="501(c)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="4291" end="4304" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="4484" end="4506" title="Unitarian Universalist" label="Unitarian Universalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="4557" end="4580" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851035" start="5108" end="5122" title="Tucke Monument" label="Tucke Monument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5149" end="5187" title="List of New Hampshire historical markers (1–25)#18" label="New Hampshire Historical Marker No. 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641846" start="5200" end="5221" title="Rye Harbor State Park" label="Rye Harbor State Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969397" wikidata="Q7777188" url="?curid=969397" title="The wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time">
<text>&quot;The wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time, and with the wrong enemy&quot; is General Omar Bradley&#x27;s famous rebuke in his May 15, 1951 Congressional testimony as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the idea of extending the Korean War into China, as proposed by General Douglas MacArthur, the commander of the U.N. forces in Korea before being relieved of command by President Harry Truman on April 11, 1951.

==Passages from testimony==
Here is a more complete passage of Bradley&#x27;s testimony:

== Vietnam War usage ==
Presidential candidate John F. Kennedy echoed Bradley&#x27;s sentiments in a speech given on October 12, 1960:
Should I become your President... I will not risk American lives and a nuclear war by permitting any other nation to drag us into the wrong war at the wrong place at the wrong time through an unwise commitment that is unwise militarily, unnecessary to our security and unsupported by our allies.

== Iraq War usage ==
The quotation has since been used to criticize the planning and execution of the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq and the subsequent occupation. General Anthony Zinni, historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., and Governor Howard Dean have all used variations of the phrase in criticism of the Bush administration&#x27;s handling of the Iraq war. Notably, Schlesinger also reported contemporaneously on Bradley&#x27;s original statement back in 1951 in his book &quot;The General and the President, and the Future of American Foreign Policy.&quot; 
Despite voting yes on the Authorization to Use Military Force on Iraq and not reversing his position at any time before the invasion, on September 6, 2004, at a Racine, West Virginia rally, Senator John Kerry said,
I would not have done just one thing differently than the president on Iraq, I would have done everything differently than the president on Iraq…. You&#x27;ve about 500 troops here, 500 troops there and it&#x27;s American troops that are 90 percent of the combat casualties and it&#x27;s American taxpayers that are paying 90 percent of the cost of the war. It&#x27;s the wrong war, in the wrong place at the wrong time.

Speaking on &quot;60 Minutes&quot;, May 23, 2004, Zinni said, &quot;The plan was wrong, it was the wrong war, the wrong place and the wrong time— with little or no planning.&quot; He stated that serious &quot;derelictions of duty,&quot; &quot;criminal negligence,&quot; and poor planning put U.S. forces in harm&#x27;s way and left Iraq in chaos after the invasion. He also said that Paul Bremer had made &quot;mistake after mistake after mistake.&quot;

In &quot;The Independent&quot;, April 15, 2004, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. wrote:
The immediate reason that Mr Bush opened Pandora&#x27;s box in the Middle East and invaded Iraq was his moral certitude that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction and that he was working in close partnership with Osama bin Laden and al-Qa&#x27;ida. Those convictions turned out to be delusions. This denouement does great harm to Mr Bush&#x27;s credibility and to that of the United States; it has got us into a ghastly mess in Iraq; and it has diverted attention, resources and military might from the war that should have commanded the Bush administration&#x27;s highest priority - the Afghan war against al-Qa&#x27;ida and international terrorism. Meanwhile Afghanistan is a mess too. Mr Bush chose the wrong war in the wrong place at the wrong time.

On December 15, 2003, at the Pacific Council on International Policy in Los Angeles, Howard Dean said Bush &quot;launched the war in the wrong way, at the wrong time, with inadequate planning, insufficient help, and at unbelievable cost.&quot; In a May 3, 2003 primary debate in South Carolina, Dean said:
Let me be very clear about what I believe. I&#x27;m delighted to see Saddam Hussein gone. I appreciate the fact that we have a strong military in this country, and I&#x27;d keep a strong military in this country, but I think this was the wrong war at the wrong time because we have set a new policy of preventive war in this country, and I think that was the wrong thing to do because sooner or later we&#x27;re going to see another country copy the United States, and sooner or later we&#x27;re going to have to deal with the fact that there may well be a Shia fundamentalist regime set up in Iraq which will be a greater danger to the United States than Iraq is.

=== 2004 Presidential debate ===
During the first Presidential debate of 2004, George W. Bush repeatedly rebuked John Kerry for using Bradley&#x27;s saying, asking, &quot;what kind of message does it say&quot; to U.S. troops and allies. Speaking of other world leaders, Bush said &quot;They&#x27;re not going to follow somebody who says, &#x27;This is the wrong war at the wrong place at the wrong time.&#x27;&quot; Bush recited versions of the quotation seven times, three times in one response.

== Other usage ==
In 2015, Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni described the South Sudanese Civil War as &quot;the wrong war in the wrong place at the wrong time.&quot; He also referred to Bradley&#x27;s use of the phrase in his Independence Day speech in October 2023, underlining his criticism of imperialist actors.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7777188" start="0" end="90" title="The wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time" label="&amp;quot;The wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time, and with the wrong enemy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="102" end="114" title="Omar Bradley" label="Omar Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="187" end="224" title="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="254" end="264" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="270" end="275" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="300" end="317" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="340" end="344" title="United Nations" label="U.N."/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="407" end="419" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="577" end="592" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="1069" end="1090" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="U.S. invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q572954" start="1130" end="1143" title="Anthony Zinni" label="Anthony Zinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q435195" start="1155" end="1178" title="Arthur Schlesinger, Jr." label="Arthur Schlesinger, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q337470" start="1193" end="1204" title="Howard Dean" label="Howard Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475339" start="1680" end="1701" title="Racine, West Virginia" label="Racine, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="1717" end="1727" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="2174" end="2184" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217683" start="2540" end="2551" title="Paul Bremer" label="Paul Bremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="2620" end="2635" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q435195" start="2659" end="2682" title="Arthur Schlesinger, Jr." label="Arthur Schlesinger, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q337470" start="3539" end="3550" title="Howard Dean" label="Howard Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="3829" end="3843" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892641" start="4476" end="4503" title="2004 United States presidential debates" label="Presidential debate of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="4505" end="4519" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="4951" end="4958" title="Uganda" label="Ugandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57274" start="4969" end="4984" title="Yoweri Museveni" label="Yoweri Museveni"/>
<link wikidata="Q15353665" start="4999" end="5023" title="South Sudanese Civil War" label="South Sudanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614400" start="5151" end="5167" title="Independence Day (Uganda)" label="Independence Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969400" wikidata="Q8019439" url="?curid=969400" title="William Tod Otto">
<text>William Tod Otto (January 19, 1816 – November 7, 1905) was an American judge and the eighth reporter of decisions of the United States Supreme Court, serving as reporter from 1875 to 1883.

==Biography==
Born in Philadelphia, he was the son of noted physician John Conrad Otto. He received his A.B. in 1833 and his A.M. in 1836, both from the University of Pennsylvania, and then read law with Joseph R. Ingersoll. He moved west and practiced law in Brownstown, Indiana and was a judge on the Indiana Second Circuit Court from 1844 to 1852. He taught law at a predecessor school of the now Indiana University Maurer School of Law from 1847 to 1852 and unsuccessfully ran for Attorney General of Indiana in 1858.

A personal friend of Abraham Lincoln, Judge Otto headed the Indiana delegation to the 1860 Republican National Convention that nominated Lincoln for the presidency. Subsequently, he was among those instrumental in delivering Indiana, a key swing state, to Lincoln in the presidential election. Lincoln appointed him Assistant Secretary of the Interior after the previous man in the position, John Palmer Usher, was promoted to Secretary of the Interior. Anticipating the outbreak of southern hostilities, Lincoln wanted Otto to be involved in military organization. He served in the Interior Department from 1863 to 1871. According to The New York Times (Page 1, April 16, 1865), Judge Otto was among those surrounding Lincoln&#x27;s bedside when the great man died after being shot by John Wilkes Booth.

Otto went on to serve as a diplomat, helping arbitrate claims against Spain, as well as a delegate to the Universal Postal Union congress in Lisbon, Portugal. In 1875, he was named Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States, a position he held until 1883.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8019439" start="0" end="16" title="William Tod Otto" label="William Tod Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="71" end="76" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="92" end="113" title="Supreme Court of the United States Reporter of Decisions" label="reporter of decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="121" end="148" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="212" end="224" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="250" end="259" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226940" start="260" end="276" title="John Conrad Otto" label="John Conrad Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="294" end="298" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="315" end="319" title="Master of Arts" label="A.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="343" end="369" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904809" start="394" end="413" title="Joseph R. Ingersoll" label="Joseph R. Ingersoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674657" start="450" end="469" title="Brownstown, Indiana" label="Brownstown, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="493" end="500" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023633" start="590" end="629" title="Indiana University Maurer School of Law" label="Indiana University Maurer School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023060" start="675" end="702" title="Attorney General of Indiana" label="Attorney General of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q361909" start="804" end="834" title="Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889756" start="1029" end="1064" title="United States Deputy Secretary of the Interior" label="Assistant Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333315" start="1105" end="1122" title="John Palmer Usher" label="John Palmer Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="1140" end="1165" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1589" end="1594" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="1625" end="1647" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="1660" end="1676" title="Lisbon, Portugal" label="Lisbon, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="1700" end="1763" title="Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969415" wikidata="Q4854155" url="?curid=969415" title="Bancroft Davis">
<text>John Chandler Bancroft Davis (December 29, 1822 – December 27, 1907), commonly known as (J. C.) Bancroft Davis, was an attorney, diplomat, judge of the Court of Claims, and Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States.

==Education and career==
Born on December 29, 1822, in Worcester, Massachusetts, Davis read law in 1844 and received an Artium Baccalaureus degree in 1847 from Harvard University. He originally entered Harvard with the class of 1840 but was suspended in his senior year and did not graduate with his original class. He was Secretary and charge d&#x27;affaires for the London legation with the United States Department of State from 1849 to 1852. He entered private practice in New York City, New York from 1853 to 1862. He was an American correspondent for the &quot;London Times&quot; from 1854 to 1861. Because of ill health, Davis retired from his law work in 1862, and settled on a farm in rural New York until he regained his health. He was a member of the New York State Assembly (Orange County, 1st District) in 1869 but vacated his seat on March 26, 1869 to accept a federal post. He was a United States Assistant Secretary of State from 1869 to 1871, and from 1873 to 1874, under President Ulysses S. Grant. He was Secretary and United States Agent for the Joint High Commission in Geneva, Switzerland from 1871 to 1873. In 1874, he was appointed as the United States Envoy to the German Empire, serving in that position until 1877.

==Federal judicial service==
Davis was nominated by President Rutherford B. Hayes on December 12, 1877, to a seat on the Court of Claims (later the United States Court of Claims) vacated by Judge Edward G. Loring. He was confirmed by the United States Senate on December 14, 1877, and received his commission the same day. His service terminated on December 9, 1881, due to his resignation to again accept the post of United States Assistant Secretary of State from 1881 to 1882.

Davis was nominated by President Chester A. Arthur on December 13, 1882, to the seat on the Court of Claims vacated by himself. He was confirmed by the Senate on December 20, 1882, and received his commission the same day. His service terminated on November 5, 1883, due to his resignation.

==Reporter of decisions==

Davis served as Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1883 to 1902.

===Role in corporate personhood controversy===
Acting as court reporter in &quot;Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad&quot;, 118 U.S. 394 (1886), dealing with taxation of railroad properties, Davis plays a historical role in the corporate personhood debate. The position of court reporter entailed that he write &quot;a summary-of-the-case commentary.&quot; Why Bancroft Davis&#x27;s role in the controversy is worth mentioning is that he noted in the headnote to the court&#x27;s opinion that the Chief Justice Morrison Waite began oral argument by stating, &quot;The court does not wish to hear argument on the question whether the provision in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which forbids a State to deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws, applies to these corporations. We are all of the opinion that it does.&quot;

In a published account of Bancroft&#x27;s collected Supreme Court reports and notes from 1885 to 1886, he wrote of the &quot;Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad&quot; case that, &quot;The defendant Corporations are persons within the intent of the clause in section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which forbids a State to deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.&quot;

Journalists and authors such as Thom Hartman have since cited Davis&#x27;s prior position as president of Newburgh and New York Railway as evidence of a conflict of interest in the corporate personhood interpretation of a Supreme Court ruling dealing with a railroad. The controversy regarding Bancroft Davis&#x27;s summary remains unsolved.

==Death==

Davis died on December 27, 1907, at his residence, 1621 H Street NW, in Washington, DC

==Family==
Davis was the son of John Davis, a Whig Governor of Massachusetts, and was the older brother of United States Representative Horace Davis.

==Personal==

On November 19, 1857, Davis married Frederica Gore King (1829–1916). Frederica was the daughter of James G. King (1791–1853), an American businessman and Whig Party politician and the granddaughter of both Archibald Gracie and Rufus King, who was the Federalist candidate for both Vice President (1804 and 1808) and President of the United States (1816). They did not have any children.

==Honors==

Davis was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1851.

==Works==
*(1847) &quot;The Massachusetts Justice&quot; 
*(1871) &quot;The Case of the United States Laid before the Tribunal of Arbitration at Geneva&quot; 
*(1873) &quot;Treaties and Conventions Concluded between the United States of America and Other Powers, Since July 4, 1776&quot; (Revised edition) 
*(1893) &quot;Mr. Fish and the Alabama Claims: A Chapter in Diplomatic History&quot; , 
*(1897) &quot;Origin of the Book of Common Prayer of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America&quot;

==See also==

*Davis political family

==References==
==Sources==
* &quot;The United States Court of Claims : a history&quot; / pt. 1. The judges, 1855–1976 / by Marion T. Bennett / pt. 2. Origin, development, jurisdiction, 1855–1978 / W. Cowen, P. Nichols, M.T. Bennett. Washington, D.C. : Committee on the Bicentennial of Independence and the Constitution of the Judicial Conference of the United States, 1976 i.e. 1977–1978. 2 vols.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4854155" start="0" end="28" title="Bancroft Davis" label="John Chandler Bancroft Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854155" start="89" end="94" title="Bancroft Davis" label="J. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4854155" start="96" end="110" title="Bancroft Davis" label="Bancroft Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153408" start="119" end="127" title="Attorneys in the United States" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="129" end="137" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="139" end="144" title="United States federal judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889674" start="152" end="167" title="United States Court of Claims" label="Court of Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="173" end="236" title="Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="294" end="303" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="305" end="318" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300597" start="326" end="334" title="read law" label="read law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="359" end="378" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Artium Baccalaureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="399" end="417" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q217713" start="576" end="598" title="charge d&amp;#x27;affaires" label="charge d&amp;#x27;affaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="607" end="613" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="632" end="665" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="716" end="729" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="731" end="739" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="806" end="818" title="London Times" label="London Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="1001" end="1024" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645840" start="1058" end="1062" title="92nd New York State Legislature" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q742482" start="1137" end="1179" title="United States Assistant Secretary of State" label="United States Assistant Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="1238" end="1254" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1305" end="1326" title="Treaty of Washington (1871)#Joint commission" label="Joint High Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1330" end="1336" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1338" end="1349" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1429" end="1442" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="1544" end="1563" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889674" start="1603" end="1618" title="United States Court of Claims" label="Court of Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889674" start="1630" end="1659" title="United States Court of Claims" label="United States Court of Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343040" start="1678" end="1694" title="Edward G. Loring" label="Edward G. Loring"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1720" end="1740" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="1996" end="2013" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="2298" end="2361" title="Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419323" start="2463" end="2510" title="Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376073" start="2622" end="2649" title="corporate personhood debate" label="corporate personhood debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349419" start="2905" end="2919" title="Morrison Waite" label="Morrison Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="3044" end="3064" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="3072" end="3084" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q338363" start="3757" end="3769" title="Thom Hartman" label="Thom Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376073" start="3906" end="3926" title="corporate personhood" label="corporate personhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4151" end="4165" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q880346" start="4199" end="4209" title="John Davis (Massachusetts Governor)" label="John Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="4213" end="4217" title="United States Whig Party" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="4218" end="4243" title="List of Governors of Massachusetts" label="Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4274" end="4302" title="United States Representative" label="United States Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124069" start="4303" end="4315" title="Horace Davis" label="Horace Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680421" start="4431" end="4444" title="James G. King" label="James G. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="4486" end="4496" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786334" start="4538" end="4554" title="Archibald Gracie" label="Archibald Gracie"/>
<link wikidata="Q456794" start="4559" end="4569" title="Rufus King" label="Rufus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="4583" end="4593" title="Federalist Party (United States)" label="Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="4613" end="4627" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q698133" start="4629" end="4633" title="1804 United States presidential election" label="1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q698185" start="4638" end="4642" title="1808 United States presidential election" label="1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="4648" end="4678" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q564395" start="4680" end="4684" title="1816 United States presidential election" label="1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742987" start="4766" end="4794" title="American Antiquarian Society" label="American Antiquarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241999" start="5338" end="5360" title="Davis political family" label="Davis political family"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969419" wikidata="Q7595925" url="?curid=969419" title="Stacia">
<text>Stacia Blake (born 26 December 1952), known mononymously as Stacia, is an Irish former performance artist/dancer with the rock band Hawkwind.

== Early years ==
Stacia was born in Exeter, Devon, England.

==With Hawkwind==
Stacia joined the band in 1971; however accounts vary as to how and why she began working with the band. Liner notes to &quot;In Search of Space&quot; indicate that poet and lyricist Robert Calvert recruited her for live shows; other sources state that she was a friend of Nik Turner, saxophonist and flautist for the band. In 2012, Turner told &quot;Mojo&quot; magazine, &quot;I met Stacia for the first time at the Isle of Wight... She said, &quot;Can I dance with you?&quot; and I said, &quot;Yeah, but you must take off all your clothes and paint your body.&quot; She took all her clothes off but unfortunately I didn&#x27;t have any body paint. That was like her audition.&quot; In an interview in British music magazine &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, Stacia herself stated that she attended a show and, inspired by the music, got on stage and performed an impromptu dance to the band&#x27;s music. However, in an interview in Prog Magazine, she said in her first time dancing with the band, at the Flamingo Ballroom in 1971, she asked permission from the band members to dance. She immediately became an integral part of the live show after joining in 1971.

According to a 1974 interview in &quot;Penthouse&quot;, Stacia was six feet (183 cm) tall and &quot;happily bisexual&quot;. She regularly augmented her visual impact by performing topless or nude, her body decorated in iridescent or luminescent paint. In a 2007 BBC Four documentary, Lemmy described her as 6 ft 2 inches (188 cm) tall with a 52 inch (132 cm) bust and a bookbinder by trade. The same documentary said that she was working as a petrol pump attendant in Cornwall when she joined the band.

Stacia regarded most of what she did with the band as interpretive dance, although there were some set routines. She was an integral part of the early to mid-1970s Hawkwind show, particularly during the &quot;Space Ritual&quot; era. She left Hawkwind in 1975 after touring with them for the &quot;Warrior on the Edge of Time&quot; album. It may not have been her decision to leave. Her departure, along with that of Lemmy (who went on to form Motörhead) and Robert Calvert, signalled the end of an era; though Calvert, after a guest appearance with the band at the Reading festival, decided to rejoin the band full-time towards the end of that year.

==After Hawkwind==
After leaving Hawkwind, Stacia returned to private life and married Roy Dyke. As former Hawkwind manager Doug Smith said in the October 2000 issue of &quot;Classic Rock&quot; magazine, &quot;The last anybody heard, Stacia was married with children and living in Hamburg with her husband Roy Dyke, formerly of Ashton, Gardner and Dyke.&quot; The couple has a daughter, Aysha Dyke, who lives in Hamburg and is currently in the band Generations of Music.

Stacia is now living in Ireland and working as an artist.

She has said about her work: &quot;[It..] is greatly influenced by my love of nature, in all its aspects. Landscapes, people, animals, sound and movement. All these things permeate my being. I allow them to become part of me. After a time of reflection, all these impressions culminate in the creation of inner landscapes which are then released to create the images you see in my work.&quot;

Stacia Blake made a return to the stage in July 2019, appearing with former Hawkwind member Nik Turner and contemporary dancer Ms. Angel at Kozfest. The unannounced performance was Stacia&#x27;s first since she last appeared with Hawkwind at Reading Festival in August 1975.

==Artistic education==
* 1990 Freie Kunstschule, Hamburg, Germany
* 1992 Limerick Senior College, Ireland
* 1993 Crawford College of Art and Design, Ireland 
* 1995 Erasmus exchange, Finland

==Exhibitions==
;Solo shows
* 1995 Taidemuseo - Joensuu, Finland
* 1999 The Daffodil Gallery - Ireland
* 2000 Oisin Gallery - Dublin, Ireland
* 2001 Tinahely Courthouse Centre - Ireland
* 2001 Domamaise Theatre &amp; Centre for the Arts - Ireland
* 2002 Kolin Ryynänen - Koli, Finland
* 2002 Galleria, Petra Raasio - Joensuu, Finland
* 2003 Bank of Ireland - Dublin, Ireland

;Awards
* 2001 Art Flight Air Lingus, Arts council
* 2001 Three month residency at Koli, Finland (Arts Council, Joensuu, Finland)
* 2005 Tyrone Guthrie Bursary (Arts Office Laois, County Council, Ireland)
;Group shows
* 1997 Bank of Ireland Exhibition - Skerries, Ireland
* 1998 Sunlight Studios - Ireland
* 1999 Sunlight Studios - Ireland
* 1999 Post War Art &amp; Design at Philips Auction House - Edinburgh, Scotland
* 1999 Sunlight Studios - Ireland
* 2000 Sunlight Studios - Ireland
* 2001 Sunlight Studios - Ireland
* 2002 Blue Leaf Gallery - Dublin, Ireland
* 2002 Sunlight Studios - Ireland
* 2003 Blue Leaf Gallery - Dublin, Ireland
* 2004 Balbriggan Art Festival - County Dublin, Ireland
* 2005 Balbriggan Art Festival - County Dublin, Ireland
* 2006 Nebenan Ausstellung - Berlin, Germany
==References==
==External links==
*Photos of Stacia at a concert in Copenhagen
*A short article about Stacia
*Article about Stacia and other Irish artists</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7595925" start="0" end="12" title="Stacia" label="Stacia Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595925" start="60" end="66" title="Stacia" label="Stacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285966" start="132" end="140" title="Hawkwind" label="Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933134" start="349" end="367" title="In Search of Space" label="In Search of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q426950" start="406" end="420" title="Robert Calvert" label="Robert Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564640" start="496" end="506" title="Nik Turner" label="Nik Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="574" end="578" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920369" start="640" end="653" title="Isle of Wight Festival 1970" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="955" end="967" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351734" start="1150" end="1163" title="Prog (magazine)" label="Prog Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108515" start="1422" end="1431" title="Penthouse (magazine)" label="Penthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="1645" end="1653" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="1667" end="1672" title="Lemmy" label="Lemmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="1742" end="1746" title="Breast" label="bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q240471" start="1753" end="1763" title="bookbinder" label="bookbinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081731" start="1941" end="1959" title="interpretive dance" label="interpretive dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q733359" start="2096" end="2108" title="Space Ritual" label="Space Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q977954" start="2184" end="2211" title="Warrior on the Edge of Time" label="Warrior on the Edge of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="2330" end="2339" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372752" start="2625" end="2633" title="Roy Dyke" label="Roy Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q509854" start="2713" end="2725" title="Classic Rock (magazine)" label="Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="2819" end="2826" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q726334" start="2866" end="2890" title="Ashton, Gardner and Dyke" label="Ashton, Gardner and Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="3034" end="3041" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q390094" start="3769" end="3786" title="Free International University" label="Freie Kunstschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778182" start="3852" end="3886" title="Crawford College of Art and Design" label="Crawford College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q254168" start="3904" end="3920" title="Erasmus Programme" label="Erasmus exchange"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969434" wikidata="Q5078913" url="?curid=969434" title="Charles Henry Butler">
<text>Charles Henry Butler (June 18, 1859 – February 9, 1940) was an American lawyer and the tenth reporter of decisions of the United States Supreme Court, serving from 1902 to 1916.

Born in New York City, his parents were William Allen, Mary R. (Marshall) Butler, he was the grandson of United States Attorney General Benjamin F. Butler. He attended Princeton University, but did not graduate. Nevertheless, he was admitted to the New York bar in 1882 and practiced there until his appointment as reporter of decisions, in 1902. His book, &quot;Treaty Making Power of the United States&quot;, was published in 1902. In 1898 he was a member of the Fairbanks-Herschell Commission that unsuccessfully attempted to resolve the Alaska Boundary Dispute, and in 1907 was a delegate to The Hague peace conference. Butler resigned as reporter because he found the work boring and he hated the anonymity. He resumed the practice of law in 1916 in Washington, D.C. Before his death, he wrote an anecdotal account of his grandfather&#x27;s, his father&#x27;s, and his own dealings with the Supreme Court, &quot;A Century at the Bar of the Supreme Court of the United States&quot;, which, in 1942, was published by G. P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. He died in Washington.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5078913" start="0" end="20" title="Charles Henry Butler" label="Charles Henry Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="93" end="114" title="Supreme Court of the United States Reporter of Decisions" label="reporter of decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="122" end="149" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="187" end="200" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="284" end="314" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q817486" start="315" end="333" title="Benjamin Franklin Butler (lawyer)" label="Benjamin F. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="347" end="367" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="644" end="674" title="Fairbanks-Herschell Commission" label="Fairbanks-Herschell Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q576036" start="720" end="743" title="Alaska Boundary Dispute" label="Alaska Boundary Dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="775" end="784" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="934" end="950" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3093062" start="1199" end="1223" title="G. P. Putnam&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="G. P. Putnam&amp;#x27;s Sons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969449" wikidata="Q4117115" url="?curid=969449" title="Flemingsberg">
<text>Flemingsberg is a southern suburb of Stockholm, Sweden that is located in Huddinge Municipality in the south-western part of the contiguous Stockholm urban area. 

It is located approximately 15 minutes by Stockholm commuter rail from central Stockholm, or 20–30 minutes by car. Flemingsberg has 12,000 inhabitants, around 12,300 people work there, and there are about 13,000 students studying at Södertörn University. 

There is a railway station (&quot;Flemingsberg&quot;, formerly &quot;Stockholm Syd Flemingsberg&quot;), a major hospital, a university college and there are also colourful high-rise residential buildings from the 1970s.

Flemingsberg has also evolved as a law enforcement center for the southern part of metropolitan Stockholm, with police station, court house, prosecutor&#x27;s office and a jail, all in buildings built in the 1990s onwards.
==History==
Flemingsberg gets its name from the Flemingsberg manor. The village where the manor house was built in the 17th century was originally called Andersta but the name was changed when it came into the ownership of Henrik Fleming. The current manor house was built in 1790.

The current buildings in Flemingsberg (also called &quot;Flempan&quot; for short) were built during the Million Programme and for a long time there was trouble renting out all the apartments and the area become known as a very bad suburb. The two halves were renamed Visättra and Grantorp as the name Flemingsberg gave bad associations. Today the name Flemingsberg is again used for the area and the railway station.

One notable building is the Flemingsberg Church.

==Facilities==

*The former Huddinge University Hospital is now a part of Karolinska University Hospital at Huddinge in Flemingsberg and is associated with the medical university of Karolinska Institute (&quot;Karolinska institutet&quot;).
*Södertörn University (&quot;Södertörns högskola&quot;), inaugurated in 1996.
*One campus of the Royal Institute of Technology (&quot;Kungliga Tekniska Högskolan&quot;), is located in southern Stockholm.
*Novum Research Park — Genomics and proteomics research and biological sciences park.
==Railway station==

Flemingsberg has a railway station on the Stockholm commuter rail line between Södertälje and Märsta, via central Stockholm. Trains usually departs within 15 minute intervals both ways. Certain long distance trains with destinations such as Malmö, Gothenburg and Eskilstuna also stop at Flemingsberg. Flemingsberg is one of Sweden&#x27;s bigger railway stations in terms of the number of passengers.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4117115" start="0" end="12" title="Flemingsberg" label="Flemingsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="27" end="33" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="37" end="46" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="48" end="54" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q492575" start="74" end="95" title="Huddinge Municipality" label="Huddinge Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q94385" start="140" end="160" title="Stockholm urban area" label="Stockholm urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q211653" start="206" end="229" title="Stockholm commuter rail" label="Stockholm commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110979" start="397" end="417" title="Södertörn University College" label="Södertörn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="926" end="931" title="manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="955" end="966" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935602" start="1252" end="1269" title="Million Programme" label="Million Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q10716212" start="1415" end="1423" title="Visättra" label="Visättra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1428" end="1436" title="Grantorp" label="Grantorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q10496642" start="1594" end="1613" title="Flemingsberg Church" label="Flemingsberg Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734280" start="1690" end="1720" title="Karolinska University Hospital" label="Karolinska University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q219564" start="1798" end="1818" title="Karolinska Institute" label="Karolinska Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110979" start="1857" end="1877" title="Södertörn University" label="Södertörn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="1953" end="1982" title="Royal Institute of Technology" label="Royal Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2061" end="2080" title="Novum Research Park" label="Novum Research Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11969224" start="2186" end="2201" title="Flemingsberg railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q211653" start="2209" end="2232" title="Stockholm commuter rail" label="Stockholm commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q26518" start="2246" end="2256" title="Södertälje" label="Södertälje"/>
<link wikidata="Q54748" start="2261" end="2267" title="Märsta" label="Märsta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="2281" end="2290" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211" start="2408" end="2413" title="Malmö" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="2415" end="2425" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26498" start="2430" end="2440" title="Eskilstuna" label="Eskilstuna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969450" wikidata="Q2446589" url="?curid=969450" title="Ski touring">
<text>Ski touring is skiing in the backcountry on unmarked or unpatrolled areas. Touring is typically done off-piste and outside of ski resorts, and may extend over a period of more than one day. It is similar to backcountry skiing but excludes the use of a ski lift or transport.

Ski touring combines elements of Nordic and alpine skiing and embraces such sub-disciplines as Telemark and &quot;randonnée&quot;. A defining characteristic is that the skier&#x27;s heels are &quot;free&quot; – i.e. not bound to the skis – in order to allow a natural gliding motion while traversing and ascending terrain which may range from perfectly flat to extremely steep.

Ski touring has been adopted by skiers seeking new snow, by alpinists, and by those wishing to avoid the high costs of traditional alpine skiing at resorts. Touring requires independent navigation skills and may involve route-finding through potential avalanche terrain. It has parallels with hiking and wilderness backpacking. Ski mountaineering is a form of ski touring which variously combines the sports of Telemark, alpine, and backcountry skiing with that of mountaineering.

==History==

Among the pioneers of ski touring is John &quot;Snowshoe&quot; Thompson, perhaps the earliest modern ski mountaineer and a prolific traveler who used skis to deliver the mail at least twice a month over the steep eastern scarp of the Sierra Nevada to remote California mining camps and settlements. His deliveries began in 1855 and continued for at least 20 years. Thompson&#x27;s route of took three days in and 48 hours back out with a pack that eventually exceeded of mail.

Cecil Slingsby, one of the earliest European practitioners, crossed the Keiser Pass in Norway on skis in 1880. Other pioneers include Adolfo Kind, Arnold Lunn, Ottorino Mezzalama, Patrick Vallençant, and Kilian Jornet Burgada.

==Terminology==

Ski touring involves both uphill and downhill travel without needing to remove skis. Various terms have emerged to refer to how the terrain is accessed and how close it is to services.
*&quot;Frontcountry&quot; refers to terrain that is off-trail but within ski area boundaries where ski lifts and emergency services are close at hand.
*&quot;Slackcountry&quot; refers to terrain that is outside of marked ski area boundaries and accessed from a lift without having to use skins or bootpack. Usually this also includes terrain with access back to the lift as well. For purists, slackcountry touring may also include touring where people use a car as a shuttle.
*&quot;Sidecountry&quot; refers to terrain that is outside of ski area boundaries yet still accessible via a ski lift. Typically sidecountry requires the skier to hike, skin, or climb within ski area boundaries to reach or return from the sidecountry area, or both.
*&quot;Backcountry&quot; refers to terrain in remote areas that is outside of ski area boundaries and not accessible via a ski lift.

==Equipment==
===Styles of equipment===

*Alpine skiing equipment can be used for ski touring with the addition of a removable binding insert that allows for free heel swing on ascents.
*Nordic ski touring is skiing with bindings that leave the heels free all the time. Thus, Nordic skiers do not have to change back and forth between uphill and downhill modes, which can be advantageous in rolling terrain. At the lighter, simpler end of the scale, Nordic skis may be narrow and edgeless cross-country types for groomed trails or ideal snow conditions, used with boots that resemble soft shoes or low boots. Backcountry Nordic uses a heavier setup than a traditional Nordic setup, but not as big and heavy as a full Telemark setup.
*Telemark skiing is at the heavier end of the Nordic skiing equipment spectrum, designed for steep backcountry terrain or ski-area use. 
*Alpine Touring (AT) or &quot;randonnée&quot; equipment is specifically designed for ski touring in steep terrain; a special alpine touring binding, otherwise very similar to a downhill binding, allows the heel to be raised for ease in ascending but locked down for full support when skiing downhill.

===Ascending aids===
Various devices can be used to make ascending easier. &quot;Fish scale&quot; pattern friction aids embossed in the center section of the bottoms of the skis or sticky ski wax in the center pocket are used in lower-angle or rolling terrain. Climbing skins are used when fish scales or ski wax fail to provide sufficient grip for skiing steeply uphill. Ski crampons may be attached when conditions are particularly icy or the grade too steep for skins.

==Ski touring regions==

Ski touring can take place anywhere that has suitable snow and terrain as well as reasonable means of access to the trailhead, i.e. plowed roads, snowcats, or aircraft.

===Iceland===
Activities center on the Troll Peninsula in northern Iceland.

===Norway===
Touring in Norway has a long tradition. Skiing was originally a practical means of winter transportation, and ski touring formed the basis of the polar expeditions of Norwegian explorers like Fridtjof Nansen and Roald Amundsen. There are thousands of kilometers of marked ski routes in Norway in forested areas and in mountain areas above treeline. The trails are maintained by organizations like Skiforeningen in the Oslomarka area and the Norwegian Trekking Association nationally, including Hardangervidda, Rondane, and Jotunheimen. The Norwegian Trekking Association (; DNT) maintains mountain trails and cabins in Norway and has more than 200,000 members.

===European Alps===
The Haute Route and Tyrol are popular areas for ski touring.

=== Kosovo, Albania and North Macedonia ===
Many companies started offering ski touring services in these three countries that share Sharr Mountains these tours are 5 to 10 days and are specific as they are implemented away from ski centers offering pristine views.

===Canada===
Ski areas are concentrated in the Rockies and the Coast Mountains. Popular areas include Jasper National Park, Rogers Pass, Wapta, Revelstoke, and Golden, in southeast British Columbia at the confluence of the Columbia and Kicking Horse Rivers. Surrounded by the Rocky Mountains to the east and the Purcell Mountains and Selkirk Mountains to the west, Kananaskis Country, the Skeena Mountains, Chic-Choc Mountains, and Gros Morne National Park also attract ski tourers.

===United States===
Touring takes place anywhere there is sufficient snow in the U.S., for example, in Jackson Hole, Loveland Pass, Berthoud Pass,
and the Sierra Nevada.

===New Zealand===
Ski areas of New Zealand include Arthur&#x27;s Pass National Park, Central Otago, Fiordland, Aoraki-Mount Cook National Park, Mount Ruapehu, Nelson, Ōhau, Wānaka, and the Arrowsmith Range.

==See also==
*Freeriding
*History of skiing
*Ski mountaineering
*Skiing and skiing topics

==References==
==External links==

*United States Ski Mountaineering Association
*Backcountry and avalanche safety info for backcountry adventurers
*International Mountaineering and Climbing Federation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2446589" start="0" end="11" title="Ski touring" label="Ski touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="15" end="21" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839591" start="29" end="40" title="backcountry" label="backcountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281105" start="105" end="110" title="piste" label="piste"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="126" end="137" title="ski resorts" label="ski resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754518" start="207" end="225" title="backcountry skiing" label="backcountry skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q891302" start="252" end="260" title="ski lift" label="ski lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q216613" start="309" end="315" title="Nordic skiing" label="Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="320" end="333" title="alpine skiing" label="alpine skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q50620" start="371" end="379" title="Telemark skiing" label="Telemark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="907" end="916" title="avalanche" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="948" end="954" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014173" start="959" end="981" title="Backpacking (wilderness)" label="wilderness backpacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075998" start="983" end="1001" title="Ski mountaineering" label="Ski mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="1120" end="1134" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548717" start="1187" end="1221" title="Snowshoe Thompson" label="John &amp;quot;Snowshoe&amp;quot; Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="1384" end="1397" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006660" start="1628" end="1642" title="William Cecil Slingsby" label="Cecil Slingsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q117264" start="1762" end="1773" title="Adolfo Kind" label="Adolfo Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q182784" start="1775" end="1786" title="Arnold Lunn" label="Arnold Lunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q354749" start="1788" end="1806" title="Ottorino Mezzalama" label="Ottorino Mezzalama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369915" start="1808" end="1826" title="Patrick Vallençant" label="Patrick Vallençant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381198" start="1832" end="1853" title="Kilian Jornet Burgada" label="Kilian Jornet Burgada"/>
<link wikidata="Q891302" start="2157" end="2165" title="ski lift" label="ski lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775641" start="2346" end="2351" title="ski skins" label="skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="2697" end="2701" title="hiking" label="hike"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="2976" end="2989" title="Alpine skiing" label="Alpine skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216613" start="3121" end="3131" title="Nordic skiing" label="Nordic ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="3423" end="3436" title="Cross-country skiing" label="cross-country"/>
<link wikidata="Q50620" start="3668" end="3683" title="Telemark skiing" label="Telemark skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892020" start="3929" end="3951" title="alpine touring binding" label="alpine touring binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894423" start="4294" end="4301" title="ski wax" label="ski wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775641" start="4376" end="4381" title="ski skins" label="skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124273" start="4482" end="4490" title="crampons" label="crampons"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="4841" end="4848" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="4875" end="4881" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q72292" start="5056" end="5071" title="Fridtjof Nansen" label="Fridtjof Nansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="5076" end="5090" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566712" start="5136" end="5145" title="ski route" label="ski route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779358" start="5261" end="5274" title="Skiforeningen" label="Skiforeningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181543" start="5282" end="5291" title="Oslomarka" label="Oslomarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186804" start="5305" end="5335" title="Norwegian Trekking Association" label="Norwegian Trekking Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585051" start="5358" end="5372" title="Hardangervidda" label="Hardangervidda"/>
<link wikidata="Q955861" start="5374" end="5381" title="Rondane" label="Rondane"/>
<link wikidata="Q588281" start="5387" end="5398" title="Jotunheimen" label="Jotunheimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q663867" start="5550" end="5561" title="Haute Route" label="Haute Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q153809" start="5566" end="5571" title="Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q391195" start="5741" end="5756" title="Sharr Mountains" label="Sharr Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353201" start="5922" end="5929" title="Canadian Rockies" label="Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q503429" start="5977" end="5997" title="Jasper National Park" label="Jasper National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q383051" start="5999" end="6010" title="Rogers Pass (British Columbia)" label="Rogers Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968305" start="6012" end="6017" title="Wapta Icefield" label="Wapta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893229" start="6019" end="6029" title="Revelstoke, British Columbia" label="Revelstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020179" start="6035" end="6041" title="Golden, British Columbia" label="Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="6056" end="6072" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="6098" end="6106" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337358" start="6111" end="6130" title="Kicking Horse River" label="Kicking Horse River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="6151" end="6166" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961786" start="6187" end="6204" title="Purcell Mountains" label="Purcell Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420547" start="6209" end="6226" title="Selkirk Mountains" label="Selkirk Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373468" start="6240" end="6258" title="Kananaskis Country" label="Kananaskis Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322327" start="6264" end="6280" title="Skeena Mountains" label="Skeena Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718094" start="6282" end="6301" title="Chic-Choc Mountains" label="Chic-Choc Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q257598" start="6307" end="6331" title="Gros Morne National Park" label="Gros Morne National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677361" start="6462" end="6474" title="Jackson Hole" label="Jackson Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872459" start="6476" end="6489" title="Loveland Pass" label="Loveland Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q828162" start="6491" end="6504" title="Berthoud Pass" label="Berthoud Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="6514" end="6527" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q712300" start="6581" end="6613" title="Arthur&amp;#x27;s Pass National Park" label="Arthur&amp;#x27;s Pass National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="6623" end="6628" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266713" start="6630" end="6639" title="Fiordland" label="Fiordland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950336" start="6641" end="6672" title="Aoraki-Mount Cook National Park" label="Aoraki-Mount Cook National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q207284" start="6674" end="6687" title="Mount Ruapehu" label="Mount Ruapehu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080625" start="6697" end="6701" title="Ōhau (skifield)" label="Ōhau"/>
<link wikidata="Q930344" start="6703" end="6709" title="Wānaka" label="Wānaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796213" start="6719" end="6735" title="Arrowsmith Range" label="Arrowsmith Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067410" start="6752" end="6762" title="Freeriding (winter sport)" label="Freeriding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707324" start="6764" end="6781" title="History of skiing" label="History of skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075998" start="6783" end="6801" title="Ski mountaineering" label="Ski mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="6803" end="6827" title="Skiing" label="Skiing and skiing topics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969451" wikidata="Q6147553" url="?curid=969451" title="Jamie Theakston">
<text>James Paul Theakston (born 21 December 1970) is an English television presenter, producer, narrator and actor. He has hosted several television programmes for the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5. He co-presented the Saturday morning BBC One children&#x27;s show &quot;Live &amp; Kicking&quot;, alongside Zoe Ball between 1996 and 1999, and co-hosted the music programme &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; between 1998 and 2003. He currently co-hosts the national breakfast show with Amanda Holden on Heart Radio.

Theakston narrated the BBC documentary series &quot;Traffic Cops&quot; from 2003 to 2015, and on Channel 5 from 2016 onwards. He has won a BAFTA award for &quot;Live &amp; Kicking&quot; and numerous awards for his radio work, including a Sony Gold, 3 Silver Awards and 4 Bronze awards, 2 Arqiva awards, 3 TRIC awards and 2 New York Radio Festival Awards.

==Education==
He joined the National Youth Theatre at the age of 13, where he appeared in plays including &quot;Murder in the Cathedral&quot; and &quot;Marat/Sade&quot; alongside contemporaries such as Daniel Craig, but he was put off from pursuing a full-time acting career by the financial hardships that he encountered. After leaving Lancing College with nine O-Levels and one GCSE in Maths, retaking it at BHASVIC, he attended North London Polytechnic (now London Metropolitan University), from which he graduated with a first class degree in business studies. Whilst at university, he read traffic bulletins on BBC GLR because he wanted to get into sports reporting.

==Life and career==
===Radio===
Before embarking on a broadcasting career, he worked for auctioneers Christie&#x27;s, and planned to study art history at the Courtauld Institute. However, after undertaking football and cricket reports for GLR and Radio 5 Live, he was spotted by the BBC&#x27;s head of sport and hired to present GLR&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Sport Show&quot; at the age of 23. He then presented numerous shows for Radio 5 Live including &quot;Sportscall,&quot; &quot;The Jamie Theakston Cricket Show&quot; and &quot;Sport on Wednesday&quot;. Theakston joined Radio 1 in April 1999 to present the &quot;Sunday Lunch&quot; show. He fronted the &#x27;One Big Sunday&#x27; events during 2000. He moved to a Saturday morning slot in 2001.He also acted as holiday cover on the station.

He left Radio 1 in 2002 to pursue an acting career, his last show being broadcast on 28 September. He joined London radio station Heart 106.2 in May 2005, replacing Jonathan Coleman on &quot;Heart Breakfast&quot; with Harriet Scott, which won Gold for Best Music Personality Show at the New York Festivals and the Silver Entertainment Award at the Sony Radio Academy Awards, both in 2007. Theakston (along with Scott) won the Radio Presenter of the Year award at the Arqiva Commercial Radio Awards in June 2009. Scott left Heart Breakfast in 2013; she was replaced by Spice Girl Emma Bunton, who already had a show on the Heart network. Bunton left in 2018.

On 3 June 2019, Heart Breakfast went national across the UK, following a decision by the UK radio regulator OFCOM to reduce local programming requirements. Theakston currently hosts the show alongside Amanda Holden.

Between Bunton’s departure and Holden’s arrival, Heart DJ Lucy Horobin was brought in as a temporary co host for Theakston.

===Television===
On television, after presenting &quot;The O Zone&quot; with Jayne Middlemiss, he has most notably hosted &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; (1998–2003), &quot;Live &amp; Kicking&quot; (1996–1999) and &quot;The Priory&quot;. The latter two shows he co-presented alongside Zoë Ball. Theakston featured beside Zoë Ball once again in Channel 5&#x27;s &quot;Britain&#x27;s Best Brain&quot; series, which aired in October 2009.

He has also hosted a number of other shows, including the Channel 4 reality TV show &quot;The Games&quot; alongside Kirsty Gallacher; game show, &quot;Beg Borrow or Steal&quot; (2004); prime-time Saturday night show &quot;The People&#x27;s Quiz; Channel 4&#x27;s The Search;&quot; and ITV Saturday night show &quot;With A Little Help From My Friends&quot;. From July–August 2013, Theakston and Emma Bunton presented ITV&#x27;s &quot;This Morning Summer&quot; on Friday mornings.

Theakston&#x27;s other presenting work includes fronting the Glastonbury Festival coverage for the BBC, the Oscars, the Grammys, &quot;A Question of Pop&quot;, UK Music Hall of Fame and Guinness World Records. He narrated all episodes of &quot;Traffic Cops&quot; and its spin-off show &quot;Motorway Cops&quot;, and since 2015 has narrated episodes of &quot;Caught on Camera&quot;.

He also played himself in the mock-interview series &quot;Rock Profile&quot; in which he interviewed &quot;celebrities&quot; impersonated by Matt Lucas and David Walliams, and in the episode &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; of the TV series &quot;FM&quot; in March 2009.

===Acting===
As an actor, Theakston has appeared in shows such as &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Marple&quot; and &quot;Little Britain&quot;. Theakston has acted with Amanda Holden in &quot;Mad About Alice&quot; (2004) and worked with Adam Faith on the series &quot;Murder in Mind&quot; in 2003, shortly before Faith&#x27;s death. He has also starred in the West End in the plays &quot;Art&quot; and &quot;Home and Beauty&quot; at the Lyric Theatre, Shaftesbury Avenue. In 2004, he appeared in Agatha Christie&#x27;s &quot;Miss Marple: Body in the Library&quot;.

==Personal life==
Theakston lived for about ten years in Wings Place, a Tudor mansion in Ditchling, East Sussex. Theakston married Sophie Siegle in Ditchling on 15 September 2007, and they live in west London. They have two children. He was previously romantically linked to socialite Lady Victoria Hervey, actress Joely Richardson, and models Erin O&#x27;Connor and Sophie Dahl.

He is a keen fencer and competed for Sussex in 1985. As captain of Ditchling Cricket Club, Theakston was a member of the first cricket team from England to play the Afghan cricket team in Kabul.

He is a member of Mensa, a Patron of Humanists UK and a supporter of Brighton &amp; Hove Albion.

In September 2024, Theakston announced that he had been diagnosed with stage I laryngeal cancer, but revealed that the prognosis was &quot;very positive&quot;. He finished treatment in January 2025, and has since made a full recovery.

===Charity===
Theakston took a break in 2003 to travel to Uganda to meet with former child soldiers. He is a patron for Cancervive, a charity established to address the needs of anyone whose family or friends are cancer-sufferers.

He played in his fifth successive Soccer Aid match at Old Trafford in June 2014. Having, in 2010, saved four penalties for England against the Rest of the World in a penalty shoot-out, before missing a penalty himself in a defeat, he was later named man of the match for his performance in goal.

On 4 October 2019, Theakston took a break from Heart Breakfast to set off on his Bike Britain Challenge, a cycling event for Global&#x27;s charity Make Some Noise. The event lasted eight days, with Theakston cycling 650 miles from Edinburgh and arriving in London on the 11th. Along the way, he stopped at Newcastle upon Tyne, Leeds, Manchester, Birmingham, Cardiff and Bristol, and met numerous life-threatened children and their families.

In June 2022, Theakston gave his wicket to the bustling medium pace of Ricky Boardman from Kew Cricket Club&#x27;s 3rd XI, an event Theakston defined as &#x27;pure theatre&#x27;.

===Brothel visit, cocaine usage, and failed injunction===

In 2002, Theakston&#x27;s visit to a Mayfair brothel was exposed by British newspaper &quot;The Sunday People&quot;. Theakston attempted to prevent publication of his paying £40 for sex and his cocaine snorting with a legal injunction. The judge, Mr Justice Ouseley, allowed publication of the story based on interviews and said, &quot;If a well-known man has sexual relations with a prostitute in a brothel, the desire on his part to keep their actions and &#x27;relationship&#x27; confidential and the desire on the part of the other to exploit their actions and relationship commercially are irreconcilable.&quot; He went on to say, &quot;I consider that the scales would be likely to come down in favour of the freedom of expression of the newspaper and of the prostitutes unless it was clear that there was a strong case of inhibiting it.&quot;

==Performance credits==
==Filmography==
===Television===
===Radio===
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6147553" start="0" end="20" title="Jamie Theakston" label="James Paul Theakston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="163" end="166" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="168" end="171" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="173" end="182" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="187" end="196" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="235" end="242" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256896" start="270" end="288" title="Live &amp;amp; Kicking" label="Live &amp;amp; Kicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374832" start="306" end="314" title="Zoe Ball" label="Zoe Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="378" end="393" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q237204" start="478" end="491" title="Amanda Holden" label="Amanda Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129015" start="495" end="500" title="Heart (radio network)" label="Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832449" start="561" end="573" title="Traffic Cops" label="Traffic Cops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="606" end="615" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087430" start="893" end="915" title="National Youth Theatre" label="National Youth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947367" start="977" end="1000" title="Murder in the Cathedral" label="Murder in the Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217144" start="1017" end="1027" title="Marat/Sade" label="Marat/Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547" start="1067" end="1079" title="Daniel Craig" label="Daniel Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774693" start="1202" end="1217" title="Lancing College" label="Lancing College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967679" start="1275" end="1282" title="BHASVIC" label="BHASVIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895971" start="1296" end="1320" title="North London Polytechnic" label="North London Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869028" start="1326" end="1356" title="London Metropolitan University" label="London Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001951" start="1412" end="1428" title="business studies" label="business studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834838" start="1481" end="1488" title="BBC Radio London" label="BBC GLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q177923" start="1627" end="1634" title="auction" label="auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="1639" end="1654" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="1677" end="1688" title="art history" label="art history"/>
<link wikidata="Q734266" start="1696" end="1715" title="Courtauld Institute" label="Courtauld Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="1757" end="1764" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q795588" start="1785" end="1797" title="Radio 5 Live" label="Radio 5 Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="2110" end="2117" title="BBC Radio 1" label="Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934045" start="2462" end="2473" title="Heart London" label="Heart 106.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272806" start="2497" end="2513" title="Jonathan Coleman (presenter)" label="Jonathan Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664317" start="2550" end="2563" title="Harriet Scott (broadcaster)" label="Harriet Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562517" start="2680" end="2705" title="Sony Radio Academy Awards" label="Sony Radio Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q219878" start="2911" end="2922" title="Emma Bunton" label="Emma Bunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="3099" end="3104" title="OFCOM" label="OFCOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q237204" start="3192" end="3205" title="Amanda Holden" label="Amanda Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209194" start="3266" end="3278" title="Lucy Horobin" label="Lucy Horobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754556" start="3388" end="3398" title="The O Zone" label="The O Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167905" start="3410" end="3426" title="Jayne Middlemiss" label="Jayne Middlemiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="3461" end="3476" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256896" start="3502" end="3520" title="Live &amp;amp; Kicking" label="Live &amp;amp; Kicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374832" start="3614" end="3622" title="Zoë Ball" label="Zoë Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="3673" end="3682" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="3824" end="3833" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735741" start="3856" end="3865" title="The Games (British TV series)" label="The Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416161" start="3882" end="3898" title="Kirsty Gallacher" label="Kirsty Gallacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="4051" end="4054" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q219878" start="4160" end="4171" title="Emma Bunton" label="Emma Bunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786162" start="4199" end="4218" title="This Morning Summer" label="This Morning Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="4307" end="4327" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4345" end="4348" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="4350" end="4360" title="the Oscars" label="the Oscars"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="4362" end="4373" title="the Grammys" label="the Grammys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832449" start="4490" end="4502" title="Traffic Cops" label="Traffic Cops"/>
<link wikidata="Q64734936" start="4537" end="4550" title="Motorway Cops" label="Motorway Cops"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038064" start="4604" end="4620" title="Caught on Camera" label="Caught on Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354637" start="4687" end="4699" title="Rock Profile" label="Rock Profile"/>
<link wikidata="Q317251" start="4770" end="4780" title="Matt Lucas (comedian)" label="Matt Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q359665" start="4785" end="4799" title="David Walliams" label="David Walliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063331" start="4883" end="4885" title="FM (British TV series)" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q391056" start="4980" end="5009" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Marple" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Marple"/>
<link wikidata="Q637033" start="5026" end="5040" title="Little Britain (TV series)" label="Little Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q237204" start="5073" end="5086" title="Amanda Holden" label="Amanda Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725901" start="5096" end="5111" title="Mad About Alice" label="Mad About Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387148" start="5141" end="5151" title="Adam Faith" label="Adam Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452888" start="5172" end="5186" title="Murder in Mind (TV series)" label="Murder in Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="5292" end="5295" title="Art" label="Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131399893" start="5312" end="5327" title="Home and Beauty" label="Home and Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269699" start="5341" end="5354" title="Lyric Theatre, London" label="Lyric Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631720" start="5356" end="5374" title="Shaftesbury Avenue" label="Shaftesbury Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="5400" end="5415" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17534720" start="5527" end="5538" title="Wings Place" label="Wings Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270518" start="5559" end="5568" title="Ditchling" label="Ditchling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289196" start="5755" end="5775" title="Lady Victoria Hervey" label="Lady Victoria Hervey"/>
<link wikidata="Q234131" start="5785" end="5801" title="Joely Richardson" label="Joely Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884047" start="5814" end="5832" title="Erin O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Erin O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q293114" start="5837" end="5848" title="Sophie Dahl" label="Sophie Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="5864" end="5870" title="Fencing" label="fencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q86477" start="6016" end="6035" title="Afghanistan national cricket team" label="Afghan cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="6039" end="6044" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q184194" start="6065" end="6070" title="Mensa International" label="Mensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q656542" start="6084" end="6096" title="Humanists UK" label="Humanists UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q19453" start="6116" end="6142" title="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C." label="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6216" end="6223" title="Cancer staging#Overall stage grouping" label="stage I"/>
<link wikidata="Q852423" start="6224" end="6240" title="laryngeal cancer" label="laryngeal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="6439" end="6445" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="6490" end="6496" title="Patron (charity)" label="patron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963216" start="6647" end="6657" title="Soccer Aid" label="Soccer Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="6667" end="6679" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="6779" end="6796" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalty shoot-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378679" start="6863" end="6879" title="man of the match" label="man of the match"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570585" start="7035" end="7041" title="Global Media &amp;amp; Entertainment" label="Global"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7057" end="7072" title="Global Media &amp;amp; Entertainment#Charity" label="Make Some Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="7141" end="7150" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7167" end="7173" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="7216" end="7235" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="7237" end="7242" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="7244" end="7254" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="7256" end="7266" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="7268" end="7275" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="7280" end="7287" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253247" start="7683" end="7700" title="The Sunday People" label="The Sunday People"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="7815" end="7825" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969452" wikidata="Q5393397" url="?curid=969452" title="Ernest Knaebel">
<text>Ernest Knaebel (June 14, 1872 – February 19, 1947) was an American lawyer and the eleventh reporter of decisions of the United States Supreme Court, serving from 1916 to 1944. He retired on January 31, 1944, because of ill health, dying three years later.

==Biography==
Ernest Knaebel was born in Manhasset, New York on June 14, 1872. He was a graduate of Yale University, receiving his A.B. in 1894, his LL.B. in 1896, and his LL.M. in 1897. He practiced law in New York City in 1898 but soon moved to Denver, Colorado. He practiced law there until 1902, when he was named United States Attorney, serving until 1907. In that year he went to Washington, D.C., where he was a special assistant to the United States Attorney General until 1911 and then Assistant Attorney General from 1911 to 1916. While at the United States Department of Justice, he specialized in cases involving the public lands and Indian matters. He became reporter in 1916 and during his tenure, the Government Printing Office took over publication of the &quot;United States Reports&quot;; previously private printers had issued them.

He died at his sister-in-law&#x27;s home in West Boxford, Massachusetts on February 19, 1947.

Some of Knaebel&#x27;s official correspondence and other personal papers are housed with the Knaebel Family Papers collection at the American Heritage Center of the University of Wyoming and available for research.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5393397" start="0" end="14" title="Ernest Knaebel" label="Ernest Knaebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="91" end="112" title="Supreme Court of the United States Reporter of Decisions" label="reporter of decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="120" end="147" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q286148" start="298" end="317" title="Manhasset, New York" label="Manhasset, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="357" end="372" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="388" end="392" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="406" end="411" title="LL.B." label="LL.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q754848" start="429" end="434" title="LL.M." label="LL.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="464" end="477" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="504" end="520" title="Denver, Colorado" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="575" end="597" title="United States Attorney" label="United States Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="643" end="659" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="701" end="731" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889542" start="752" end="778" title="United States Assistant Attorney General" label="Assistant Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="811" end="846" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928358" start="973" end="999" title="United States Government Publishing Office" label="Government Printing Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418332" start="1154" end="1181" title="West Boxford, Massachusetts" label="West Boxford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743983" start="1338" end="1362" title="American Heritage Center" label="American Heritage Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326975" start="1370" end="1391" title="University of Wyoming" label="University of Wyoming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969453" wikidata="Q5616384" url="?curid=969453" title="Guilty Men">
<text>Guilty Men is a British polemical book written under the pseudonym &quot;Cato&quot; that was published in July 1940, after the failure of British forces to prevent the defeat and occupation of Norway and France by Nazi Germany. It attacked fifteen public figures for their failed policies towards Germany and for their failure to re-equip the British armed forces. In denouncing appeasement, it defined the policy as the &quot;deliberate surrender of small nations in the face of Hitler&#x27;s blatant bullying&quot;. A classic denunciation of the former government&#x27;s policy, it shaped popular and scholarly thinking for the next two decades.

==Contents==
The book&#x27;s slogan, &quot;Let the guilty men retire&quot;, was an attack on members of the National Government before Winston Churchill became Prime Minister in May 1940. Most were Conservatives, although some were National Liberals and one was Ramsay MacDonald, the former leader of the Labour Party. Several were current members of Churchill&#x27;s government. The book shaped popular thinking about appeasement for twenty years; it effectively destroyed the reputation of former Prime Ministers Stanley Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain, and contributed to the defeat of the Conservative Party at the 1945 general election. According to historian David Dutton, &quot;its impact upon Chamberlain&#x27;s reputation, both among the general public and within the academic world, was profound indeed&quot;.

According to the book, the &quot;guilty men&quot; were:

*Neville Chamberlain
*Sir John Simon
*Sir Samuel Hoare
*Ramsay MacDonald
*Stanley Baldwin
*Lord Halifax
*Sir Kingsley Wood
*Ernest Brown
*David Margesson
*Sir Horace Wilson
*Sir Thomas Inskip
*Leslie Burgin
*Earl Stanhope
*W. S. Morrison
*Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith
Though mostly devoted to what the authors see as the blindness and inertia of the Conservative majority that in 1939 led a drastically under-prepared Britain into war, followed by the disastrous losses of Norway and of France in 1940, the authors look briefly at the British Army&#x27;s contribution to these failures. While praising the discipline and courage of the soldiers in the field, they point to grave errors of strategy. In their opinion, some lessons that should have been obvious from the 1914–1918 war over the same terrain in France were ignored: you need a secure perimeter to fall back on in need; you need a mobile reserve to call on; in defence, you must guard against infiltration by motorised infantry and you need copious anti-aircraft and anti-tank artillery; to attack, you need superiority in aircraft and tanks.

==Authorship==
&quot;Guilty Men&quot; was written by three journalists: Michael Foot (a future leader of the Labour Party), Frank Owen (a former Liberal MP), and Peter Howard (a Conservative). They believed that Britain had suffered a succession of bad leaders who, with junior ministers, advisers and officials, had conducted a disastrous foreign policy towards Germany and had failed to prepare the country for war. After Victor Gollancz, creator of the Left Book Club, had been persuaded to publish the book, the authors divided the 24 chapters among themselves and wrote it in four days, finishing on 5 June 1940. Gollancz asked for some of the rhetoric to be toned down, fearing the reaction it might provoke, but he rushed it into print in four weeks.

It was under a pseudonym because the writers were employed by Lord Beaverbrook, who barred his journalists from writing for publications other than his own. Beaverbrook, who was active in the Conservative Party, was also a vocal supporter of appeasement, though he was not mentioned in the book.

There was much speculation as to who Cato was. At one time Aneurin Bevan was named as its author. Randolph Churchill (Winston&#x27;s son, also a Beaverbrook journalist) was also wrongly attributed as its author. In the meantime, the real authors had some fun reviewing their own work. Michael Foot wrote an article, &quot;Who Is This Cato?&quot; Beaverbrook was as much in the dark as anyone but joked that he &quot;made do with the royalties from &quot;Guilty Men&quot;&quot;. The authors earned no money from the book as their literary agent Ralph Pinker, son of the much more successful James B. Pinker, absconded with the royalties.

==Publication==
&quot;Guilty Men&quot; was published in early July 1940, shortly after Winston Churchill became Prime Minister, the Dunkirk evacuation had shown Britain&#x27;s military unpreparedness, and the Fall of France left the country with few allies. Several major book wholesalers, W H Smith and Wyman&#x27;s, and the largest book distributor, Simpkin Marshall, refused to handle the book. It was sold on news-stands and street barrows and went through twelve editions in July 1940, selling 200,000 copies in a few weeks.

&quot;Guilty Men&quot; remains in circulation and was reprinted for its historical interest by Penguin Books to mark its sixtieth anniversary in 2000.

==Evaluation==

The book&#x27;s arguments and conclusions have been questioned by politicians and historians. In 1945, Quintin Hogg, MP, wrote &quot;The Left Was Never Right&quot;, which was critical of &quot;Guilty Men&quot; and argued that &quot;unpreparedness before the war was largely the consequence of the policies of the parties of the Left&quot;. In 1944, Geoffrey Mander published &quot;We Were Not All Wrong&quot;.

The fact that all bar one of the 15 &quot;guilty men&quot; named were either Conservatives or Liberals caused controversy – no mention was made, for example, of the Labour Party (UK) cabinet member and mid-1930s leader George Lansbury, a pacifist who advocated Unilateral disarmament in the face of fascist rearmament.

The idea of appeasement as error and cowardice was challenged by historian A. J. P. Taylor in his book &quot;The Origins of the Second World War&quot; (1960), in which he argued that, in the circumstances, it might be seen as a rational policy.

==See also==
* &quot;The Left Was Never Right&quot;, a Tory contrary view by Quintin Hogg 
* The bomber will always get through, a military/political belief from the 1930s that held that in future conflicts regardless of air defences sufficient numbers of bombers would survive to destroy cities and infrastructure

==Notes==

===Citations===
===Bibliography===

==Further reading==
* Aster, S. &quot;&#x27;Guilty men&#x27;: the case of Neville Chamberlain&quot; in R. Boyce and E. Robertson, eds., &quot;Paths to war: new essays on the origins of the Second World War&quot; (1989)
* Dutton, D. J. &quot;Guilty men (act. 1940)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography,&quot; Oxford University Press. online
* Faber, David. &quot;Munich, 1938: Appeasement and World War II&quot; (2009).
* Hucker, Daniel. &quot;The Unending Debate: Appeasement, Chamberlain and the Origins of the Second World War.&quot; &quot;Intelligence and National Security&quot; 23.4 (2008): 536-551.
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;Michael Foot: A Life&quot; (2007), ch 3</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="24" end="31" title="polemic" label="polemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="193" end="199" title="German occupation of Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="204" end="210" title="Battle of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="214" end="226" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="379" end="390" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784906" start="757" end="776" title="Third National Government 1935–1937" label="National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="784" end="801" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="809" end="823" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="847" end="860" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354368" start="881" end="898" title="National Liberal Party (UK, 1931)" label="National Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="911" end="927" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="954" end="966" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="1164" end="1179" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="1184" end="1203" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1242" end="1260" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="1268" end="1289" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="1528" end="1547" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q333091" start="1553" end="1563" title="John Simon, 1st Viscount Simon" label="John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333429" start="1569" end="1581" title="Samuel Hoare, 1st Viscount Templewood" label="Samuel Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="1583" end="1599" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="1601" end="1616" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="1618" end="1630" title="Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax" label="Lord Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518614" start="1636" end="1649" title="Kingsley Wood" label="Kingsley Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392836" start="1651" end="1663" title="Ernest Brown (British politician)" label="Ernest Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790100" start="1665" end="1680" title="David Margesson" label="David Margesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902260" start="1686" end="1699" title="Horace Wilson (civil servant)" label="Horace Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q333019" start="1705" end="1718" title="Thomas Inskip" label="Thomas Inskip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530677" start="1720" end="1733" title="Leslie Burgin" label="Leslie Burgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143495" start="1735" end="1748" title="James Stanhope, 7th Earl Stanhope" label="Earl Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q335323" start="1750" end="1764" title="William Morrison, 1st Viscount Dunrossil" label="W. S. Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q427394" start="1770" end="1791" title="Reginald Dorman-Smith" label="Reginald Dorman-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="2293" end="2302" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="1914–1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="2702" end="2714" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488833" start="2754" end="2764" title="Frank Owen (politician)" label="Frank Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="2775" end="2782" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376657" start="2792" end="2804" title="Peter Howard (journalist)" label="Peter Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q574400" start="3054" end="3069" title="Victor Gollancz" label="Victor Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050628" start="3086" end="3100" title="Left Book Club" label="Left Book Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="3451" end="3467" title="William Maxwell Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook" label="Lord Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="3745" end="3758" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183105" start="3784" end="3802" title="Randolph Churchill" label="Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="3804" end="3818" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q18877800" start="4276" end="4291" title="James B. Pinker" label="James B. Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="4456" end="4474" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Dunkirk evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="4533" end="4547" title="Battle of France" label="Fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548712" start="4614" end="4623" title="W H Smith" label="W H Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175555" start="4676" end="4692" title="Simpkin &amp;amp; Marshall" label="Simpkin Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="4950" end="4963" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q175366" start="5126" end="5142" title="Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone" label="Quintin Hogg, MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746633" start="5156" end="5180" title="The Left Was Never Right" label="The Left Was Never Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534765" start="5372" end="5387" title="Geoffrey Mander" label="Geoffrey Mander"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="5599" end="5616" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q247589" start="5653" end="5668" title="George Lansbury" label="George Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885198" start="5695" end="5717" title="Unilateral disarmament" label="Unilateral disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q706931" start="5829" end="5844" title="A. J. P. Taylor" label="A. J. P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013141" start="5863" end="5898" title="The Origins of the Second World War" label="The Origins of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746633" start="6021" end="6045" title="The Left Was Never Right" label="The Left Was Never Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q175366" start="6077" end="6089" title="Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone" label="Quintin Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228376" start="6093" end="6127" title="The bomber will always get through" label="The bomber will always get through"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="6221" end="6233" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="air defences"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="6256" end="6262" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q24955258" start="6385" end="6394" title="Sidney Aster" label="Aster, S."/>
<link wikidata="Q5233519" start="6721" end="6733" title="David Faber (politician)" label="Faber, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q93657" start="6986" end="7004" title="Morgan, Kenneth O." label="Morgan, Kenneth O."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969462" wikidata="Q6651324" url="?curid=969462" title="Little Pigeon River">
<text>Little Pigeon River is the name of several rivers in the United States:

*Little Pigeon River (Cheboygan County)
*Little Pigeon River (Indiana)
*Little Pigeon River (Michigan)
*Little Pigeon River (Mullett Lake)
*Little Pigeon River (Tennessee)

== See also ==
* Pigeon River (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6651324" start="0" end="19" title="Little Pigeon River" label="Little Pigeon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651329" start="74" end="112" title="Little Pigeon River (Cheboygan County)" label="Little Pigeon River (Cheboygan County)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688567" start="114" end="143" title="Little Pigeon River (Indiana)" label="Little Pigeon River (Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872322" start="145" end="175" title="Little Pigeon River (Michigan)" label="Little Pigeon River (Michigan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651331" start="177" end="211" title="Little Pigeon River (Mullett Lake)" label="Little Pigeon River (Mullett Lake)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651334" start="213" end="244" title="Little Pigeon River (Tennessee)" label="Little Pigeon River (Tennessee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094627" start="263" end="292" title="Pigeon River (disambiguation)" label="Pigeon River (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969470" wikidata="Q1376788" url="?curid=969470" title="European Mathematical Society">
<text>The European Mathematical Society (EMS) is a European organization dedicated to the development of mathematics in Europe. Its members are different mathematical societies in Europe, academic institutions and individual mathematicians. The current president is Jan Philip Solovej, professor at the Department of Mathematics at the University of Copenhagen.

==Goals==
The Society seeks to serve all kinds of mathematicians in universities, research institutes and other forms of higher education. Its aims are to
#Promote mathematical research, both pure and applied,
#Assist and advise on problems of mathematical education,
#Concern itself with the broader relations of mathematics to society,
#Foster interaction between mathematicians of different countries,
#Establish a sense of identity amongst European mathematicians,
#Represent the mathematical community in supra-national institutions.

The EMS is itself an Affiliate Member of the International Mathematical Union and an Associate Member of the International Council for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

==History==

The precursor to the EMS, the European Mathematical Council was founded in 1978 at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Helsinki. This informal federation of mathematical societies was chaired by Sir Michael Atiyah. The European Mathematical Society was founded on 28 October 1990 in Mądralin near Warsaw, Poland, with Friedrich Hirzebruch as founding President. Initially, the EMS had 27 member societies. The first European Congress of Mathematics (ECM) was held at the Sorbonne and Panthéon-Sorbonne universities in Paris in 1992, and is now held every 4 years at different locations around Europe, organised by the EMS. ECM 2020 was postponed for a year due to the covid pandemic took place in 2021 in Portorož in Slovenia. The last ECM (2024) was in Seville.

===Presidents of the EMS===

Source:

#Friedrich Hirzebruch, 1990–1994
#Jean-Pierre Bourguignon, 1995–1998
#Rolf Jeltsch, 1999–2002
#John Kingman, 2003–2006
#Ari Laptev, 2007–2010
#Marta Sanz-Solé, 2011–2014
#Pavel Exner, 2015–2018
#Volker Mehrmann, 2019–2022
#Jan Philip Solovej, 2023–present

==Structure and Governance==
The governing body of the EMS is its Council, which comprises delegates representing all of the societies which are themselves members of the EMS, along with delegates representing the institutional and individual EMS members. The Council meets every 2 years, and appoints the President and Executive Committee who are responsible for the running of the society.

Besides the Executive Committee, the EMS has standing committees on: Applications and Interdisciplinary Relations, Developing Countries, Mathematical Education, ERCOM (Directors of European Research Centres in the Mathematical Sciences), Ethics, European Solidarity, Meetings, Publications and Electronic Dissemination, Raising Public Awareness of Mathematics, Women in Mathematics.

The EMS&#x27;s rules are set down in its Statutes and Bylaws. The EMS is headquartered at the University of Helsinki.

==Prizes==

The European Congress of Mathematics (ECM) is held every four years under the Society&#x27;s auspices, at which ten EMS Prizes are awarded to &quot;recognize excellent contributions in Mathematics by young researchers not older than 35 years&quot;.

Since 2000, the Felix Klein Prize (endowed by the Institute for Industrial Mathematics in Kaiserslautern) has been awarded to &quot;a young scientist or a small group of young scientists (normally under the age of 38) for using sophisticated methods to give an outstanding solution, which meets with the complete satisfaction of industry, to a concrete and difficult industrial problem.&quot;

Since 2012, the Otto Neugebauer Prize (endowed by Springer Verlag) has been awarded to a researcher or group of researchers &#x27;&quot;for highly original and influential work in the field of history of mathematics that enhances our understanding of either the development of mathematics or a particular mathematical subject in any period and in any geographical region&quot;.

The following are the awardees so far, (a F symbol denotes mathematicians who later earned a Fields Medal).

===1992 prizes===

EMS Prizes: Richard Borcherds (UK)F – Jens Franke (Germany) – Alexander Goncharov (Russia) – Maxim Kontsevich (Russia)F – François Labourie (France) – Tomasz Łuczak (Poland) – Stefan Müller (Germany) – Vladimír Šverák (Czechoslovakia) – Gábor Tardos (Hungary) – Claire Voisin (France)

===1996 prizes===

EMS Prizes: Alexis Bonnet (France) – Timothy Gowers (UK)F – Annette Huber-Klawitter (Germany) – Aise Johan de Jong (Netherlands) – Dmitry Kramkov (Russia) – Jiří Matoušek (Czech Republic) – Loïc Merel (France) – Grigori Perelman (Russia)F, declined – Ricardo Pérez-Marco (Spain/France) – Leonid Polterovich (Russia/Israel)

===2000 prizes===

EMS Prizes: Semyon Alesker (Israel) – Raphaël Cerf (France) – Dennis Gaitsgory (Moldova) – Emmanuel Grenier (France) – Dominic Joyce (UK) – Vincent Lafforgue (France) – Michael McQuillan (UK) – Stefan Nemirovski (Russia) – Paul Seidel (UK/Italy) – Wendelin Werner (France)F

Felix Klein Prize: David C. Dobson (USA)

===2004 prizes===

EMS Prizes: Franck Barthe (France) – Stefano Bianchini (Italy) – Paul Biran (Israel) – Elon Lindenstrauss (Israel)F – Andrei Okounkov (Russia)F – Sylvia Serfaty (France) – Stanislav Smirnov (Russia)F – Xavier Tolsa (Spain) – Warwick Tucker (Australia/Sweden) – (Germany)

Felix Klein Prize: &quot;Not Awarded&quot;

===2008 prizes===
EMS Prizes: Artur Avila (Brazil)F – Alexei Borodin (Russia) – Ben J. Green (UK) – Olga Holtz (Russia) – Boáz Klartag (Israel) – Alexander Kuznetsov (Russia) – Assaf Naor (USA/Israel) – Laure Saint-Raymond (France) – Agata Smoktunowicz (Poland) – Cédric Villani (France)F

Felix Klein Prize: Josselin Garnier (France)

===2012 prizes===
EMS Prizes: Simon Brendle (Germany) - Emmanuel Breuillard (France) - 
Alessio Figalli (Italy)F - Adrian Ioana (Romania) - Mathieu Lewin (France) - Ciprian Manolescu (Romania) - Grégory Miermont (France) - Sophie Morel (France) - Tom Sanders (UK) - Corinna Ulcigrai (Italy) -

Felix Klein Prize: Emmanuel Trélat (France)

Otto Neugebauer Prize: Jan P. Hogendijk (Netherlands)

===2016 prizes===
EMS Prizes: Sara Zahedi (Iran-Sweden) - Mark Braverman (Israel) - Vincent Calvez (France) - Guido de Philippis (Italy) - Peter Scholze (Germany)F - Péter Varjú (Hungary) - Thomas Willwacher (Germany) - James Maynard (UK)F - Hugo Duminil-Copin (France)F - Geordie Williamson (Australia)

Felix Klein Prize: Patrice Hauret (France)

Otto Neugebauer Prize: Jeremy Gray (UK)

===2020 prizes===
EMS Prizes: Karim Adiprasito (Germany) - Ana Caraiani (Romania) - Alexander Efimov (Russia) - Simion Filip (Moldova) - Aleksandr Logunov (Russia) - Kaisa Matomäki (Finland) - Phan Thành Nam (Vietnam) - Joaquim Serra (Spain) - Jack Thorne (UK) - Maryna Viazovska (Ukraine)F

Felix Klein Prize: Arnulf Jentzen (Germany)

Otto Neugebauer Prize: Karine Chemla (France)

===2024 prizes===
Source:

EMS Prizes: Maria Colombo (Italy/Switzerland) - Cristiana De Filippis (Italy) - Jessica Fintzen (Germany) - Nina Holden (Norway/USA) - Tom Hutchcroft (UK/USA) - Jacek Jendrej (Poland/France) - Adam Kanigowski (Poland/USA) - Frederick Manners (UK/USA) - Richard Montgomery (UK) - Danylo Radchenko (Ukraine/France)

Felix Klein Prize: Fabien Casenave (France)

Otto Neugebauer Prize: Reinhard Siegmund-Schultze (Germany/Norway)

Paul Lévy Prize in Probability Theory: Jeremy Quastel (Canada)

===2025 prizes===

==National societies holding full membership in EMS==

*Armenian Mathematical Union
*Austrian Mathematical Society
*Belgian Mathematical Society
*Belgian Statistical Society
*Bosnian Mathematical Society
*Union of Bulgarian Mathematicians
*Croatian Mathematical Society
*Cyprus Mathematical Society
*Czech Mathematical Society
*Danish Mathematical Society
*Edinburgh Mathematical Society
*Estonian Mathematical Society
*Finnish Mathematical Society
*Société Mathématique de France
*Society of Applied &amp; Industrial Mathematicians (GAMM)
*Georgian Mathematical Union
*German Mathematical Society
*Hellenic Mathematical Society
*Icelandic Mathematical Society
*Institute of Mathematics and its Applications
*Irish Mathematical Society
*Israel Mathematical Union
*Italian Association of Mathematics Applied to Economic and Social Sciences (AMASES)
*Società Italiana di Matematica Applicata e Industriale (SIMAI)
*Italian Mathematical Union
*János Bolyai Mathematical Society
*Kosovar Mathematical Society
*Latvian Mathematical Society
*Lithuanian Mathematical Society
*London Mathematical Society
*Luxembourg Mathematical Society
*Malta Mathematical Society
*Moscow Mathematical Society
*Norwegian Mathematical Society
*Norwegian Statistical Association
*Polish Mathematical Society
*Portuguese Mathematical Society
*Real Sociedad Matemática Española (Royal Spanish Math. Society)
*Romanian Mathematical Society
*Royal Dutch Mathematical Society
*Slovak Mathematical Society
*Slovenian Discrete and Applied Mathematics Society
*Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles (SMAI)
*Sociedad Española de Matemática Aplicada (Spanish Soc. of Appl. Math.)
*Societat Catalana de Matemàtiques (Catalan Society of Mathematics)
*Society of Mathematicians and Physicists of Montenegro
*Spanish Society of Statistics and Operations Research
*St. Petersburg Mathematical Society
*Svenska Matematikersamfundet (Swedish Mathematical Society)
*Swiss Mathematical Society
*The Society of Mathematicians, Physicists and Astronomers of Slovenia
*Turkish Mathematical Society
*Ukrainian Mathematical Society
==Publications==
The EMS is the sole shareholder of the publisher EMS Press that publishes over 25 academic journals, including:
* &quot;Algebraic Geometry&quot;
* &quot;Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré C&quot;
* &quot;Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré D&quot;
* &quot;Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici&quot;
* &quot;Documenta Mathematica&quot;
* &quot;Elemente der Mathematik&quot;
* &quot;EMS Surveys in Mathematical Sciences&quot;
* &quot;Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics&quot;
* &quot;Interfaces and Free Boundaries&quot;
* &quot;Journal of Combinatorial Algebra&quot;
* &quot;Journal of Fractal Geometry&quot;
* &quot;Journal of Noncommutative Geometry&quot;
* &quot;Journal of Spectral Theory&quot;
* &quot;Journal of the European Mathematical Society&quot;
* &quot;L’Enseignement Mathématique&quot;
* &quot;Mathematical Statistics and Learning&quot;
* &quot;Memoirs of the European Mathematical Society&quot;
* &quot;Oberwolfach Reports&quot;
* &quot;Portugaliae Mathematica&quot;
* &quot;Publications of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences&quot;
* &quot;Quantum Topology&quot;
* &quot;Rendiconti del Seminario Matematico della Università di Padova&quot;
* &quot;Rendiconti Lincei - Matematica e Applicazioni&quot;
* &quot;Revista Matemática Iberoamericana&quot;
* &quot;Zeitschrift für Analysis und ihre Anwendungen&quot;

EMS Press has also published over 200 books in mathematics since 2003, in both print and digital formats.

In addition, since 2021 it publishes the Magazine of the European Mathematical Society, often called &quot;EMS Magazine&quot; (ISSN 2747-7894, eISSN 2747-7908), formerly known as the Newsletter of the European Mathematical Society (ISSN 1027-488X), which was established in 1991. It features news and expositions of recent developments in mathematical research. It is quarterly and open access. The current editor-in-chief is 
Fernando da Costa (2020–) (succeeding Valentin Zagrebnov (2016–2020)).
The &quot;Encyclopedia of Mathematics&quot; is also sponsored by the EMS.

==See also==

*List of mathematical societies
&lt;br&gt;

==References==
==External links==
*The European Mathematical Society Homepage
*EMS Press
*Mathematics in Europe portal by the EMS committee for Raising Public Awareness of Mathematics
*History of the EMS
*8th European Congress of Mathematics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1376788" start="4" end="33" title="European Mathematical Society" label="European Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376788" start="35" end="38" title="European Mathematical Society" label="EMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="99" end="110" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="114" end="120" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520792" start="260" end="278" title="Jan Philip Solovej" label="Jan Philip Solovej"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="330" end="354" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q828490" start="942" end="974" title="International Mathematical Union" label="International Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049878" start="1006" end="1066" title="International Council for Industrial and Applied Mathematics" label="International Council for Industrial and Applied Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="1169" end="1209" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="International Congress of Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="1213" end="1221" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q208356" start="1293" end="1307" title="Michael Atiyah" label="Michael Atiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="1391" end="1397" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1399" end="1405" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q61753" start="1412" end="1432" title="Friedrich Hirzebruch" label="Friedrich Hirzebruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377907" start="1510" end="1542" title="European Congress of Mathematics" label="European Congress of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q564988" start="1799" end="1807" title="Portorož" label="Portorož"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="1848" end="1855" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q61753" start="1897" end="1917" title="Friedrich Hirzebruch" label="Friedrich Hirzebruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398883" start="1930" end="1953" title="Jean-Pierre Bourguignon" label="Jean-Pierre Bourguignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q951381" start="1991" end="2003" title="John Kingman" label="John Kingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q653786" start="2016" end="2026" title="Ari Laptev" label="Ari Laptev"/>
<link wikidata="Q9029537" start="2039" end="2054" title="Marta Sanz-Solé" label="Marta Sanz-Solé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626145" start="2067" end="2078" title="Pavel Exner" label="Pavel Exner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531146" start="2091" end="2106" title="Volker Mehrmann" label="Volker Mehrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520792" start="2119" end="2137" title="Jan Philip Solovej" label="Jan Philip Solovej"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="3024" end="3046" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377907" start="3065" end="3097" title="European Congress of Mathematics" label="European Congress of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q176916" start="3755" end="3770" title="Springer Verlag" label="Springer Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="4177" end="4189" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q334010" start="4224" end="4241" title="Richard Borcherds" label="Richard Borcherds"/>
<link wikidata="Q95705" start="4250" end="4261" title="Jens Franke" label="Jens Franke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642205" start="4274" end="4293" title="Alexander Goncharov" label="Alexander Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q369588" start="4305" end="4321" title="Maxim Kontsevich" label="Maxim Kontsevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428886" start="4334" end="4351" title="François Labourie" label="François Labourie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440536" start="4363" end="4376" title="Tomasz Łuczak" label="Tomasz Łuczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337200" start="4388" end="4401" title="Stefan Müller (mathematician)" label="Stefan Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593578" start="4414" end="4429" title="Vladimír Šverák" label="Vladimír Šverák"/>
<link wikidata="Q92841" start="4449" end="4461" title="Gábor Tardos" label="Gábor Tardos"/>
<link wikidata="Q468049" start="4474" end="4487" title="Claire Voisin" label="Claire Voisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602619" start="4529" end="4542" title="Alexis Bonnet" label="Alexis Bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q220402" start="4554" end="4568" title="Timothy Gowers" label="Timothy Gowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297" start="4577" end="4600" title="Annette Huber-Klawitter" label="Annette Huber-Klawitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q371475" start="4613" end="4631" title="Aise Johan de Jong" label="Aise Johan de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232565" start="4648" end="4662" title="Dmitry Kramkov" label="Dmitry Kramkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q472657" start="4674" end="4687" title="Jiří Matoušek (mathematician)" label="Jiří Matoušek"/>
<link wikidata="Q450614" start="4707" end="4717" title="Loïc Merel" label="Loïc Merel"/>
<link wikidata="Q117346" start="4729" end="4745" title="Grigori Perelman" label="Grigori Perelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148714" start="4768" end="4787" title="Ricardo Pérez-Marco" label="Ricardo Pérez-Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819412" start="4805" end="4823" title="Leonid Polterovich" label="Leonid Polterovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269580" start="4872" end="4886" title="Semyon Alesker" label="Semyon Alesker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757430" start="4898" end="4910" title="Raphaël Cerf" label="Raphaël Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q950863" start="4922" end="4938" title="Dennis Gaitsgory" label="Dennis Gaitsgory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338267" start="4951" end="4967" title="Emmanuel Grenier" label="Emmanuel Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237590" start="4979" end="4992" title="Dominic Joyce" label="Dominic Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526664" start="5000" end="5017" title="Vincent Lafforgue" label="Vincent Lafforgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928581" start="5029" end="5046" title="Michael McQuillan (mathematician)" label="Michael McQuillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336653" start="5054" end="5071" title="Stefan Nemirovski" label="Stefan Nemirovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q475420" start="5083" end="5094" title="Paul Seidel" label="Paul Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q164369" start="5108" end="5123" title="Wendelin Werner" label="Wendelin Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174234" start="5154" end="5169" title="David Clark Dobson" label="David C. Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442414" start="5208" end="5221" title="Franck Barthe" label="Franck Barthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338360" start="5233" end="5250" title="Stefano Bianchini" label="Stefano Bianchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q690891" start="5261" end="5271" title="Paul Biran" label="Paul Biran"/>
<link wikidata="Q334069" start="5283" end="5301" title="Elon Lindenstrauss" label="Elon Lindenstrauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q315425" start="5314" end="5329" title="Andrei Okounkov" label="Andrei Okounkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q519885" start="5342" end="5356" title="Sylvia Serfaty" label="Sylvia Serfaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q333948" start="5368" end="5385" title="Stanislav Smirnov" label="Stanislav Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597844" start="5398" end="5410" title="Xavier Tolsa" label="Xavier Tolsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550074" start="5421" end="5435" title="Warwick Tucker" label="Warwick Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q715043" start="5542" end="5553" title="Artur Avila" label="Artur Avila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721259" start="5566" end="5580" title="Alexei Borodin" label="Alexei Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q792628" start="5592" end="5604" title="Ben J. Green" label="Ben J. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699677" start="5612" end="5622" title="Olga Holtz" label="Olga Holtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q887293" start="5634" end="5646" title="Boáz Klartag" label="Boáz Klartag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799644" start="5658" end="5677" title="Alexander Kuznetsov (mathematician)" label="Alexander Kuznetsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q738599" start="5689" end="5699" title="Assaf Naor" label="Assaf Naor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649352" start="5715" end="5734" title="Laure Saint-Raymond" label="Laure Saint-Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q390879" start="5746" end="5764" title="Agata Smoktunowicz" label="Agata Smoktunowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q334065" start="5776" end="5790" title="Cédric Villani" label="Cédric Villani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621728" start="5821" end="5837" title="Josselin Garnier" label="Josselin Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q98244" start="5878" end="5891" title="Simon Brendle" label="Simon Brendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338194" start="5904" end="5923" title="Emmanuel Breuillard" label="Emmanuel Breuillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641168" start="5936" end="5951" title="Alessio Figalli" label="Alessio Figalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q373194" start="5963" end="5975" title="Adrian Ioana" label="Adrian Ioana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908633" start="5988" end="6001" title="Mathieu Lewin" label="Mathieu Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q560828" start="6013" end="6030" title="Ciprian Manolescu" label="Ciprian Manolescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551559" start="6043" end="6059" title="Grégory Miermont" label="Grégory Miermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391052" start="6071" end="6083" title="Sophie Morel" label="Sophie Morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440058" start="6095" end="6106" title="Tom Sanders (mathematician)" label="Tom Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132859" start="6114" end="6130" title="Corinna Ulcigrai" label="Corinna Ulcigrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338424" start="6161" end="6176" title="Emmanuel Trélat" label="Emmanuel Trélat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681854" start="6210" end="6226" title="Jan P. Hogendijk" label="Jan P. Hogendijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929280" start="6272" end="6283" title="Sara Zahedi" label="Sara Zahedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929363" start="6300" end="6314" title="Mark Braverman (mathematician)" label="Mark Braverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929358" start="6326" end="6340" title="Vincent Calvez" label="Vincent Calvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929361" start="6352" end="6370" title="Guido de Philippis" label="Guido de Philippis"/>
<link wikidata="Q98034" start="6381" end="6394" title="Peter Scholze" label="Peter Scholze"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929454" start="6408" end="6419" title="Péter Varjú" label="Péter Varjú"/>
<link wikidata="Q22265413" start="6432" end="6449" title="Thomas Willwacher" label="Thomas Willwacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q19655060" start="6462" end="6475" title="James Maynard (mathematician)" label="James Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15461028" start="6484" end="6502" title="Hugo Duminil-Copin" label="Hugo Duminil-Copin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23874534" start="6515" end="6533" title="Geordie Williamson" label="Geordie Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6566" end="6580" title="Patrice Hauret" label="Patrice Hauret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544613" start="6614" end="6625" title="Jeremy Gray" label="Jeremy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q21825482" start="6662" end="6678" title="Karim Adiprasito" label="Karim Adiprasito"/>
<link wikidata="Q18704954" start="6691" end="6703" title="Ana Caraiani" label="Ana Caraiani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6716" end="6732" title="Alexander Efimov" label="Alexander Efimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q55973697" start="6744" end="6756" title="Simion Filip" label="Simion Filip"/>
<link wikidata="Q29368505" start="6769" end="6786" title="Aleksandr Logunov (mathematician)" label="Aleksandr Logunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q27061623" start="6798" end="6812" title="Kaisa Matomäki" label="Kaisa Matomäki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6825" end="6839" title="Phan Thành Nam" label="Phan Thành Nam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6852" end="6865" title="Joaquim Serra" label="Joaquim Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q56884388" start="6876" end="6887" title="Jack Thorne (mathematician)" label="Jack Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23721911" start="6895" end="6911" title="Maryna Viazovska" label="Maryna Viazovska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6943" end="6957" title="Arnulf Jentzen" label="Arnulf Jentzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729607" start="6992" end="7005" title="Karine Chemla" label="Karine Chemla"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528729" start="7055" end="7068" title="Maria Colombo (mathematician)" label="Maria Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102084452" start="7091" end="7112" title="Cristiana De Filippis" label="Cristiana De Filippis"/>
<link wikidata="Q98916924" start="7123" end="7138" title="Jessica Fintzen" label="Jessica Fintzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q99485329" start="7151" end="7162" title="Nina Holden" label="Nina Holden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7178" end="7192" title="Tom Hutchcroft" label="Tom Hutchcroft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7204" end="7217" title="Jacek Jendrej" label="Jacek Jendrej"/>
<link wikidata="Q102936216" start="7236" end="7251" title="Adam Kanigowski" label="Adam Kanigowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7267" end="7284" title="Frederick Manners" label="Frederick Manners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7296" end="7314" title="Richard Montgomery (Mathematician)" label="Richard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7322" end="7338" title="Danylo Radchenko" label="Danylo Radchenko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7376" end="7391" title="Fabien Casenave" label="Fabien Casenave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117593" start="7425" end="7451" title="Reinhard Siegmund-Schultze" label="Reinhard Siegmund-Schultze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11109473" start="7509" end="7523" title="Jeremy Quastel" label="Jeremy Quastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q108936692" start="7609" end="7636" title="Armenian Mathematical Union" label="Armenian Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q303786" start="7638" end="7667" title="Austrian Mathematical Society" label="Austrian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q815516" start="7669" end="7697" title="Belgian Mathematical Society" label="Belgian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7699" end="7726" title="Belgian Statistical Society" label="Belgian Statistical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7728" end="7756" title="Bosnian Mathematical Society" label="Bosnian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q108936711" start="7758" end="7791" title="Union of Bulgarian Mathematicians" label="Union of Bulgarian Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7793" end="7822" title="Croatian Mathematical Society" label="Croatian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200468" start="7824" end="7851" title="Cyprus Mathematical Society" label="Cyprus Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q64364564" start="7853" end="7879" title="Czech Mathematical Society" label="Czech Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270174" start="7881" end="7908" title="Danish Mathematical Society" label="Danish Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284744" start="7910" end="7940" title="Edinburgh Mathematical Society" label="Edinburgh Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q12361323" start="7942" end="7971" title="Estonian Mathematical Society" label="Estonian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417959" start="7973" end="8001" title="Finnish Mathematical Society" label="Finnish Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726704" start="8003" end="8033" title="Société Mathématique de France" label="Société Mathématique de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q318109" start="8035" end="8085" title="Society of Applied &amp;amp; Industrial Mathematicians" label="Society of Applied &amp;amp; Industrial Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12868953" start="8094" end="8121" title="Georgian Mathematical Union" label="Georgian Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q563335" start="8123" end="8150" title="German Mathematical Society" label="German Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707247" start="8152" end="8181" title="Hellenic Mathematical Society" label="Hellenic Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q108936703" start="8183" end="8213" title="Icelandic Mathematical Society" label="Icelandic Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040575" start="8215" end="8260" title="Institute of Mathematics and its Applications" label="Institute of Mathematics and its Applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672860" start="8262" end="8288" title="Irish Mathematical Society" label="Irish Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526145" start="8290" end="8315" title="Israel Mathematical Union" label="Israel Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8317" end="8391" title="Italian Association of Mathematics Applied to Economic and Social Sciences" label="Italian Association of Mathematics Applied to Economic and Social Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8402" end="8456" title="Società Italiana di Matematica Applicata e Industriale" label="Società Italiana di Matematica Applicata e Industriale"/>
<link wikidata="Q658922" start="8466" end="8492" title="Italian Mathematical Union" label="Italian Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q834214" start="8494" end="8527" title="János Bolyai Mathematical Society" label="János Bolyai Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q108936705" start="8529" end="8557" title="Kosovar Mathematical Society" label="Kosovar Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597682" start="8559" end="8587" title="Latvian Mathematical Society" label="Latvian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q108936707" start="8589" end="8620" title="Lithuanian Mathematical Society" label="Lithuanian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810244" start="8622" end="8649" title="London Mathematical Society" label="London Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142793" start="8651" end="8682" title="Luxembourg Mathematical Society" label="Luxembourg Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q113635115" start="8684" end="8710" title="Malta Mathematical Society" label="Malta Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949336" start="8712" end="8739" title="Moscow Mathematical Society" label="Moscow Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253252" start="8741" end="8771" title="Norwegian Mathematical Society" label="Norwegian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11992528" start="8773" end="8806" title="Norwegian Statistical Association" label="Norwegian Statistical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063277" start="8808" end="8835" title="Polish Mathematical Society" label="Polish Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232660" start="8837" end="8868" title="Portuguese Mathematical Society" label="Portuguese Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6102145" start="8870" end="8903" title="Real Sociedad Matemática Española" label="Real Sociedad Matemática Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q127273257" start="8935" end="8964" title="Romanian Mathematical Society" label="Romanian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663608" start="8966" end="8998" title="Royal Dutch Mathematical Society" label="Royal Dutch Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q30297544" start="9000" end="9027" title="Slovak Mathematical Society" label="Slovak Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9029" end="9079" title="Slovenian Discrete and Applied Mathematics Society" label="Slovenian Discrete and Applied Mathematics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487989" start="9081" end="9133" title="Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles" label="Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9142" end="9182" title="Sociedad Española de Matemática Aplicada" label="Sociedad Española de Matemática Aplicada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703964" start="9214" end="9247" title="Societat Catalana de Matemàtiques" label="Societat Catalana de Matemàtiques"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9282" end="9336" title="Society of Mathematicians and Physicists of Montenegro" label="Society of Mathematicians and Physicists of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134163" start="9338" end="9391" title="Spanish Society of Statistics and Operations Research" label="Spanish Society of Statistics and Operations Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222371" start="9393" end="9428" title="St. Petersburg Mathematical Society" label="St. Petersburg Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558219" start="9430" end="9458" title="Svenska Matematikersamfundet" label="Svenska Matematikersamfundet"/>
<link wikidata="Q684691" start="9491" end="9517" title="Swiss Mathematical Society" label="Swiss Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9519" end="9588" title="The Society of Mathematicians, Physicists and Astronomers of Slovenia" label="The Society of Mathematicians, Physicists and Astronomers of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636314" start="9590" end="9618" title="Turkish Mathematical Society" label="Turkish Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9620" end="9650" title="Ukrainian Mathematical Society" label="Ukrainian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376788" start="9717" end="9726" title="EMS Press" label="EMS Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="9750" end="9766" title="academic journal" label="academic journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156781" start="9788" end="9806" title="Algebraic Geometry (journal)" label="Algebraic Geometry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9821" end="9859" title="Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré C" label="Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré C"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9874" end="9912" title="Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré D" label="Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré D"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152387" start="9927" end="9960" title="Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici" label="Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici"/>
<link wikidata="Q563335" start="9975" end="9996" title="Documenta Mathematica" label="Documenta Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15759013" start="10011" end="10034" title="Elemente der Mathematik" label="Elemente der Mathematik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10049" end="10085" title="EMS Surveys in Mathematical Sciences" label="EMS Surveys in Mathematical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611320" start="10100" end="10130" title="Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics" label="Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10145" end="10175" title="Interfaces and Free Boundaries" label="Interfaces and Free Boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10190" end="10222" title="Journal of Combinatorial Algebra" label="Journal of Combinatorial Algebra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10237" end="10264" title="Journal of Fractal Geometry" label="Journal of Fractal Geometry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10279" end="10313" title="Journal of Noncommutative Geometry" label="Journal of Noncommutative Geometry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10328" end="10354" title="Journal of Spectral Theory" label="Journal of Spectral Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296136" start="10369" end="10413" title="Journal of the European Mathematical Society" label="Journal of the European Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10428" end="10455" title="L%27Enseignement_mathématique" label="L’Enseignement Mathématique"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10470" end="10506" title="Mathematical Statistics and Learning" label="Mathematical Statistics and Learning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10521" end="10565" title="Memoirs of the European Mathematical Society" label="Memoirs of the European Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10580" end="10599" title="Oberwolfach Reports" label="Oberwolfach Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232584" start="10614" end="10637" title="Portugaliae Mathematica" label="Portugaliae Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10652" end="10716" title="Publications of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences" label="Publications of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10731" end="10747" title="Quantum Topology" label="Quantum Topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312843" start="10762" end="10824" title="Rendiconti del Seminario Matematico della Università di Padova" label="Rendiconti del Seminario Matematico della Università di Padova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10839" end="10884" title="Rendiconti Lincei - Matematica e Applicazioni" label="Rendiconti Lincei - Matematica e Applicazioni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10899" end="10932" title="Revista Matemática Iberoamericana" label="Revista Matemática Iberoamericana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10947" end="10992" title="Zeitschrift für Analysis und ihre Anwendungen" label="Zeitschrift für Analysis und ihre Anwendungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376788" start="11000" end="11009" title="EMS Press" label="EMS Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340196" start="11615" end="11642" title="Encyclopedia of Mathematics" label="Encyclopedia of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627333" start="11695" end="11725" title="List of mathematical societies" label="List of mathematical societies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969476" wikidata="Q2931797" url="?curid=969476" title="CNSA (disambiguation)">
<text>[[CNSA]] is the China National Space Administration, the national space agency of China.

CNSA may also refer to:

==Organizations==
* China National School of Administration, the former name of the Chinese Academy of Governance
* &quot;Comité National de Secours et d&#x27;Alimentation&quot;, a humanitarian organization in Belgium in World War I
* Canadian Nursing Students&#x27; Association; see Nursing in Canada
* California Nursing Student Association; see Golden West College
* the French National Solidarity Fund for Autonomy

==Other uses==
* Commercial National Security Algorithm Suite, cryptographic algorithms promulgated by the US National Security Agency</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2931797" start="0" end="8" title="CNSA (disambiguation)" label="[[CNSA]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931797" start="90" end="94" title="CNSA (disambiguation)" label="CNSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099815" start="135" end="174" title="China National School of Administration" label="China National School of Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15613771" start="237" end="286" title="Comité National de Secours et d&amp;#x27;Alimentation" label="Comité National de Secours et d&amp;#x27;Alimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070269" start="399" end="416" title="Nursing in Canada" label="Nursing in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579962" start="463" end="482" title="Golden West College" label="Golden West College"/>
<link wikidata="Q86756234" start="552" end="596" title="Commercial National Security Algorithm Suite" label="Commercial National Security Algorithm Suite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969477" wikidata="Q1187426" url="?curid=969477" title="Preimage attack">
<text>In cryptography, a preimage attack on cryptographic hash functions tries to find a message that has a specific hash value. A cryptographic hash function should resist attacks on its preimage (set of possible inputs).

In the context of attack, there are two types of preimage resistance:

* &quot;preimage resistance&quot;: for essentially all pre-specified outputs, it is computationally infeasible to find any input that hashes to that output; i.e., given , it is difficult to find an such that .
* &quot;second-preimage resistance&quot;: for a specified input, it is computationally infeasible to find another input which produces the same output; i.e., given , it is difficult to find a second input such that .

These can be compared with a collision resistance, in which it is computationally infeasible to find any two distinct inputs , that hash to the same output; i.e., such that .

Collision resistance implies second-preimage resistance. Second-preimage resistance implies preimage resistance only if the size of the hash function&#x27;s inputs can be substantially (e.g., factor 2) larger than the size of the hash function&#x27;s outputs. Conversely, a second-preimage attack implies a collision attack (trivially, since, in addition to , is already known right from the start).

== Applied preimage attacks ==
By definition, an ideal hash function is such that the fastest way to compute a first or second preimage is through a brute-force attack. For an -bit hash, this attack has a time complexity , which is considered too high for a typical output size of = 128 bits. If such complexity is the best that can be achieved by an adversary, then the hash function is considered preimage-resistant. However, there is a general result that quantum computers perform a structured preimage attack in formula_1, which also implies second preimage and thus a collision attack.

Faster preimage attacks can be found by cryptanalysing certain hash functions, and are specific to that function. Some significant preimage attacks have already been discovered, but they are not yet practical. If a practical preimage attack is discovered, it would drastically affect many Internet protocols. In this case, &quot;practical&quot; means that it could be executed by an attacker with a reasonable amount of resources. For example, a preimaging attack that costs trillions of dollars and takes decades to preimage one desired hash value or one message is not practical; one that costs a few thousand dollars and takes a few weeks might be very practical.

All currently known practical or almost-practical attacks on MD5 and SHA-1 are collision attacks. In general, a collision attack is easier to mount than a preimage attack, as it is not restricted by any set value (any two values can be used to collide). The time complexity of a brute-force collision attack, in contrast to the preimage attack, is only formula_2.

===Restricted preimage space attacks===
The computational infeasibility of a first preimage attack on an ideal hash function assumes that the set of possible hash inputs is too large for a brute force search. However if a given hash value is known to have been produced from a set of inputs that is relatively small or is ordered by likelihood in some way, then a brute force search may be effective. Practicality depends on the input set size and the speed or cost of computing the hash function.

A common example is the use of hashes to store password validation data for authentication. Rather than store the plaintext of user passwords, an access control system stores a hash of the password. When a user requests access, the password they submit is hashed and compared with the stored value. If the stored validation data is stolen, the thief will only have the hash values, not the passwords. However most users choose passwords in predictable ways and many passwords are short enough that all possible combinations can be tested if fast hashes are used, even if the hash is rated secure against preimage attacks. Special hashes called key derivation functions have been created to slow searches. &quot;See&quot; Password cracking. For a method to prevent the testing of short passwords see salt (cryptography).

== See also ==
* Birthday attack
* Cryptographic hash function
* Hash function security summary
* Puzzle friendliness
* Rainbow table
* Random oracle
* : &quot;Attacks on Cryptographic Hashes in Internet Protocols&quot;

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3" end="15" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187426" start="19" end="34" title="Preimage attack" label="preimage attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="38" end="65" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83" end="90" title="Message#In computer science" label="message"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="182" end="190" title="Preimage#Inverse image" label="preimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779448" start="746" end="766" title="collision resistance" label="collision resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q869370" start="1443" end="1461" title="brute-force attack" label="brute-force attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="1499" end="1514" title="time complexity" label="time complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="1753" end="1769" title="quantum computer" label="quantum computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="1927" end="1941" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysing"/>
<link wikidata="Q185235" start="2616" end="2619" title="MD5" label="MD5"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="2624" end="2629" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q389463" start="2634" end="2650" title="collision attack" label="collision attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q161157" start="3466" end="3474" title="password" label="password"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496793" start="4063" end="4086" title="key derivation function" label="key derivation function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746524" start="4140" end="4157" title="Password cracking" label="Password cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500258" start="4218" end="4237" title="salt (cryptography)" label="salt (cryptography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q615485" start="4257" end="4272" title="Birthday attack" label="Birthday attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="4275" end="4302" title="Cryptographic hash function" label="Cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5678853" start="4305" end="4335" title="Hash function security summary" label="Hash function security summary"/>
<link wikidata="Q124518107" start="4338" end="4357" title="Puzzle friendliness" label="Puzzle friendliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139146" start="4360" end="4373" title="Rainbow table" label="Rainbow table"/>
<link wikidata="Q228184" start="4376" end="4389" title="Random oracle" label="Random oracle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969486" wikidata="Q6094696" url="?curid=969486" title="Itihaas">
<text>Itihaas or Itihas may refer to:

* Itihasa, historical portions of the Brāhmaṇas
* Indian epic poetry
* &quot;Itihaas&quot; (1987 film), a 1987 Indian Hindi-language drama film by Joshiy, starring Raaj Kumar, Shabana Azmi, Anil Kapoor, Rati Agnihotri, Mohnish Behl, Suresh Oberoi and Danny Denzongpa
* &quot;Itihaas&quot; (TV series), a TV series by Balaji Telefilms (1996–1997)
* &quot;Itihaas&quot; (1997 film), a 1997 Indian Hindi-language romantic action thriller film by Raj Kanwar, starring Ajay Devgn and Twinkle Khanna
* &quot;Itihas&quot; (1995 film), a 1995 Indian Assamese-language family drama film by Bhabendra Nath Saikia and starring Nikumoni Barua, Tapan Das and Biju Phukan
* &quot;Itihas&quot; (2002 film), a 2002 Bangladeshi film
* &quot;Ithihasa&quot;, 2014 Indian Malayalam-language fantasy comedy film by Binu Sadanandan, starrimg Anusree and Shine Tom Chacko</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3774766" start="35" end="42" title="Itihasa" label="Itihasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193297" start="83" end="101" title="Indian epic poetry" label="Indian epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034168" start="104" end="135" title="Itihaas (1987 film)" label="&amp;quot;Itihaas&amp;quot; (1987 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85770282" start="302" end="333" title="Itihaas (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Itihaas&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11165970" start="381" end="412" title="Itihaas (1997 film)" label="&amp;quot;Itihaas&amp;quot; (1997 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19742518" start="529" end="559" title="Itihas (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;Itihas&amp;quot; (1995 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25588362" start="693" end="723" title="Itihas (2002 film)" label="&amp;quot;Itihas&amp;quot; (2002 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18611392" start="757" end="765" title="Ithihasa" label="Ithihasa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969495" wikidata="Q915824" url="?curid=969495" title="Ford Ranger (Americas)">
<text>The Ford Ranger is a range of pickup trucks manufactured and marketed by Ford Motor Company in North and South America under the Ford Ranger nameplate. Introduced in early 1982 for the 1983 model year, the Ranger is currently in its fourth generation. Developed as a replacement for the Mazda-sourced Ford Courier, the model line has been sold across the Americas; Ford of Argentina began production of the Ranger for South America in 1998.

Through its production, the model line has served as a close rival to the Chevrolet S-10 and its Chevrolet Colorado successor (and their GMC counterparts), with the Ranger as the best-selling compact truck in the United States from 1987 to 2004. From 2012 to 2018, the Ranger model line was retired in North America as Ford concentrated on its full-size F-Series pickup trucks. For the 2019 model year, Ford introduced a fourth generation of the Ranger (after a seven-year hiatus). The first mid-size Ranger in North America, the model line is derived from the globally-marketed Ford Ranger (revised to fulfill North American design requirements).

The first three generations of the Ranger were produced by Ford at its Louisville Assembly (Louisville, Kentucky), Edison Assembly (Edison, New Jersey), and Twin Cities Assembly (Saint Paul, Minnesota) facilities; the final 2012 Ranger was the final vehicle produced at the St. Paul facility. The current fourth-generation Ranger is manufactured by Ford at Wayne Stamping &amp; Assembly (Wayne, Michigan). Ford of Argentina produced the Ranger in its General Pacheco plant from 1998 to 2011; it replaced the North American–designed version of the Ranger with the current Ranger T6 for 2012 production.


== Development ==
=== Ford Courier (1972–1982) ===
For the 1972 model year, the Ford Courier was introduced as the first compact pickup truck sold by Ford. Following the rise of the compact truck segment during the 1960s, Ford entered into a partnership with Mazda to market the Mazda B1800 in North America; the Courier would become the first of several jointly manufactured vehicles between the two companies from the 1970s into the 2000s. Along with minimizing the risk for Ford of developing a vehicle in an unfamiliar market segment, the partnership provided Mazda with critically needed funds.

While sharing the cab and chassis with its Mazda counterpart, to increase its sales potential in North America, the Courier adapted design elements of the Ford F-Series, with twin round headlamps, silver grille, and &quot;FORD&quot; lettering on the hood above the grille. In 1977, the Courier and B1800 (later B2000) were redesigned with a larger cab, redesigned pickup bed, and tailgate. While closer in appearance to its Mazda counterpart, the Courier was given signal/parking lamps inset in the grille (rather than the bumper); an optional 2.3L Ford engine was not available in the Mazda pickups.

From 1972 to 1982, the Ford Courier was manufactured alongside the Mazda B-Series in Hiroshima, Japan. To avoid the 25% Chicken Tax on imported trucks, both vehicles were imported as chassis-cab trucks (taxed at 4% tariff). Following their importation to United States, pickup truck beds shipped separately from Japan were installed before shipment to dealers.

=== Project Yuma (1976–1982) ===
In 1976, Ford commenced development on &quot;Project Yuma&quot; as a replacement for the Courier. In addition to designing the first domestically produced compact truck, another key factor driving the $700 million project was compliance with the fuel economy standards of the mid-1980s. At the launch of the project in 1976, Ford predicted that for the company to properly comply with 1985 CAFE standards, nearly 50% of pickup trucks sold in the United States would require a four-cylinder engine. In 1976, compact trucks held a 5% share of pickup truck sales, with Ford predicting an expansion to 50% by 1985, equaling nearly a million sales per year.

Project Yuma was centered around quality and fuel efficiency. At the beginning of the project, Ford researched additional elements that were valued by potential compact truck buyers. Along with flexibility for both work and personal use, Ford found that buyers desired additional interior room, including three-across seating, comfortable seats, and headroom and legroom for a six-foot-tall driver; other minor details were discovered such as five-bolt wheels and a larger ashtray.

During design, the body underwent extensive wind tunnel testing, to meet a planned 20 MPG fuel efficiency target (on its own, the standard front bumper spoiler added 1 MPG); its 0.45 drag coefficient bested that of the two-door Ford Mustang. To further improve fuel economy, the Ranger increased the use of high-strength steel and other lightweight materials, including a magnesium clutch housing, aluminum transfer case (for four-wheel drive), and a magnesium clutch/brake pedal bracket. To further save weight, the design of the front suspension was computer-optimized, rendering the front stabilizer bar optional. Though narrower than the F-Series and other full-size competitors, the cargo bed of the Ranger was given the capability to transport a four-foot-wide sheet of material (considered an industry measure of space in pickup truck bed design) through the use of recesses to insert supports across the bed, allowing such material to be placed above the wheel wells.

The 1979 fuel crisis nearly doomed the Yuma/Ranger project, as it occurred between launch of the 1979 Ford LTD and 1980 Ford F-Series. After selling nearly one million F-Series trucks in 1978, in 1980, Ford had yet to gain a profit from its redesign of the F-Series. Ford President Don Petersen kept the compact truck project alive for several reasons. By 1980, General Motors was developing its own domestically produced compact truck, with the Chevrolet S-10/GMC S-15 providing a potential competitor. Peterson also felt that, if equipped correctly, buyers would pay nearly the same for a compact truck as a full-size truck (such as the F-100).

Around 1980, the Project Yuma truck took on the Ford Ranger name, adopting the name of the mid to upper-level trim used by the Ford F-Series since 1965. In anticipation of the compact truck line, 1981 marked the final use of the Ranger trim for the F-Series and Bronco (replaced by XLS for 1982).

== Production ==
The Ranger was produced at the Louisville Assembly Plant in Louisville, Kentucky, from 1982 to 1999. From 1993 to 2004, production also was sourced from Edison Assembly in Edison, New Jersey. For its entire production run until 2011, the Ranger was produced at the Twin Cities Assembly Plant in St Paul, Minnesota. The final 2012 Ranger produced on December 16, 2011, ended 86 years of production at Twin Cities Assembly as well as the production of all compact pickups in the United States.

In 2008, Ford made its first plans to end production of the Ranger in North America, although its high productivity spared it from The Way Forward. Twin Cities Assembly (built in 1925) was the oldest Ford factory in the world. Ford later extended the closure date of the factory to 2011, but in June 2011, a final closure date was announced. As Twin Cities was the sole production location of the Ranger in North America (from 1982), its closure brought the production of the Ranger to an end after 29 model years. The 2011 model year was the final model year for retail sales, with a shortened 2012 model year for fleet sales; the final North American market Ranger (a white SuperCab Sport produced for pest-control company Orkin) was produced just before 10 a.m. local time on December 16, 2011.

Over its production life, the chassis and suspension of the Ranger would be used for several compact Ford trucks and sport-utility vehicles. During the 1990s and 2000s, Mazda adopted a badge-engineered version of the Ranger, for their B-Series nameplate (the reverse of the Ford Courier produced by Mazda).

In 2015, as part of contract negotiations with the United Auto Workers, leaked reports over the future of the Michigan Assembly Plant included the potential decision of replacing Ford Focus and Ford C-Max production with an American-market version of the global Ranger. Along with the revival of the Ranger nameplate, the UAW negotiations also included a potential revival of the Ford Bronco SUV. At the 2017 North American International Auto Show, Ford confirmed the return of the Ranger and Ford Bronco, with the Ford Ranger as a 2019 model-year vehicle.

== First generation (1983) ==
The first Ranger rolled off the Louisville assembly line on January 18, 1982. While initially slated for a traditional autumn release, to more closely compete with the introduction of the Chevrolet S-10, Ford advanced the launch of the 1983 Ranger several months, with the first vehicles reaching showrooms in March 1982.

Initially sold alongside its Courier predecessor, the first 1983 Ranger was priced at US$6,203 (). While far smaller in exterior size than the F-Series, 4×4 Rangers offered a payload of 1,600 pounds, matching or exceeding the F-100 in payload capacity. For 1984, the Ford Bronco II two-door SUV was introduced. Similar in size to the 1966–1977 Bronco, the Bronco II used a shortened version of the Ranger chassis, along with much of its interior components.

For the 1989 model year, the Ranger underwent a major mid-cycle revision to improve its exterior aerodynamics and interior ergonomics. For 1991, the Ford Explorer SUV was derived from the facelifted Ranger, sharing its front fascia, chassis, and interior components.

=== Chassis specification ===
The first-generation Ranger uses a body-on-frame chassis design; while using a chassis developed specifically for the model line, the Ranger adopts many chassis design elements from the F-Series. Along with traditional leaf-spring rear suspension, the Ranger is fitted with Twin I-Beam independent front suspension. To minimize unsprung weight, the Twin I-Beams were constructed of stamped high-strength steel (rather than forged steel).

Rear-wheel drive was standard, with part-time four-wheel drive as an option (never offered in the Courier). Dependent on configuration, the Ranger was produced in three wheelbases: 107.9 inches (6-foot bed), 113.9 inches (7-foot bed), and 125 inches (SuperCab, introduced in 1986).

For 1989, rear-wheel anti-lock brakes became standard.

==== Powertrain ====
From 1983 to 1992, the first-generation Ranger was powered by 2.0L and 2.3L versions of the Ford &quot;&quot;Lima&quot;&quot; inline-4; the 2.8L, 2.9L, and 4.0L Ford &quot;Cologne V6&quot;; the 3.0L Ford &quot;Vulcan V6&quot;; and four-cylinder diesel engines sourced from Mazda (Perkins) and Mitsubishi. Two long-running engines associated with the Ford light trucks made their debut in the first-generation Ranger; the twin spark-plug version (with distributorless ignition) of the Pinto engine was introduced in 1989, remaining in use through 2001. In 1990, the 4.0L Cologne V6 was introduced; in modified form, the engine was used through the 2012 model-year discontinuation of the Ranger in North America.

A four-speed manual transmission was standard on all engines for 1983 and 1984, with a five-speed manual as an option; a three-speed automatic was offered on 2.3L and 2.8L engines. For 1985, the five-speed manual became the standard transmission, with a four-speed automatic offered on non-diesel Rangers. For 1989, the Mazda M5OD-R1 transmission became the standard transmission.
=== Body design ===
Slightly larger than the Courier, the first-generation Ranger was approximately 18 inches shorter and 11 inches narrower than an equivalently configured F-100/F-150. While proportioned similar to the Chevrolet S-10 and Japanese-sourced compact trucks, it adopted exterior design elements from the F-Series, including its twin headlamps, chrome grille, &quot;FORD&quot; tailgate lettering, tail-lamps, and cab proportions. In line with the Courier, the Ranger was offered with two pickup bed sizes; a standard 6-foot length and an extended 7-foot length. In 1986, a third configuration was introduced with the advent of the Ranger SuperCab. Extended 17 inches behind the front doors for additional cab space, the SuperCab was offered with the 6-foot bed length; four-wheel-drive SuperCabs were sold only with V6 engines.

During its production, the first-generation Ranger was offered with several seating configurations. A three-passenger bench seat was standard, with various types of bucket seats offered (dependent on trim level). As part of the 1989 mid-cycle update, a 40/60 split-bench seat was introduced. The SuperCab was offered with a pair of center-facing jump seats, expanding capacity to five.

From 1983 to 1988, the interior saw few major revisions. In 1986, the instrument cluster was revised, allowing the fitment of a tachometer. To streamline production, the Ranger shared interior components with other Ford vehicles, sharing the steering column, door handles, and window controls from the Ford Escort, Ford F-Series, and Ford Bronco; nearly the entire driver&#x27;s compartment of the Ford Bronco II was directly sourced from the Ranger.

For 1989, the Ranger underwent a mid-cycle redesign with new front fenders, a restyled hood and grille, and flush-mounted composite headlamps (with larger marker lamps). To further improve aerodynamics, the front bumper was redesigned and enlarged to fit more closely with the front fenders. Badging was revised; the fender icons were restyled, and the &quot;FORD&quot; lettering on the right-hand side of the XLT-significant tailgate trim panel was switched for a blue oval. The interior was given a redesign, including new door panels, new seats, and an all-new dashboard (introducing a glovebox). To improve ergonomics, the instrument panel was redesigned for improved legibility, with automatic transmission Rangers receiving a column-mounted gearshift; manual-transmission versions saw the removal of the key-release button from the steering column.

=== Trim ===

The first-generation Ranger was marketed in five trim levels: S, Ranger, XL, XLS, and XLT. Intended largely for fleet sales, the Ranger S (introduced in 1984) was offered with virtually no available options. While still largely a work truck, the Ranger XL offered color-keyed trim, floor mats, and chrome bumpers. The XLS was marketed as the sportiest version of the Ranger, offering bucket seats, blackout trim, and tape stripe packages (essentially the successor to the 1970s &quot;Free Wheeling&quot; trims) while the XLT was offered with two-tone exteriors, chrome exterior trim, and upgraded interior trim.

The Ranger STX was introduced in 1985 for Ranger 4x4s on the West Coast of the United States, becoming fully available for 1986. Offering a &quot;sport&quot; suspension and larger tires, the STX was denoted by the offering of a bucket-seat interior and model-specific two-tone paint scheme.

*&quot;S&quot; – Included: Vinyl upholstery, tachometer (only on 4×4 models), halogen headlamps, black foldaway mirrors, and manual transmission.
*&quot;Sport&quot; – Added: power steering, tachometer on 4×2 and 4×4 models, rear step bumper, an AM stereo with digital clock or an AM/FM stereo with cassette player and clock, and aluminum rims.
*&quot;Custom&quot; – same as S.
*&quot;XLT&quot; – Added: cloth upholstery, sliding rear window, chrome rear step bumper, brushed-aluminum tailgate appliqué, and deluxe wheel trim.
*&quot;STX&quot; – Added: tachometer on 4×2, floor console, fog lamps, an AM/FM stereo with clock, and sport cast aluminum rims.

==== Ranger GT ====
Following an initial late-1986 introduction in California, Ford marketed the Ranger GT &quot;sport pickup&quot; option package from 1987 to 1989. Offered only with regular-cab trucks equipped with two-wheel drive, the GT initially was offered for short-bed Rangers and introduced for long-bed vehicles during the model year. The Ranger GT was available in either red, white, or blue paint colors; chrome trim was painted body color. Equipped similar to a Ranger XLT, the interior of the GT featured two bucket seats and a center console. For 1988, a ground effects package was added, including a redesigned body-color front bumper (integrating the fog lamps). 

Powered by a 140hp 2.9L V6 (paired with either a 5-speed manual or 4-speed automatic transmission), the Ranger GT was equipped with front and rear anti-roll bars, a limited-slip differential, and performance tires. In 1989, the Ford Truck Public Affairs office constructed a one-off prototype, fitting a Ranger GT with a 220hp V6 from the Ford Taurus SHO and a 5-speed manual transmission from a Mustang GT.

After the decision not to series-produce the variant with the SHO V6, the Ranger GT was shelved for 1990.

== Second generation (1993) ==
After a ten-year production run, Ford introduced the second generation of the Ranger for the 1993 model year with much of its chassis carried over from the previous generation. Sharing no body panels with its predecessor, the redesigned Ranger shifted from a smaller-proportioned F-Series to a more aerodynamic design, no longer sharing its front fascia with the Ford Explorer. For the first time in the compact segment, the Ranger offered a stepside-style bed with the Ranger Splash.

For the 1994 model year, Ford commenced production of the Ranger for Mazda, who began to sell the model line as the B-Series pickup truck (effectively in reverse of the 1972–1982 agreement that produced the Ford Courier).

For 1995, the second-generation Ranger underwent a mid-cycle revision; in 1996, the model line became the first compact pickup to offer dual airbags.

=== Chassis specification ===
The second-generation Ranger carried much of its chassis design from its predecessor, with a leaf-sprung rear suspension and a Twin-I-Beam independent front suspension. Two wheelbases were carried over from the previous generation: 107.9 inches (short bed), 113.9 inches (long bed), with the SuperCab lengthened to 125.2 inches (0.2 inches longer).

Rear-wheel drive remained standard, with four-wheel drive as an option; a Dana 35 TTB front axle was used. With four-wheel drive Rangers, a manually-shifted transfer case was standard; a &quot;Touch Drive&quot; electronically shifted transfer case was an option, using automatic-locking front-wheel hubs.

For 1995, the front brakes were revised, adopting two-piston brake calipers from the Ford Explorer; four-wheel anti-lock brakes were standardized on Rangers with 4-wheel drive and/or the 4.0L V6.

==== Powertrain ====
The standard engine on the second-generation Ranger was again the 2.3L inline-4 (retuned to 98 hp). The 2.9L V6 was retired, with the Ranger sharing two optional V6 engines with the Aerostar. The 140 hp 3.0L V6 became standard on STX trim and SuperCab 4x4s (retuned to 145 hp in 1995). The 160 hp 4.0L V6 (also shared with the Explorer) remained an option.

The Mazda M5OD 5-speed manual remained the standard transmission for all three engines. In 1995, the A4LD 4-speed automatic was replaced by two electronically controlled transmissions: the lighter-duty 4R44E (for the inline-4 and 3.0L V6) and the heavier-duty 4R55E (for the 4.0L V6). In 1997, the latter was replaced by the 5-speed 5R55E automatic, marking the first 5-speed automatic of an American manufacturer.
=== Body design ===
The second-generation Ranger saw major changes centered around the exterior, sharing no body panels with its predecessor. In line with the Aerostar and Explorer, the Ranger adopted more aerodynamic body contours, with flush-mounted door glass, a lower hoodline, taller and wider doors (exterior rain gutters were eliminated, in line with the Ford Taurus); sideview mirror brackets were eliminated. In a major departure from other compact pickup trucks, the cab was widened nearly three inches, matching the mid-size Dodge Dakota in width.

The interior of the second-generation underwent a smaller degree of change (compared to the exterior). While the seats and door panels were new, the dashboard was nearly carryover from 1989 to 1992. For 1994, the instrument panel saw the introduction of a six-digit odometer; the doors saw the addition of side impact guard beams. In a functional change, the 1994 Ranger adopted R134a Freon (CFC-free) air conditioning.

For 1995, the Ranger underwent a mid-cycle revision for the exterior and interior. Distinguished by a revised grille (common for both rear-wheel drive and 4×4 Rangers), the 1995 Ranger shared its dashboard with the second-generation Explorer, with more ergonomic controls and a double DIN radio head unit. Alongside the introduction of a standard driver-side airbag, a power-operated driver seat became an option (for SuperCab Rangers). For 1996, a passenger-side airbag was introduced as an option; to allow the use of a child safety seat, a key-operated lockout was supplied with the airbag option.

As with the first generation, the second-generation Ranger was offered in three basic body styles: a regular cab with 6- or 7-foot bed lengths, or a SuperCab extended cab (with short bed). In 1992, Ford introduced the first FlareSide bed for the Ranger with the Splash trim (see below); in 1996, the FlareSide bed became an option for all short-bed Rangers. In a break from its predecessor, rear-wheel drive and 4×4 Rangers were fitted with different grille designs, with a six-hole design for 2WD models; 4×4 models were given a single-slot design. For 1995, all Rangers adopted a four-hole grille.

=== Trim ===
The second-generation Ranger largely carried over the trim lines from its predecessor. The base Ranger S (meant largely for fleets) was discontinued, with the XL becoming the standard Ranger trim. Alongside the standard XL was the XL Sport, Splash, XLT, and STX. For 1995, the STX trim became exclusive to 4×4 Rangers.

*&quot;XL&quot; – Included: Vinyl upholstery, bench seat, tinted glass, tachometer on 4×4, and steel rims.
*&quot;XL Sport&quot; – Added: sport tape stripe.
*&quot;XLT&quot; – Added: Floor consolette, cloth upholstery, an AM/FM stereo with clock, and full-faced steel wheels.
*&quot;STX&quot; – Added: cloth upholstery, captains chairs with floor console, power steering, an AM/FM stereo with cassette player and clock, and tachometer.

==== Ranger Splash ====

Introduced for the 1993 model year, the Ranger Splash was a sub-model of the second-generation Ranger. Alongside the Flareside pickup bed, the Splash was fitted with a lowered suspension (1 inch in rear, 2 inches in front for 2WD versions); all versions were fitted with 4×4 Ranger grilles. The monochromatic exterior was fitted with special vinyl &quot;Splash&quot; decals on the sides and the tailgate. The Splash models also featured bucket seats for the interior as well as electronic side mirrors.

Rear-wheel-drive Splashes were fitted with chrome steel wheels, while 4×4 versions were fitted with aluminum wheels.

== Third generation (1998) ==
For the 1998 model year, a third generation of the Ranger made its debut. While visually similar to the previous generation, extensive upgrades were made to the chassis, suspension, and drivetrain. In line with the larger F-150 and Super Duty trucks, SuperCab Rangers gained the option of two rear-hinged doors for 1999, becoming the first model line in the compact truck segment to do so.

Several variants of the Ranger were derived from this generation. Ford of Argentina introduced a crew-cab variant of the Ranger for South America in 1998; the Ford Ranger EV was the first electric vehicle produced by Ford in the United States. The Ford Explorer Sport Trac mid-size pickup truck shared its wheelbase (and some components) with the Ranger.

The 2011 model year was the final model year for regular sales of the Ranger in North America; following a short run of 2012 production exclusively for fleet sales, the final vehicle was produced by Twin Cities Assembly on December 15, 2011; the 2012 Ranger Sport SuperCab 4×4 was the final vehicle produced by the facility.

=== Chassis specification ===
The third-generation Ranger received a redesigned frame; replacing full-length C-channel construction, the frame rails forward of the firewall became fully boxed. Coinciding with the larger two-door cab, wheelbases were lengthened, with the model line offered in 111.6 inches (two-door, 6-foot bed), 117.6 inches (two-door, 7-foot bed), and 125.9 inches (2+2 door SuperCab, 6-foot bed).

As with the two previous generations, a rear-wheel drive configuration was standard; on four-wheel drive, front-wheel hubs were vacuum-locked from the dashboard. From 2001 onward, the vacuum-locked front hubs were replaced by front hubs that were permanently engaged to the front axle.

Following the 1995 Ford Explorer and 1997 Ford F-150, the third-generation Ranger abandoned the long-running Twin I-Beam front suspension, introducing a short/long-arm (SLA) configuration. To further improve handling, recirculating-ball steering was replaced by a rack-and-pinion steering configuration.

==== Powertrain ====
From 1998 to 2001, the standard engine for the Ranger was a new 2.5 L version of the Lima four-cylinder, with the stroke increased by over the previous 2.3 L unit. Additionally, a higher-flow cylinder head using narrower valve stems was fitted and eight crank counterbalance weights were now used instead of four. With the larger displacement and other changes it now produced . The optional 3.0 L Vulcan V6 and 4.0 L Cologne V6 engines carried over. During the 2001 model year, the 2.5 L engine was replaced by a 2.3 L DOHC engine (later also used by the Ford Focus). The same year, the Ranger adopted the overhead-cam version of the 4.0 L V6 (originally introduced in the Explorer). Following the 2008 model year, the 3.0 L V6 ended production, the Ranger having been the sole vehicle offered with the engine by that time.

For all five engines, the third-generation Ranger was offered with a Mazda-produced 5-speed manual transmission as standard equipment; in 2001, the 4.0 L V6 was paired with the heavier-duty &quot;M5OD-R1HD&quot; version. The 2.5 L I4 was offered with an optional 4-speed automatic along with the 3.0 L V6; in 2001, a 5-speed automatic became an option for those engines.
=== Body design ===
In contrast to its 1993 redesign, the third-generation Ranger saw relatively conservative changes to its appearance. To increase interior space on regular-cab Rangers, the cab was expanded over 3 inches rearward (through a longer wheelbase). Through the deletion of Twin-I-Beam suspension, designers were able to lower the hoodline, which was introduced with new fenders and a grille (sharing design influences from the 1997 F-150). With the exception of a passenger-airbag lockout switch, the interior saw little change since its 1995 redesign.

The third-generation Ranger saw several updates through its production. For 2001, the front fascia was redesigned with a new grille and headlamps; the amber turn signals were deleted from the taillamps. For 2004, the grille was enlarged (in the style of the F-150); for the first time since 1995, the interior saw several revisions, with new front seats (to meet updated federal safety requirements) and a new instrument panel and steering wheel. 2005 marked the final year for the FlareSide bed option.

For 2006, the Ranger received its final major update (as the model line was planned for a 2008 discontinuation). The grille was restyled into a &quot;3-slot&quot; configuration (in line with the F-Series), adding clear-lens headlamps and parking lamps; the sideview mirrors were replaced with a rectangular design. The rear of the Ranger underwent several changes, with redesigned taillamps and a larger Ford Blue Oval centred on the tailgate. For the first time since 1989, the Ranger fender badging was redesigned (with a larger design).

For 2007, small interior updates included a slightly altered steering wheel design and an MP3 auxiliary jack standard in place of where the airbag key-switch once was. Aside from an ESC button in 2010, this would mark the final cosmetic update for the Ford Ranger’s interior up until discontinuation in 2011. 

For the 2010 model year, Ford introduced optional graphics packages for the Ranger, installed by dealers. The extended-length bed was removed from retail sale, becoming exclusive to the XL Fleet model. 

From 2004-2009, Rangers equipped with the Pioneer 290 watt audio package were given a large full split centre console. 

=== Trim ===
At its launch, the third-generation Ranger was marketed with the XL and XLT trims; the long-running STX trim level was discontinued and the Splash trim was discontinued after 1998. For further differentiation between the XL and XLT, for 1999, Ford introduced Sport and Off-Road variants of each trim (effectively replacing the Splash and STX, respectively); a low-content XL Fleet model was also offered.

For 2001, the Ranger Edge was introduced, with the FX4 and Tremor following in 2002. For 2005, the Ranger Tremor was deleted and the STX returning; the Ranger Edge effectively became the Ranger Sport for 2006.

Several adjustments were made to the Ranger trims during the late 2000s. After 2007, the STX was discontinued, with 2009 serving as the final year for the FX4 (produced in 2010 for Canada). From 2010 onward, the XL, XLT, and Sport were offered; the latter two included Sirius radio as an optional feature, beginning in 2007.

==== Ranger Edge (2001–2005) ====

For 2000, Ford introduced the &quot;XL Trailhead&quot; option, offering the suspension and higher ride height of a 4x4 Ranger on a rear-wheel drive vehicle. For 2001, the option became the Edge trim level for the Ranger; slotted between the XL and XLT. Distinguished by a monochromatic exterior, Edge also served as a successor to the 1990s Splash trim. To expand the trim offering, Ford introduced the Edge Plus (combining several XLT features with the Edge), along with a 4x4 variant with the 4.0L V6 (as the Edge already was produced with the front suspension and tires of the 4x4).

Following the 2005 model year, the Ranger Edge was repackaged as the Ranger Sport (as Ford shifted the Edge nameplate to a mid-size CUV); the Sport would be produced through the 2012 model year.

==== Ranger FX4 (2002–2009) ====
From 2002 to 2009. the Ranger FX4 was offered as the flagship of the Ranger model line, produced with heavy-duty off-road components.

Introduced as the Ranger FX4 for 2002, the off-road option package came standard with the 4.0L V6, including a manual transfer case, 31-inch all-terrain tires on 15-inch Alcoa wheels, a Ford 8.8 rear axle with a limited-slip differential and three skid plates. The interior was given two-tone bucket seats (leather seats becoming optional in 2006) with heavy-duty rubber floor mats.

For 2003, the FX4 model line was expanded, as Ford introduced the Ranger FX4 Off-Road; the previous FX4 became the FX4 Level II. Intended as a lower-cost version, the FX4 Off Road does not have the Torsen limited-slip rear axle, Bilstein shocks, or Alcoa wheels on 31-inch tires; instead, the FX4 Off-Road uses off-the-shelf Ford components. To distinguish the two model lines, the FX4 Off-Road was given a chrome grille and front bumper (for 2006, the Off-Road received a body-color grille). While the Level II was never sold with a FlareSide bed option, the configuration was offered on the Off-Road for 2003 and 2004.

For 2008, Ford consolidated the two FX4 model lines, withdrawing the Level II. While retaining the FX4 Off-Road name, the new model line adopted a number of features from the Level II, including three skid plates, a Torsen differential (as an option), heavy-duty shocks (Rancho units replacing Bilsteins), and two-tone bucket seats with heavy-duty rubber flooring. After the 2009 model year, the FX4 was discontinued in the United States (2010 for Canada).

According to Ford, 17,971 Level IIs were built from 2002 through 2007 (including the 2002 FX4); 45,172 FX4 Off Roads were built from 2003 to 2009.

==== Ranger Tremor (2002–2004) ====
For the 2002 model year, the Ranger Tremor was introduced as an option package. In line with the 1990s Ranger Splash, the Tremor was largely an appearance option package, with its content centered around a high-end audio system. Including a 485-watt 4-speaker stereo system, the Tremor included a cassette/CD player, white-gauge instruments, monochromatic exterior, badging, and 16-inch wheels.

For 2003, the Tremor became a stand-alone trim level, lasting through 2004.

=== Safety ===
The Ranger was the first small pickup to introduce dual airbags as safety features. It received an &quot;acceptable&quot; frontal crash test rating from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety when they were first tested in 1998, while many of its competitors received &quot;marginal&quot; or &quot;poor&quot; ratings at that time. The exception was the Toyota Tacoma, which also got an &quot;acceptable&quot; rating.

The 2007 model year introduced a newly mandated tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS), as well as replacing the airbag key switch with an automatic passenger seat integrated sensor. 

The 2010 model year brought the addition of front seat combination head and torso airbags to improve passenger safety in a side-impact collision and earned &quot;good&quot; rating through the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety&#x27;s side impact test. Also, electronic stability control was added for the 2010 models as standard equipment.

In the Roof Strength Test conducted by Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, the 2010 Ranger earned an &quot;Acceptable&quot; rating.

== Fourth generation (2019) ==
Ford had intended to release a new North American Ranger for 2004, codenamed P273, but the project was cancelled.

For the 2019 model year, the fourth-generation Ranger was introduced, going on sale in January 2019. Returning after an eight-year hiatus (2012 production was not marketed for retail sale), the fourth-generation Ranger became the first of the model line produced as a mid-size pickup. Developed from the Ranger T6 designed by Ford Australia, the Ranger underwent several design changes to its frame and bumpers.

Along with its shift in size segments, the fourth generation marks several firsts for the Ranger in North America. The two-door standard-cab configuration is no longer produced; all examples are SuperCabs or SuperCrews. While Ford Argentina produced crew-cab Rangers during the 1990s and 2000s, this is the first Ranger offered with four full doors in the United States and Canada. For the first time, no V6 engine nor any manual transmission is offered; a 2.3-liter turbocharged inline-4 and a 10-speed automatic is the sole powertrain offering (as of 2020 production).

The fourth-generation Ranger is produced by Ford at its Michigan Assembly Plant in Wayne, Michigan.

== Fifth generation (2024) ==
The North American fifth generation of the Ranger debuted on May 10, 2023 (after having gone on sale globally in November 2021) and will go on sale later in the year. The Ranger lineup will feature a Raptor version for the first time.

== Variants ==
=== Ford Ranger EV (1998–2002) ===

The first battery electric vehicle produced by Ford in North America, the Ford Ranger EV was produced from 1998 to 2002. Originally fitted with lead-acid batteries, Nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries were introduced for 1999. While using the frame of a 4×4 Ranger, the Ranger EV was rear-wheel drive with a rear-mounted driveline. It is also the only rear-wheel drive American-produced Ford fitted with a de Dion rear suspension. Externally, the Ranger EV is primarily distinguished from a standard Ranger by its grille; the Ranger EV has a grille-mounted charging port on the right third of its grille.

During its production, 1,500 Ranger EVs were produced; as with most electric vehicles of the 1990s, it was offered exclusively through lease. While most fleet-leased Ranger EVs were returned to Ford after the end of the lease and dismantled, some Ranger EVs leased by individuals were purchased and remain in use.

=== Mazda B-Series/Mazda Truck (1994–2010) ===
For 1994, Mazda North America ended imports of the B-series from Japan, entering into an agreement with Ford to market a rebadged version of the Ranger as the B-series in the United States and Canada. For Mazda, whose 1986–1993 B-series had struggled in North America, the new B-series was a variant of one of the highest-selling compact trucks. In addition, selling a truck produced in the United States allowed Mazda to entirely circumvent the 25% &quot;chicken tax&quot;.

The Mazda B-Series adopted both cab configurations of the Rangers; all units were produced with Styleside beds (revised in design for the Mazda line). Mechanically identical to the Ranger, the B-Series was offered with the same engines and transmissions; both two-wheel drive and 4×4 versions were offered. In line with previous Mazda pickup trucks, badging was related to engine displacement, with the B2300 sold with the 2.3-liter inline-four, and the B3000 and B4000 receiving the 3.0 and 4.0-liter V6s respectively.

To distinguish the Mazda from the Ranger, stylists gave the B-Series its own front fascia, pickup truck bed, and wheel designs; the extended cab (Cab Plus) received chrome window trim and blacked-out B-pillars. At its launch, the B-Series was offered in SE and LE trim lines (equivalent to Ranger XL and XLT). For 1997, the trim levels were revised, becoming SE-5 and SE-5+; for 1998, the SX and SE were offered, remaining through the rest of the production run.

As the two model lines were nearly identical, the Ford-produced B-Series closely followed the development of the Ranger in its body and chassis. For 1997, Mazda dropped the B3000 (separately from Ford), returning it for 1998. For 1998, the B-series underwent the same body and chassis upgrades as the Ranger. Along with a redesign of the front fascia, Mazda received an all-new pickup truck bed (with vestigial fenders/steps); in a mechanical change, an enlarged standard engine created the B2500. As a running change during the model year, Cab Plus (SuperCab) models received two rear-hinged doors, a first in the pickup truck segment. For 2001, an all-new standard engine replaced the B2500 with the return of the B2300; the B4000 received an overhead-cam engine.

For 2002, Mazda remarketed the model line, relaunching the B-Series in North America as the renamed Mazda Truck. While the Truck name was all-new, all B-Series fender badging denoting engine size remained. Separate from the Ranger, the Mazda Truck received what would be its final exterior update; on a redesigned front fascia, the Mazda badge was centered into the grille. After 2007, the B3000 was discontinued (Ford ended production of the 3.0L Vulcan V6 within a year). As Mazda North America began to shift away from pickup truck sales, the Mazda Truck was withdrawn from the United States after the 2009 model year; leftover production was sold in Canada for 2010.

The final Mazda Truck was produced by Twin Cities Assembly on December 11, 2009, ending 37 years of pickup truck sales by Mazda North America.

=== South American production (1996–2011) ===

In 1995, Ford began exports of the Ranger from the United States to Argentina; initial exports started with two-door SuperCab equipped with the 4.0-liter gasoline &quot;Cologne&quot; V6. As demand increased, Ford made the decision to produce it locally in Buenos Aires, Argentina, at the Ford General Pacheco Assembly Plant for the local market and subsequently for the rest of Latin America.

The first Rangers produced at General Pacheco were built in 1996, with Ford offering single cab versions with gasoline engines. By November 1997, supply was increased with both diesel and gasoline engines, two-wheel and four-wheel drive, and different levels of equipment. After two years of local production, Ford of Argentina introduced a redesigned version of the Ranger for 1998. Featuring the same updates as its counterpart in the United States, a new four-door double cab body variant exclusive to South America made its debut. As Ford was developing the functionally similar Ford Explorer Sport Trac at the time, the double-cab Ford Ranger was not produced or marketed in the United States or Canada.

Starting in 1998, Ford began to phase out the Ford Courier name on its Mazda-produced compact pickups sold globally in favor of the Ranger nameplate (though the Courier remained in use in Australia). Consequently, exports of the North American-produced Ranger were primarily limited to South America, including Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. To better match the needs of local buyers, Ford of Argentina offered three different turbodiesel powertrain options, including a 2.5-liter turbocharged four-cylinder diesel with 115 hp (85 kW) starting in 1998, a 2.8-liter with 135 hp (99 kW) starting in 2002 and a 3.0-liter with and of torque mated to an Eaton &quot;FSO-2405-A&quot; five-speed manual transmission starting in 2004.

The 2001 exterior facelift given to North American Rangers was not carried over to South American versions, with the 1998 front bodywork remaining until the 2003 model year. For 2004, both versions were given the same grille (though Argentine-produced versions were designed with projector-style headlamps). Following a US$156.5 million upgrade to the General Pacheco factory in 2007, several upgrades were made to the South American Ranger; a number of them would diverge the model from its US counterpart. For 2008, the Ranger received a makeover with a grill and headlights similar to the 2006 North American version; bed extenders became available for all boxes.

For 2010, Ford of Argentina gave the Ranger its largest facelift since 1992. Exclusive to South America, the update replaced the hood, front fenders and bumper with a more aggressive design; to allow for a more aggressive stance, large wheel arches were included. For the first time, the Ranger adopted the Ford three-bar corporate grille; the door handles were redesigned, shifting to a loop-style design. The interior was largely unchanged, as were the powertrain offerings. A new option (for Argentina and Brazil) included an engine powered by compressed natural gas, making it the first pickup truck to offer a factory-built natural gas vehicle (NGV) commercially available in those countries.

In 2012, Ford of Argentina replaced the US-derived Ranger with the larger Ranger T6. Designed by Ford of Australia, the Ranger T6 consolidated the Ford- and Mazda-based versions of the Ranger onto a single platform sold globally, introduced to North America for 2019.

Ford Ranger (Argentina) wheelbases and bed lengths:

* 1998–2012 – – 6 ft. bed (1,732mm) Single Cab
* 1998–2012 – – 7 ft. bed (2,129mm) Single Cab
* 1998–2012 – – 5 ft. bed (1,467mm) Double Cab

Engines:
== Sales ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* Specifications and technical data</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q915824" start="4" end="15" title="Ford Ranger (Americas)" label="Ford Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q215601" start="30" end="42" title="pickup truck" label="pickup truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="73" end="91" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467909" start="129" end="140" title="Ford Ranger" label="Ford Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="287" end="292" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077083" start="301" end="313" title="Ford Courier" label="Ford Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436915" start="365" end="382" title="Ford Motor Argentina" label="Ford of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071280" start="516" end="530" title="Chevrolet S-10" label="Chevrolet S-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071143" start="539" end="557" title="Chevrolet Colorado" label="Chevrolet Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146685" start="796" end="804" title="Ford F-Series" label="F-Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467907" start="1021" end="1032" title="Ford Ranger (T6)" label="Ford Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689444" start="1162" end="1181" title="Louisville Assembly Plant" label="Louisville Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="1183" end="1203" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481218" start="1206" end="1221" title="Edison Assembly" label="Edison Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q746801" start="1223" end="1241" title="Edison, New Jersey" label="Edison, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858109" start="1248" end="1268" title="Twin Cities Assembly Plant" label="Twin Cities Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="1270" end="1291" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976635" start="1448" end="1477" title="Wayne Stamping &amp;amp; Assembly" label="Wayne Stamping &amp;amp; Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q125225" start="1479" end="1494" title="Wayne, Michigan" label="Wayne, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q99659096" start="1542" end="1563" title="Pacheco Stamping and Assembly" label="General Pacheco plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1974" end="1985" title="Mazda B-Series#Ford Courier" label="Mazda B1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q124135030" start="2451" end="2464" title="Ford F-Series (fifth generation)" label="Ford F-Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="2983" end="2999" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963394" start="3018" end="3029" title="Chicken tax" label="Chicken Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024680" start="3081" end="3099" title="Chassis cab" label="chassis-cab trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q744139" start="3683" end="3687" title="CAFE" label="CAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042317" start="3992" end="4007" title="fuel efficiency" label="fuel efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="4474" end="4485" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q910274" start="4837" end="4850" title="transfer case" label="transfer case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="5411" end="5427" title="1979 oil crisis" label="1979 fuel crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175794" start="5509" end="5517" title="Ford LTD (Americas)" label="Ford LTD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467755" start="5527" end="5540" title="Ford F-Series (seventh generation)" label="Ford F-Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467755" start="5648" end="5672" title="Ford F-Series (seventh generation)" label="redesign of the F-Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294993" start="5689" end="5701" title="Donald Petersen" label="Don Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="5769" end="5783" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071280" start="5853" end="5876" title="Chevrolet S-10" label="Chevrolet S-10/GMC S-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689444" start="6401" end="6426" title="Louisville Assembly Plant" label="Louisville Assembly Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="6430" end="6450" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481218" start="6523" end="6538" title="Edison Assembly" label="Edison Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q746801" start="6542" end="6560" title="Edison, New Jersey" label="Edison, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858109" start="6635" end="6661" title="Twin Cities Assembly Plant" label="Twin Cities Assembly Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="6665" end="6683" title="St Paul, Minnesota" label="St Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773786" start="6994" end="7009" title="The Way Forward" label="The Way Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102943" start="7588" end="7593" title="Orkin" label="Orkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="7779" end="7800" title="sport-utility vehicle" label="sport-utility vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837449" start="8080" end="8103" title="Michigan Assembly Plant" label="Michigan Assembly Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q209029" start="8149" end="8159" title="Ford Focus" label="Ford Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q914079" start="8164" end="8174" title="Ford C-Max" label="Ford C-Max"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8374" end="8417" title="North American International Auto Show#2017" label="2017 North American International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689444" start="8590" end="8600" title="Louisville Assembly Plant" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071280" start="8746" end="8760" title="Chevrolet S-10" label="Chevrolet S-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436747" start="9148" end="9162" title="Ford Bronco II" label="Ford Bronco II"/>
<link wikidata="Q598084" start="9489" end="9502" title="Ford Explorer" label="Ford Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309241" start="9912" end="9923" title="Twin I-Beam" label="Twin I-Beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405703" start="9966" end="9981" title="Unsprung mass" label="unsprung weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436704" start="10540" end="10556" title="Ford Pinto engine" label="&amp;quot;Lima&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467695" start="10603" end="10625" title="Ford Cologne V6 engine" label="&amp;quot;Cologne V6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467994" start="10641" end="10662" title="Ford Vulcan engine" label="&amp;quot;Vulcan V6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798344" start="11475" end="11495" title="Mazda M5OD transmission" label="M5OD-R1 transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="16347" end="16349" title="V6 engine" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500099" start="16470" end="16483" title="anti-roll bar" label="anti-roll bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747980" start="16662" end="16677" title="Ford Taurus SHO" label="Ford Taurus SHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467869" start="16719" end="16729" title="Ford Mustang (third generation)" label="Mustang GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467924" start="16794" end="16800" title="Ford SHO V6 engine" label="SHO V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q598084" start="17233" end="17246" title="Ford Explorer" label="Ford Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="17425" end="17430" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302203" start="17472" end="17493" title="Mazda B series" label="B-Series pickup truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309241" start="17887" end="17898" title="Swing axle" label="Twin-I-Beam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18184" end="18195" title="Dana 35#Independent front suspension (IFS) Dana 35 axle" label="Dana 35 TTB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798344" start="19002" end="19006" title="Mazda M5OD transmission" label="M5OD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467669" start="19093" end="19097" title="Ford A4LD transmission" label="A4LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467945" start="19769" end="19780" title="Ford Taurus (first generation)" label="Ford Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868945" start="19943" end="19955" title="Dodge Dakota" label="Dodge Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q423029" start="20346" end="20357" title="R134a" label="R134a Freon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510608" start="20666" end="20676" title="ISO 7736" label="double DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q124871" start="20677" end="20692" title="head unit" label="radio head unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467910" start="23588" end="23602" title="Ford Ranger EV" label="Ford Ranger EV"/>
<link wikidata="Q287647" start="23677" end="23701" title="Ford Explorer Sport Trac" label="Ford Explorer Sport Trac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24969" end="24989" title="Double wishbone suspension#Short long arms suspension" label="short/long-arm (SLA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467780" start="25698" end="25708" title="Ford Focus (first generation)" label="Ford Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798344" start="26164" end="26173" title="Mazda M5OD transmission" label="M5OD-R1HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467757" start="26779" end="26789" title="Ford F-Series (tenth generation)" label="1997 F-150"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467747" start="27164" end="27169" title="Ford F-Series (eleventh generation)" label="F-150"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="29487" end="29493" title="Sirius XM Radio" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467636" start="30716" end="30734" title="Ford 8.8 axle" label="Ford 8.8 rear axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571585" start="30742" end="30767" title="limited-slip differential" label="limited-slip differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535041" start="30778" end="30788" title="skid plate" label="skid plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581540" start="33023" end="33036" title="Toyota Tacoma" label="Toyota Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042346" start="33465" end="33503" title="Insurance Institute for Highway Safety" label="Insurance Institute for Highway Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q595839" start="33535" end="33563" title="electronic stability control" label="electronic stability control"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042346" start="33657" end="33695" title="Insurance Institute for Highway Safety" label="Insurance Institute for Highway Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467907" start="33930" end="33954" title="Ford Ranger (fourth generation)" label="fourth-generation Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467907" start="34205" end="34214" title="Ford Ranger (T6)" label="Ranger T6"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837449" start="34942" end="34965" title="Michigan Assembly Plant" label="Michigan Assembly Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q125225" start="34969" end="34984" title="Wayne, Michigan" label="Wayne, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="35314" end="35338" title="battery electric vehicle" label="battery electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467910" start="35378" end="35392" title="Ford Ranger EV" label="Ford Ranger EV"/>
<link wikidata="Q337724" start="35448" end="35467" title="lead-acid batteries" label="lead-acid batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q308567" start="35469" end="35496" title="Nickel metal hydride battery" label="Nickel metal hydride (NiMH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179415" start="35712" end="35719" title="de Dion tube" label="de Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798354" start="36284" end="36303" title="Mazda North American Operations" label="Mazda North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963394" start="36730" end="36741" title="chicken tax" label="chicken tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="39433" end="39442" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467695" start="39534" end="39541" title="Ford Cologne V6 engine" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="39621" end="39633" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436915" start="39653" end="39688" title="Ford Motor Company of Argentina" label="Ford General Pacheco Assembly Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536609" start="39965" end="39974" title="two-wheel drive" label="two-wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="39979" end="39995" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q215601" start="40227" end="40237" title="crew cab" label="double cab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40949" end="40975" title="List of Ford engines#4 cylinder" label="turbocharged four-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="40976" end="40982" title="diesel engine" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48872" start="41117" end="41122" title="Eaton Corporation" label="Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q99659096" start="41548" end="41571" title="Pacheco Stamping and Assembly" label="General Pacheco factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q720050" start="42411" end="42433" title="compressed natural gas" label="compressed natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162927" start="42493" end="42512" title="natural gas vehicle" label="natural gas vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467907" start="42637" end="42646" title="Ford Ranger (T6)" label="Ranger T6"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969510" wikidata="Q221207" url="?curid=969510" title="Lazer Guided Melodies">
<text>Lazer Guided Melodies is the debut studio album by English space rock band Spiritualized. The album was recorded by the inaugural line up of the band, consisting of Jason Pierce (vocals, guitars), Mark Refoy (guitars), Will Carruthers (bass), Jonny Mattock (drums) and Kate Radley (keyboards) from 1990 to 1991, and mixed by Pierce in London in January 1992. The album was first released on Dedicated Records in March 1992, on cassette, Compact Disc and Vinyl (2 x LP, with initial copies containing an additional free 7&quot;).

Initially released on two 45rpm vinyl LPs, the album&#x27;s twelve songs are segued together into four colour-coded (red, green, blue, black), cross-faded suites. As such, the album was included in &quot;Pitchfork&quot;″s 2010 list of &quot;ten unusual CD-era gimmicks&quot;.

By 1995, the album had sold 10,000 copies in the United States.

==Background==
&quot;Lazer Guided Melodies&quot; is unique in Jason Pierce&#x27;s oeuvre as it simultaneously explores motorik, minimalist music, and space rock while subtly using &quot;meticulously detailed, layered instrumentation, the sumptuous deployment of horns and strings&quot; to create cinematic, textured, and deeply narcotic soundscapes. Pierce reported that the album cost £3800 to produce. 

Critic Simon Reynolds wrote in his &quot;Melody Maker&quot; review of the album:

==Music==
The album is described musically as dream pop, space rock, and shoegaze.

==Critical reception and legacy==
&quot;Lazer Guided Melodies&quot; was included in the book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot;. In 2016, Vinyl Me, Please listed the album as one of the &quot;10 Best Shoegaze Albums to Own on Vinyl&quot;. In 2017, &quot;NME&quot; ranked the album at number 2 on its list of the &quot;10 Best Shoegaze Albums Ever&quot;. In 2018, &quot;Pitchfork&quot; ranked the album at number 11 on its list of &quot;The 30 Best Dream Pop Albums.&quot; &quot;The Quietus&quot; said that the album&#x27;s &quot;cosmic prettiness&quot; anticipated dream pop. While reviewing its 2021 reissue, &quot;Pitchfork&quot; described it as &quot;one of the most gentle rock records of its time&quot; and stated that &quot;Spiritualized seemed to emerge from the ether perfectly realized, creating rock music that was serene, spaced-out, and untroubled.&quot; Music critic Jim DeRogatis called &quot;Lazer Guided Melodies&quot; “one of the most enchanting psychedelic rock albums ever made.”

==Track listing==
On the LP edition, tracks 1–3 are the &quot;Red&quot; section, tracks 4–7 are the &quot;Green&quot; section, tracks 8–9 are the &quot;Blue&quot; section, and tracks 10–12 are the &quot;Black&quot; section. Track 4, &quot;Run&quot;, contains elements of &quot;Call Me the Breeze&quot; by J. J. Cale and &quot;Run Run Run&quot; by The Velvet Underground.

==Personnel==
Credits adapted from liner notes.
Spiritualized
* Jason Pierce – guitar (Fender Telecaster, Eko Rocket, acoustic guitar), dulcimer, autoharp, piano, vocals
* Kate Radley – keyboards (Vox Continental, Farfisa, piano), vocals
* Mark Refoy – guitar (Gretsch Country Gent, Epiphone Casino, Fender Telecaster), acoustic guitar, dulcimer
* Will Carruthers – bass (Gibson Thunderbird)
* Jonny Mattock – drums, percussion, dulcimer

Additional musicians
* Simon Clarke – flute
* Roddy Lorimer – trumpet
* Will Gregory – saxophone
* Colin Humphries – cello
* Martin Robinson – cello
* Owen John – violin

Technical personnel
* Jason Pierce – production, mixing
* Barry Clempson – mixing, engineering, production
* Angus Wallace – engineering
* Declan O&#x27;Regan – engineering
* Mike Long – engineering
* Paul Adkins – engineering
* Chris Blair – mastering
* Gavin Lindsay – artwork
* Pete Gardner – photographer
* Andrew Sutton – sleeve design
* Albert Tupelo – sleeve design
==Charts==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="35" end="47" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q236913" start="59" end="69" title="space rock" label="space rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144015" start="75" end="88" title="Spiritualized" label="Spiritualized"/>
<link wikidata="Q327117" start="165" end="177" title="Jason Pierce" label="Jason Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540946" start="197" end="207" title="Mark Refoy" label="Mark Refoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002739" start="219" end="234" title="Will Carruthers" label="Will Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271209" start="243" end="256" title="Jonny Mattock" label="Jonny Mattock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193978" start="269" end="280" title="Kate Radley" label="Kate Radley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609269" start="391" end="408" title="Dedicated Records" label="Dedicated Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="734" end="743" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q327117" start="934" end="946" title="Jason Pierce" label="Jason Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949856" start="991" end="998" title="motorik" label="motorik"/>
<link wikidata="Q572901" start="1000" end="1016" title="minimalist music" label="minimalist music"/>
<link wikidata="Q236913" start="1022" end="1032" title="space rock" label="space rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q202676" start="1285" end="1299" title="Simon Reynolds" label="Simon Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="1319" end="1331" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q592330" start="1406" end="1415" title="dream pop" label="dream pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q236913" start="1417" end="1427" title="space rock" label="space rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q272167" start="1433" end="1441" title="shoegaze" label="shoegaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="1543" end="1583" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="1716" end="1719" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="1831" end="1840" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759110" start="1940" end="1951" title="The Quietus" label="The Quietus"/>
<link wikidata="Q723229" start="2342" end="2355" title="Jim DeRogatis" label="Jim DeRogatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021569" start="2739" end="2757" title="Call Me the Breeze" label="Call Me the Breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q44833" start="2767" end="2777" title="J. J. Cale" label="J. J. Cale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379527" start="2788" end="2799" title="Run Run Run (The Velvet Underground song)" label="Run Run Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="2809" end="2831" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q327117" start="2898" end="2910" title="Jason Pierce" label="Jason Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="2921" end="2938" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Fender Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q370915" start="2980" end="2988" title="autoharp" label="autoharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193978" start="3006" end="3017" title="Kate Radley" label="Kate Radley"/>
<link wikidata="Q584508" start="3031" end="3046" title="Vox Continental" label="Vox Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396593" start="3048" end="3055" title="Farfisa" label="Farfisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540946" start="3074" end="3084" title="Mark Refoy" label="Mark Refoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061402" start="3095" end="3102" title="Gretsch" label="Gretsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347244" start="3117" end="3132" title="Epiphone Casino" label="Epiphone Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="3134" end="3151" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Fender Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002739" start="3182" end="3197" title="Will Carruthers" label="Will Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q584917" start="3206" end="3224" title="Gibson Thunderbird" label="Gibson Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271209" start="3228" end="3241" title="Jonny Mattock" label="Jonny Mattock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969517" wikidata="Q7565056" url="?curid=969517" title="Soup with risotto">
<text>Soup with Risotto is a dish in Italian-American cuisine made with risotto, eggs, bread crumbs, and clear or brown soup. It is commonly made when one has risotto leftover after a meal. The risotto is made into little balls the size of small nuts. These are then covered in egg and bread crumbs and fried in butter. After being dried they are added to either clear or brown soup.

Similar recipes in Italy are supplì and arancini, in which the balls are made (actually a little bigger than eggs), but they are not added to soup and are rather eaten on their own.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7565056" start="0" end="17" title="Soup with risotto" label="Soup with Risotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699131" start="31" end="55" title="Italian-American cuisine" label="Italian-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208105" start="66" end="73" title="risotto" label="risotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="75" end="79" title="egg (food)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q658413" start="81" end="92" title="bread crumb" label="bread crumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="114" end="118" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="387" end="393" title="recipe" label="recipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="398" end="403" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q250966" start="408" end="414" title="supplì" label="supplì"/>
<link wikidata="Q268857" start="419" end="427" title="arancini" label="arancini"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969529" wikidata="Q7966465" url="?curid=969529" title="Walter Wyatt">
<text>Walter Wyatt (July 20, 1893 – February 26, 1978) was an American lawyer, who served as the twelfth Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States.

Born in Savannah, Georgia, Wyatt received his LL.B. from the University of Virginia in 1917. During World War I, Wyatt worked as legal adviser to the Selective Service System, the federal agency charged with enforcing the newly implemented military draft. From 1922 to 1946, he was an attorney for the Federal Reserve System, ending his career there as General Counsel of the agency, and from 1936 to 1946, he also served as counsel to a related agency, the Federal Open Market Committee. During this period, Wyatt also authored several books on banking law.

Wyatt was appointed as the Supreme Court&#x27;s Reporter of Decisions on March 1, 1946, after the post had been vacant for two years following the death of Ernest Knaebel. He retroactively edited the volumes of the &quot;United States Reports&quot; covering those two years, volumes 322 to 325.

Wyatt died in Washington, D.C., in 1978. His papers are held at the Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library at the University of Virginia.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7966465" start="0" end="12" title="Walter Wyatt" label="Walter Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="99" end="120" title="Supreme Court of the United States Reporter of Decisions" label="Reporter of Decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="128" end="162" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="173" end="190" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="211" end="216" title="LL.B." label="LL.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="226" end="248" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="265" end="276" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="315" end="339" title="Selective Service System" label="Selective Service System"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="405" end="419" title="military draft" label="military draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="467" end="489" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve System"/>
<link wikidata="Q564612" start="518" end="533" title="General Counsel" label="General Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289022" start="623" end="652" title="Federal Open Market Committee" label="Federal Open Market Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="711" end="718" title="banking" label="banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393397" start="881" end="895" title="Ernest Knaebel" label="Ernest Knaebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1035" end="1051" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q15179080" start="1089" end="1141" title="Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library" label="Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="1149" end="1171" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969538" wikidata="Q1451040" url="?curid=969538" title="Le Faisceau">
<text>Le Faisceau (, &quot;The Fasces&quot;) was a short-lived French fascist political party. It was founded on 11 November 1925 as a far right league by Georges Valois. It was preceded by its newspaper, &quot;Le Nouveau Siècle&quot;, which had been founded as a weekly on February 26 but became a daily after the party&#x27;s creation.

==Creation==
Contributors to &quot;Le Nouveau Siècle&quot; originally included Valois, Jacques Arthuys, Philippe Barrès, Hubert Bourgin, Eugène Mathon, Henri Massis and Xavier Vallat. After the foundation of the party it was the object of bitter attacks from the Action Française, who considered it a potential rival, and most well-known names were intimidated. Arthuys, Barrès and Mathon were among those who remained.

The &quot;Faisceau&quot; had borrowed its name from the Italian &quot;Fasci&quot; and the National Fascist Party (PNF), and also adopted their paramilitary style - with uniforms, staged ceremonies and parades; it also expressed admiration for Benito Mussolini. Even extensive investigations by the French police failed to reveal any links, official or unofficial with the PNF and Italy. Many of its ideas were ones already established in the French far right milieu, deriving mostly from the work of Maurice Barrès. Valois claimed that Barrès&#x27; &quot;Le Cocarde&quot; had been the first Fascist newspaper.

==Authoritarianism and corporatism==
They included a &quot;&quot;national&quot; state&quot; (i.e. for the benefit of all social classes, rather than the existing &quot;bourgeois&quot; state or the Marxist proletarian state) with a strong, authoritarian leader. Thus, its stated aims included a coup d&#x27;état and a dictatorship, although it never took any concrete steps towards achieving these ends. Nor was it clear who the dictator was to be — Valois himself did not indicate a willingness to occupy the position, and Maxime Weygand may have been the preferred candidate of some members of the &quot;Faisceau&quot;.

The &quot;Faisceau&quot; ran into serious problems almost as soon as it was founded. Valois — a former anarcho-syndicalist who had converted to Orléanism and joined the Action Française (leaving the group after the World War I) — and the industrialists who financed the party, such as Eugène Mathon (the owner of a large textile firm) and the perfume manufacturer François Coty all claimed to favour corporatism as the basis for economic organisation. Nonetheless, it soon became clear that they had rather different ideas about what the term meant. For Valois, it arguably meant a form of producerism, with an economy to be run by the producers (everyone involved in manufacturing goods), whereas Mathon interpreted it as an amended &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism, where businessmen like himself should be in charge, with no interference by the state.

These differences led to Mathon and Coty leaving shortly after the foundation of the party, placing it in a precarious financial situation, made worse by the commercial failure of &quot;Le Nouveau Siècle&quot; following the Action Française&#x27;s attacks.

==Valois&#x27;s version of fascism==
Valois considered Fascism to be a revolt against &quot;bourgeois rule&quot;, and as such it had much in common with Marxism — he described them as &quot;&quot;brother enemies&quot;. The &quot;Faisceau&quot; never questioned the existence of private property, but Valois nonetheless felt that socialism was not his main enemy; he stated that fascism had &quot;exactly the same object as socialism&quot;, even if he viewed the latter as flawed in its means of achieving that end.

The party tried to place itself above the left-right division, but this particular outlook turned out to be a source of further problems. Most of its militants came from the right, particularly the far-right (this serves to explain the Action Française&#x27;s hostility: many Action Française militants joined &quot;Faisceau&quot;, being disillusioned with the lack of dynamism maintained by Charles Maurras, the group&#x27;s acute Roman Catholic and Orléanist conservatism, and its primary functioning as a literary society). It worked hard to recruit people from the left, with some success: notably, Marcel Delagrange, former French Communist Party (PCF) mayor of Périgueux, and the anarcho-syndicalist (and future Vichy Régime minister) Hubert Lagardelle. One notable member was Marcel Bucard, who would later found the Mouvement Franciste and collaborate extensively with the Nazi authorities during the German occupation of France.

These minor victories were never proportionate to the effort invested by the &quot;Faisceau&quot;, and the group failed to expand at the left&#x27;s expense, while becoming the enemy of the right - unlike in Italy, the latter was strong and confident enough not to rely on Fascists against the left.

The Faisceau&#x27;s aims were indeed radical, but its actions did not live up to them. The party did form paramilitary &quot;Légions&quot;&quot; — but they usually functioned as self-defence against attacks by the Action Française&#x27;s &quot;Camelots du Roi&quot;. They rarely clashed with police forces, and their only major engagement with the PCF was at the party&#x27;s meeting in Rheims on 27 June 1926. Those who had joined hoping for revolutionary action began to leave, and, by the end of 1926, the party was losing militants fast - a decline was hastened by the formation of a right-wing government under Raymond Poincaré, and the stabilisation of the franc.

The &quot;Faisceau&quot; ceased to exist in 1928. Valois himself, whose politics were becoming more left-wing, was excluded from the party, the remains of which founded the &quot;Parti Fasciste Révolutionnaire&quot;.
==Bibliography==
*Arnold, Edward, editor (2000). &quot;The Development of the Radical Right in France: From Boulanger to le Pen&quot;. London: Macmillan.
*Carsten, Francis (1980). &quot;The Rise of Fascism&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press.
*Halls, W. D. (1995). &quot;Politics, Society, and Christianity in Vichy France&quot;. Oxford: Berg.
*Morgan, Philip (2002). &quot;Fascism in Europe, 1919-1945&quot;. London: Routledge.
*Payne, Stanley (1996). &quot; A History of Fascism, 1914-1945&quot;. London: Routledge.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1451040" start="0" end="11" title="Le Faisceau" label="Le Faisceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="57" end="63" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="64" end="71" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="72" end="87" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240332" start="129" end="145" title="far right league" label="far right league"/>
<link wikidata="Q545580" start="149" end="163" title="Georges Valois" label="Georges Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158151" start="420" end="435" title="Jacques Arthuys" label="Jacques Arthuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379306" start="437" end="452" title="Philippe Barrès" label="Philippe Barrès"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141940" start="454" end="468" title="Hubert Bourgin" label="Hubert Bourgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131604" start="485" end="497" title="Henri Massis" label="Henri Massis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291608" start="502" end="515" title="Xavier Vallat" label="Xavier Vallat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="596" end="612" title="Action Française" label="Action Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="810" end="817" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660946" start="824" end="829" title="Fascio" label="Fasci"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="844" end="866" title="National Fascist Party" label="National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="897" end="909" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434" start="923" end="930" title="uniform" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q657449" start="955" end="961" title="parade" label="parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="997" end="1013" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="1203" end="1212" title="far right" label="far right"/>
<link wikidata="Q314957" start="1254" end="1268" title="Maurice Barrès" label="Maurice Barrès"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="1486" end="1498" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="1533" end="1542" title="Bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="1562" end="1569" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q118365" start="1570" end="1587" title="Dictatorship of the proletariat" label="proletarian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="1604" end="1624" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="1659" end="1675" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="1682" end="1694" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q170357" start="1888" end="1902" title="Maxime Weygand" label="Maxime Weygand"/>
<link wikidata="Q188993" start="2090" end="2109" title="anarchosyndicalism" label="anarcho-syndicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q431192" start="2131" end="2140" title="Orléanist" label="Orléanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2202" end="2213" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="2225" end="2239" title="Business magnate" label="industrialists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2272" end="2285" title="Eugène Mathon" label="Eugène Mathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332383" start="2351" end="2364" title="François Coty" label="François Coty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="2387" end="2398" title="corporatism" label="corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247692" start="2577" end="2588" title="producerism" label="producerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="2655" end="2668" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="2727" end="2740" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="2747" end="2757" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="3383" end="3399" title="Property (ownership right)" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3434" end="3443" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921172" start="3663" end="3682" title="Left-Right politics" label="left-right division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="4013" end="4028" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4053" end="4067" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q431192" start="4072" end="4081" title="Orléanist" label="Orléanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="4082" end="4094" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q497893" start="4129" end="4145" title="literary society" label="literary society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4224" end="4241" title="Marcel Delagrange" label="Marcel Delagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="4250" end="4272" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588" start="4288" end="4297" title="Périgueux" label="Périgueux"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="4339" end="4351" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q552471" start="4362" end="4379" title="Hubert Lagardelle" label="Hubert Lagardelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q468019" start="4404" end="4417" title="Marcel Bucard" label="Marcel Bucard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323813" start="4445" end="4464" title="Mouvement Franciste" label="Mouvement Franciste"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="4502" end="4506" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="4530" end="4557" title="German military administration in occupied France during World War II" label="German occupation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="4967" end="4979" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="5248" end="5254" title="Rheims" label="Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="5304" end="5314" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="5477" end="5493" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881382" start="5503" end="5529" title="Franc Poincaré" label="stabilisation of the franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="5972" end="5996" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969540" wikidata="Q1545770" url="?curid=969540" title="Limiting magnitude">
<text>In astronomy, limiting magnitude is the faintest apparent magnitude of a celestial body that is detectable or detected by a given instrument.

In some cases, limiting magnitude refers to the upper threshold of detection. In more formal uses, limiting magnitude is specified along with the strength of the signal (e.g., &quot;10th magnitude at 20 sigma&quot;). Sometimes limiting magnitude is qualified by the purpose of the instrument (e.g., &quot;10th magnitude for photometry&quot;) This statement recognizes that a photometric detector can detect light far fainter than it can reliably measure.

The limiting magnitude of an instrument is often cited for ideal conditions, but environmental conditions impose further practical limits. These include weather, moonlight, skyglow, and light pollution. The International Dark-Sky Association has been vocal in championing the cause of reducing skyglow and light pollution.

==Naked-eye visibility==

The limiting magnitude for naked eye visibility refers to the faintest stars that can be seen with the unaided eye near the zenith on clear moonless nights. The quantity is most often used as an overall indicator of sky brightness, in that light polluted and humid areas generally have brighter limiting magnitudes than remote desert or high altitude areas. The limiting magnitude will depend on the observer, and will increase with the eye&#x27;s dark adaptation. On a relatively clear sky, the limiting visibility will be about 6th magnitude. However, the limiting visibility is 7th magnitude for faint stars visible from dark rural areas located from major cities. (See the Bortle scale.)

There is even variation within metropolitan areas. For those who live in the immediate suburbs of New York City, the limiting magnitude might be 4.0. This corresponds to roughly 250 visible stars, or one-tenth of the number that is visible under perfectly dark skies. From the boroughs of New York City outside Manhattan (Brooklyn, Queens, Staten Island, and the Bronx), the limiting magnitude might be 3.0, suggesting that at best, only about 50 stars might be seen at any one time. From brightly lit Midtown Manhattan, the limiting magnitude is possibly 2.0, meaning that from the heart of New York City only about 15 stars will be visible at any given time.

From relatively dark suburban areas, the limiting magnitude is frequently closer to 5 or somewhat fainter, but from very remote and clear sites, some amateur astronomers can see nearly as faint as 8th magnitude. Many basic observing references quote a limiting magnitude of 6, as this is the approximate limit of star maps which date from before the invention of the telescope. Ability in this area, which requires the use of averted vision, varies substantially from observer to observer, with both youth and experience being beneficial.

Limiting magnitude is traditionally estimated by searching for faint stars of known magnitude. In 2013 an app was developed based on Google&#x27;s Sky Map that allows non-specialists to estimate the limiting magnitude in polluted areas using their phone.

==Modelling magnitude limits==
We see stars if they have sufficient contrast against the background sky. A star&#x27;s brightness (more precisely its illuminance) must exceed the sky&#x27;s surface brightness (i.e. luminance) by a sufficient amount. Earth&#x27;s sky is never completely black – even in the absence of light pollution there is a natural airglow that limits what can be seen. The astronomer H.D. Curtis reported his naked-eye limit as 6.53, but by looking at stars through a hole in a black screen (i.e. against a totally dark background) was able to see one of magnitude 8.3, and possibly one of 8.9.

Naked-eye magnitude limits can be modelled theoretically using laboratory data on human contrast thresholds at various background brightness levels. Andrew Crumey has done this using data from experiments where subjects viewed artificial light sources under controlled conditions. Crumey showed that for a sky background with surface brightness formula_1, the visual limit formula_2 could be expressed as:
formula_3
where formula_4 is a &quot;field factor&quot; specific to the observer and viewing situation. The very darkest skies have a zenith surface brightness of approximately 22 mag arcsec−2, so it can be seen from the equation that such a sky would be expected to show stars approximately 0.4 mag fainter than one with a surface brightness of 21 mag arcsec−2. Crumey speculated that for most people formula_4 will lie between about 1.4 and 2.4, with formula_6 being typical. This would imply formula_7 at the darkest sites, consistent with the traditionally accepted value, though substantially poorer than what is often claimed by modern amateur observers.

To explain the discrepancy, Crumey pointed out that his formula assumed sustained visibility rather than momentary glimpses. He reported that &quot;scintillation can lead to sudden &#x27;flashes&#x27; with a brightening of 1 to 2 mag lasting a hundredth of a second.&quot; He commented, &quot;The activities of amateur astronomers can lie anywhere between science and recreational sport. If the latter, then the individual&#x27;s concern with limiting magnitude may be to maximise it, whereas for science a main interest should be consistency of measurement.&quot; He recommended that &quot;For the purposes of visibility recommendations aimed at the general public it is preferable to consider typical rather than exceptional performance... Stars should be continuously visible (with direct or averted vision) for some extended period (e.g. at least a second or two) rather than be seen to flash momentarily.&quot;

Crumey&#x27;s formula, stated above, is an approximation to a more general one he obtained in photometric units. He obtained other approximations in astronomical units for skies ranging from moderately light polluted to truly dark.
formula_8
If an observer knows their own SQM (i.e. sky brightness formula_9 measured by a sky quality meter), and establishes their actual limiting magnitude, they can work out their own formula_4 from these formulae. Crumey recommended that for accurate results, the observer should ascertain the V-magnitude of the faintest steadily visible star to one decimal place, and for highest accuracy should also record the colour index and convert to a standard value. Crumey showed that if the limit is formula_11 at colour index formula_12, then the limit at colour index zero is approximately formula_13

Some sample values are tabulated below. The general result is that a gain of 1 SQM in sky darkness equates to a gain in magnitude limit of roughly 0.3 to 0.4.

== Visual magnitude limit with a telescope ==
The aperture (or more formally entrance pupil) of a telescope is larger than the human eye pupil, so collects more light, concentrating it at the exit pupil where the observer&#x27;s own pupil is (usually) placed. The result is increased illuminance – stars are effectively brightened. At the same time, magnification darkens the background sky (i.e. reduces its luminance). Therefore stars normally invisible to the naked eye become visible in the telescope. Further increasing the magnification makes the sky look even darker in the eyepiece, but there is a limit to how far this can be taken. One reason is that as magnification increases, the exit pupil gets smaller, resulting in a poorer image – an effect that can be seen by looking through a small pinhole in daylight. Another reason is that star images are not perfect points of light; atmospheric turbulence creates a blurring effect referred to as seeing. A third reason is that if magnification can be pushed sufficiently high, the sky background will become effectively black, and cannot be darkened any further. This happens at a background surface brightness of approximately 25 mag arcsec−2, where only &#x27;dark light&#x27; (neural noise) is perceived.

Various authors have stated the limiting magnitude of a telescope with entrance pupil formula_14 centimetres to be of the form
formula_15
with suggested values for the constant formula_16 ranging from 6.8 to 8.7. Crumey obtained a formula for formula_16 as a function of the sky surface brightness, telescope magnification, observer&#x27;s eye pupil diameter and other parameters including the personal factor formula_4 discussed above. Choosing parameter values thought typical of normal dark-site observations (e.g. eye pupil 0.7cm and formula_6) he found formula_20.

Crumey obtained his formula as an approximation to one he derived in photometric units from his general model of human contrast threshold. As an illustration, he calculated limiting magnitude as a function of sky brightness for a 100mm telescope at magnifications ranging from x25 to x200 (with other parameters given typical real-world values). Crumey found that a maximum of 12.7 mag could be achieved if magnification was sufficiently high and the sky sufficiently dark, so that the background in the eyepiece was effectively black. That limit corresponds to formula_16 = 7.7 in the formula above.

More generally, for situations where it is possible to raise a telescope&#x27;s magnification high enough to make the sky background effectively black, the limiting magnitude is approximated by
formula_22
where formula_14 and formula_4 are as stated above, formula_25 is the observer&#x27;s pupil diameter in centimetres, and formula_26 is the telescope transmittance (e.g. 0.75 for a typical reflector).

Telescopic limiting magnitudes were investigated empirically by I.S. Bowen at Mount Wilson Observatory in 1947, and Crumey was able to use Bowen&#x27;s data as a test of the theoretical model. Bowen did not record parameters such as his eye pupil diameter, naked-eye magnitude limit, or the extent of light loss in his telescopes; but because he made observations at a range of magnifications using three telescopes (with apertures 0.33 inch, 6 inch and 60 inch), Crumey was able to construct a system of simultaneous equations from which the remaining parameters could be deduced. Because Crumey used astronomical-unit approximations, and plotted on log axes, the limit &quot;curve&quot; for each telescope consisted of three straight sections, corresponding to exit pupil larger than eye pupil, exit pupil smaller, and sky background effectively black. Bowen&#x27;s anomalous limit at highest magnification with the 60-inch telescope was due to poor seeing. As well as vindicating the theoretical model, Crumey was able to show from this analysis that the sky brightness at the time of Bowen&#x27;s observations was approximately 21.27 mag arcsec−2, highlighting the rapid growth of light pollution at Mount Wilson in the second half of the twentieth century.

==Large observatories==
Telescopes at large observatories are typically located at sites selected for dark skies. They also increase the limiting magnitude by using long integration times on the detector, and by using image-processing techniques to increase the signal to noise ratio. Most 8 to 10 meter class telescopes can detect sources with a visual magnitude of about 27 using a one-hour integration time.
Automated astronomical surveys are often limited to around magnitude 20 because of the short exposure time that allows covering a large part of the sky in a night. In a 30 second exposure the 0.7-meter telescope at the Catalina Sky Survey has a limiting magnitude of 19.5. The Zwicky Transient Facility has a limiting magnitude of 20.5, and Pan-STARRS has a limiting magnitude of 24.

Even higher limiting magnitudes can be achieved for telescopes above the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, such as the Hubble Space Telescope, where the sky brightness due to the atmosphere is not relevant. For orbital telescopes, the background sky brightness is set by the zodiacal light. The Hubble telescope can detect objects as faint as a magnitude of +31.5, and the James Webb Space Telescope (operating in the infrared spectrum) is expected to exceed that.

==See also==
*Araucaria Project
*Night sky
*Dark-sky movement
*Ricco&#x27;s law

==References==
==External links==
*Estimating Limiting Magnitude at NinePlanets.org
*Telescope Limiting Magnitude Calculator
*Loss of the Night app for estimating limiting magnitude
*The Astronomical Magnitude Scale
*Astronomical Visibility (articles by Andrew Crumey)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3" end="12" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545770" start="14" end="32" title="Limiting magnitude" label="limiting magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="49" end="67" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="73" end="87" title="celestial body" label="celestial body"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="346" end="351" title="Standard deviation" label="sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="467" end="477" title="Photometry (astronomy)" label="photometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q826992" start="806" end="840" title="International Dark-Sky Association" label="International Dark-Sky Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126193" start="893" end="900" title="skyglow" label="skyglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="905" end="920" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="1073" end="1079" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537571" start="1165" end="1179" title="sky brightness" label="sky brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722595" start="1626" end="1638" title="Bortle scale" label="Bortle scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1740" end="1753" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="1919" end="1944" title="boroughs of New York City" label="boroughs of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="1953" end="1962" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1964" end="1972" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="1974" end="1980" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="1982" end="1995" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="2001" end="2010" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="2144" end="2161" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014785" start="2730" end="2744" title="averted vision" label="averted vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927806" start="2991" end="2998" title="Sky Map" label="Sky Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q690182" start="3168" end="3176" title="Contrast (vision)" label="contrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q194411" start="3250" end="3261" title="illuminance" label="illuminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="3290" end="3308" title="surface brightness" label="surface brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q355386" start="3315" end="3324" title="luminance" label="luminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="3418" end="3433" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q408723" start="3453" end="3460" title="airglow" label="airglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q349821" start="3506" end="3517" title="Heber Doust Curtis" label="H.D. Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q504303" start="3867" end="3880" title="Andrew Crumey" label="Andrew Crumey"/>
<link wikidata="Q538992" start="4934" end="4947" title="Twinkling" label="scintillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962644" start="6025" end="6042" title="sky quality meter" label="sky quality meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q129833" start="6233" end="6244" title="UBV photometric system" label="V-magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q271860" start="6353" end="6365" title="color index" label="colour index"/>
<link wikidata="Q359518" start="6775" end="6789" title="entrance pupil" label="entrance pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9397013" start="6890" end="6900" title="exit pupil" label="exit pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q194411" start="6982" end="6993" title="illuminance" label="illuminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q355386" start="7107" end="7116" title="luminance" label="luminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057006" start="7653" end="7659" title="Astronomical seeing" label="seeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q492305" start="7913" end="7935" title="Eigengrau" label="&amp;#x27;dark light&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q690182" start="8656" end="8674" title="Contrast (vision)" label="contrast threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q520866" start="9609" end="9619" title="Ira Sprague Bowen" label="I.S. Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="9623" end="9647" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q550089" start="11229" end="11248" title="astronomical survey" label="astronomical survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q349600" start="11312" end="11325" title="exposure time" label="exposure time"/>
<link wikidata="Q515838" start="11438" end="11457" title="Catalina Sky Survey" label="Catalina Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43401707" start="11496" end="11521" title="Zwicky Transient Facility" label="Zwicky Transient Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075600" start="11560" end="11570" title="Pan-STARRS" label="Pan-STARRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="11714" end="11736" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q204079" start="11870" end="11884" title="zodiacal light" label="zodiacal light"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="11968" end="11994" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="12013" end="12021" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166244" start="12075" end="12092" title="Araucaria Project" label="Araucaria Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="12094" end="12103" title="Night sky" label="Night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223097" start="12105" end="12122" title="Dark-sky movement" label="Dark-sky movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974341" start="12124" end="12140" title="Ricco&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ricco&amp;#x27;s law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969550" wikidata="Q1233770" url="?curid=969550" title="Iphigenia in Aulis">
<text>Iphigenia in Aulis or Iphigenia at Aulis (; variously translated, including the Latin &quot;Iphigenia in Aulide&quot;) is the last of the extant works by the playwright Euripides. Written between 408, after &quot;Orestes&quot;, and 406 BC, the year of Euripides&#x27; death, the play was first produced the following year in a trilogy with &quot;The Bacchae&quot; and &quot;Alcmaeon in Corinth&quot; by his son or nephew, Euripides the Younger, and won first place at the City Dionysia in Athens.

Set prior to the commencement of the Trojan War, &quot;Iphigenia at Aulis&quot; revolves around the strong resistance by Clytemnestra to the decision of her husband, Agamemnon, the leader of the Greek coalition before and during the Trojan War, to ritually sacrifice and kill his daughter, Iphigenia, to appease the goddess Artemis. This would allow his troops to set sail to preserve their honour in order to battle and ultimately sack Troy, actions which would result in the killing of all of Troy&#x27;s men and the enslavement of all of its women by Agamemnon and the Greek men. These latter events are central to several of the Greek tragedies such as Euripides&#x27; &quot;Hecuba&quot; and &quot;The Trojan Women&quot;, as well as Aeschylus&#x27; play &quot;Agamemnon&quot;.

The conflict in &quot;Iphigenia at Aulis&quot; also focuses closely on Iphigenia&#x27;s initial resistance to the idea of dying/being killed and her relationship with her father and, to a lesser degree, on a young Achilles, who is drawn into the situation by Agamemnon. Also known to the audience of Athenians who witnessed the play&#x27;s performance would have been the fact that, as a result of Agamemnon&#x27;s actions, after the war he will be killed upon his homecoming by his wife, Clytemnestra, and that she in turn will be killed by her son, Orestes, in order to avenge his father. All appear in &quot;Iphigenia at Aulis&quot;.

==Background==
The Greek fleet is waiting at Aulis, Boeotia, with its ships ready to sail for Troy, but is unable to depart due to a strange lack of wind. After consulting the seer Calchas, the Greek leaders learn that this is no mere meteorological abnormality but rather the will of the goddess Artemis, who is withholding the winds because Agamemnon has offended her because his men have killed a sacred stag.

Calchas informs the general that in order to appease the goddess, he must sacrifice his eldest daughter, Iphigenia. Agamemnon, in spite of his horror, must consider this seriously because his assembled troops, who have been waiting on the beach and are increasingly restless, may rebel if the delay continues. He sends a message to his wife, Clytemnestra, telling her to send Iphigenia to Aulis on the pretext that the girl is to be married to the Greek warrior Achilles before he sets off to fight.

==Plot==

At the start of the play, Agamemnon has second thoughts about going through with the sacrifice and sends a second message to his wife, telling her to ignore the first. Clytemnestra never receives it, however, because it is intercepted by Menelaus, Agamemnon&#x27;s brother, who is enraged over his change of heart.

To Menelaus, this is not only a personal blow (for it is his wife, Helen, with whom the Trojan prince Paris ran off, and whose retrieval is the main pretext for the war), it may also lead to mutiny and the downfall of the Greek leaders should the rank and file discover the prophecy and realise that their general has put his family above their pride as soldiers.

The brothers debate the matter and, eventually, each seemingly changes the other&#x27;s mind. Menelaus is apparently convinced that it would be better to disband the Greek army than to have his niece killed, but Agamemnon is now ready to carry out the sacrifice, claiming that the army will storm his palace at Argos and kill his entire family if he does not. By this time, Clytemnestra is already on her way to Aulis with Iphigenia and her baby brother Orestes, making the decision of how to proceed all the more difficult.
Iphigenia is thrilled at the prospect of marrying one of the great heroes of the Greek army, but she, her mother, and the ostensible groom-to-be soon discover the truth. Furious at having been used as a prop in Agamemnon&#x27;s plan, Achilles vows to defend Iphigenia, initially more for the purposes of his own honour than to save the innocent girl. However, when he tries to rally the Greeks against the sacrifice, he finds out that &quot;the entirety of Greece&quot;—including the Myrmidons under his personal command—demand that Agamemnon&#x27;s wishes be carried out, and he barely escapes being stoned.

Clytemnestra and Iphigenia try in vain to persuade Agamemnon to change his mind, but the general believes that he has no choice. As Achilles prepares to defend Iphigenia by force, Iphigenia, realizing that she has no hope of escape, begs Achilles not to throw his life away in a lost cause. Over her mother&#x27;s protests and to Achilles&#x27;s admiration, she consents to her sacrifice, declaring that she would rather die heroically, winning renown as the savior of Greece, than be dragged unwilling to the altar. Leading the chorus in a hymn to Artemis, she goes to her death, with her mother Clytemnestra so distraught as to presage her murder of her husband and Orestes&#x27;s matricide years later.

The play as it exists in the manuscripts ends with a messenger reporting that Iphigenia has been replaced on the altar by a deer. It is, however, generally considered that this is not an authentic part of Euripides&#x27; original text. &quot;Paley agrees with Porson in regarding the rest of the play after Iphigenia&#x27;s exit [lines 1510 to the end of the play] as the work of an interpolator&quot;. A fragment of the play may indicate that Artemis appeared to console Clytemnestra and assure her that her daughter had not been sacrificed after all, but if this is a surviving reference to Euripides&#x27; original ending, that ending is not extant.

== Associated myths ==
The first lines of the Chorus (Women of Chalcis) are:

&quot;To the sandy beach of sea-coast Aulis I came after a voyage through the tides of Euripus, leaving Chalcis on its narrow firth, my city which feedeth the waters of far famed Arethusa near the sea...&quot;

About the Arethusa myth:

&quot;The Sicilian well Arethusa, ...was believed to have a subterraneous communication with the river Alpheius, in Peloponnesus. According to Pausanias, Alpheius was a passionate hunter and fell in love with the nymph Arethusa, but she fled from him to the island of Ortygia near Syracuse, and metamorphosed herself into a well, whereupon Alpheius became a river, which flowing from Peloponnesus under the sea to Ortygia, there united its waters with those of the well Arethusa. This story is related somewhat differently by Ovid. Arethusa, a fair nymph, once while bathing in the river Alpheius in Arcadia, was surprised and pursued by the god; but Artemis took pity upon her and changed her into a well, which flowed under the earth to the island of Ortygia.&quot;

==Cultural influence==
The play inspired the tragedy &quot;Iphigénie&quot; (1674) by Jean Racine and was the basis of several operas in the eighteenth century, using librettos that drew from both Euripedes&#x27;s and Racine&#x27;s versions and had various plot variants. The earliest extant libretto is by Christian Heinrich Postel, &quot;Die wunderbar errettete Iphigenia&quot;, set by Reinhard Keiser in 1699. The most popular libretto was Apostolo Zeno&#x27;s &quot;Ifigenia in Aulide&quot; (1718), set by Antonio Caldara (1718), Giuseppe Maria Orlandini (1732), Giovanni Porta (1738), Nicola Porpora (1735), Girolamo Abos (1752), Giuseppe Sarti (1777), Angelo Tarchi (1785), and Giuseppe Giordani (1786). Other libretti include &quot;Ifigenia&quot; by Matteo Verazi (set by Niccolò Jommelli, 1751), that of Vittorio Amadeo Cigna-Santi (set by Ferdinando Bertoni, 1762 and Carlo Franchi, 1766), that of Luigi Serio (set by Vicente Martín y Soler, 1779 and Alessio Prati, 1784), and that of Ferdinando Moretti (set by Niccolò Antonio Zingarelli, 1787 and Luigi Cherubini, 1788). However, the best-known opera today is Christoph Willibald Gluck&#x27;s &quot;Iphigénie en Aulide&quot; (1774).

&quot;Iphigenia in Aulis&quot; has had a significant influence on modern art. Greek director Michael Cacoyannis based his 1977 film &quot;Iphigenia&quot; (starring Irene Papas as Clytemnestra) on Euripides&#x27;s script. The play also formed the basis for the 2003 novel &quot;The Songs of the Kings&quot; by Barry Unsworth, as well as the P. D. Q. Bach cantata &quot;Iphigenia in Brooklyn.&quot; Neil LaBute drew heavily on the story of Iphigenia for his short play &quot;Iphigenia in Orem&quot;, one of his Bash series.

US Latina playwright Caridad Svich&#x27;s 2004 multimedia play &quot;Iphigenia Crash Land Falls on the Neon Shell That Was Once Her Heart (a rave fable)&quot; is published in the international theatre journal TheatreForum, and also in the anthology &quot;Divine Fire: Eight Contemporary Plays Inspired by the Greeks&quot; published in 2005 by BackStage Books. The play re-sets Iphigenia&#x27;s story in and around Ciudad Juárez and the murders of the Women of Juárez.

Charles L. Mee, an American playwright, adapted the text for the modern theatre through his project, &quot;The Re-Making Project&quot;. Mee&#x27;s &quot;Iphigenia 2.0,&quot; which was inspired by Euripides&#x27;s &quot;Iphigenia in Aulis&quot;, incorporates some texts from Alan Stuart-Smyth, Jim Graves, Jim Morris, Gaby Bashan, Richard Holmes, Richard Heckler, Dave Grossman, Wilfred Owen, and Anthony Swofford. The New York World Premiere of this version of &quot;Iphigenia 2.0&quot; was originally produced by Signature Theatre Company, New York City, and was described in the &quot;New York Times&quot; review as a &quot;proudly unfaithful and rather tedious version of Euripides&#x27; &quot;Iphigenia at Aulis.&quot; &quot;

Greek director Yorgos Lanthimos based his 2017 film &quot;The Killing of a Sacred Deer&quot; loosely on the story of Agamemnon.

Image Comics plans a graphic novel version of the play to be released in May 2022, written by Edward Einhorn and with art by Eric Shanower. 
==Themes==
Gender Roles: The role of gender in Iphigenia in Aulis becomes very clear as the work progresses. Ancient Greek culture is very male-dominated, with a majority of Greek warriors and heroes being of that gender. Women in Greek culture had no political rights or rights over their own bodies - their job was to bear children and listen to their husbands (or their fathers, if they are unmarried). In Iphigenia in Aulis, Iphigenia herself makes this difference very clear. Iphigenia’s father, Agamemnon, summons her to Aulis, under the false guise that she is to marry one of the heroes there, Achilles. As a woman, she herself has no true choice in who she marries, as it is her father’s job to select and approve of a man for her marriage. Even when Achilles and Agamemnon reveal the truth, Iphigenia knows that she has no choice, so she is forced to beg her father to change his mind. Eventually, she concludes that her sacrifice would be worth the furthering of the war. She herself notes that it would be “better” her life than the life of all the soldiers gathered there, as a woman’s life bears a lot less value than the life of a man. She feels obligated to make the decision she makes because of the subservient role she is expected to play to the men in her life. Euripides’ Iphigenia in Aulis highlights the importance of gender roles in both the decision Iphigenia makes and in how she is treated by her father, Agamemnon. 

Sacrifice and Duty: In Iphigenia in Aulis, Iphigenia is willing to make a great sacrifice to further the Trojan War, a war that she herself has no involvement in. Warfare was a major part of Ancient Greek life, and a source of great renown. Many major Greek artworks depicted the Greek warrior or the art of warfare (art including buildings, statues, coins, and vases). In war, a major theme is sacrifice - it was a great honor to fall in battle as a hero. Iphigenia recognizes this when she chooses to make the sacrifice so that the Greek warriors could sail onwards to Troy. She bears a great sense of duty to her country, and she chooses to lay her life down not for her sake, but for the sake of the war and her country. She only asks that her name is written in history for her great sacrifice, although she does not get this. In some translations, the Gods see her sense of duty and her willingness to die an honorable death, and she is saved by Artemis, who puts a deer in her place at the sacrificial table. In these versions, as a reward for her selflessness, Iphigenia is taken to Tauris by Artemis, where she is made a priestess at Artemis’ temple.

==Translations==
* Jane Lumley (1537–1578), ca. 1555 (first published in 1909)
* Robert Potter, 1781 – verse
* T. A. Buckley, 1850 – prose
* , 1891 – prose
* Arthur Way, 1912 – verse
* Florence M. Stawell, 1929 – verse
* Moses Hadas and John McLean, 1936 - prose 
* Charles R. Walker, 1958
* W. S. Merwin and George E. Dimock Jr., 1978 – verse
* Paul Roche, 1998 – verse (Euripides: Ten Plays (Signet))
* Mary-Kay Gamel, 1999 – prose
* James Morwood, 2002 – verse
* Don Taylor, 2004
* George Theodoridis, 2007
* Edward Einhorn, 2013
* Anne Lill, 2013 - Estonian, received Alexander Kurtna Award
* Nicolas Billon &amp; Roger Beck, 2010
* Christopher Collard &amp; James Morwood, 2017 – verse
* Andy Hinds, with Martine Cuypers 2017
* Brian Vinero, 2018 – rhymed verse
* Rachel Hadas, 2018 - verse

== References ==
==External links==
*
*Text at The Internet Classics Archive
*Text at The Perseus Digital Library, Tufts University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="169" end="178" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q663886" start="213" end="220" title="Orestes (play)" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q934597" start="346" end="357" title="The Bacchae" label="The Bacchae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609022" start="374" end="393" title="Alcmaeon in Corinth" label="Alcmaeon in Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="472" end="485" title="Dionysia" label="City Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="664" end="673" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="731" end="741" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="788" end="797" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="822" end="829" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="935" end="939" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115611" start="1177" end="1183" title="Hecuba (play)" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216943" start="1200" end="1216" title="The Trojan Women" label="The Trojan Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="1235" end="1244" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1262" end="1271" title="Oresteia#Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821780" start="1963" end="1968" title="Aulis (ancient Greece)" label="Aulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="2094" end="2098" title="Prophet" label="seer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725527" start="2099" end="2106" title="Calchas" label="Calchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="2215" end="2222" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="2674" end="2686" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="2794" end="2802" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="3081" end="3089" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="3226" end="3231" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="3261" end="3266" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q192407" start="3978" end="3985" title="Orestes" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q466830" start="4533" end="4542" title="Myrmidons" label="Myrmidons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497260" start="5608" end="5613" title="Frederick Apthorp Paley" label="Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q852657" start="5626" end="5632" title="Richard Porson" label="Porson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747483" start="6345" end="6367" title="Fountain of Arethusa" label="Sicilian well Arethusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q941745" start="6438" end="6446" title="Alfeios" label="Alpheius"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="6451" end="6463" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="6478" end="6487" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q643456" start="6554" end="6562" title="Arethusa (mythology)" label="Arethusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233234" start="6603" end="6610" title="Ortygia" label="Ortygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="6616" end="6624" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="6861" end="6865" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="6935" end="6942" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="6986" end="6993" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q903424" start="7163" end="7172" title="Iphigénie" label="Iphigénie"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="7189" end="7200" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q90787" start="7410" end="7435" title="Christian Heinrich Postel" label="Christian Heinrich Postel"/>
<link wikidata="Q436126" start="7491" end="7506" title="Reinhard Keiser" label="Reinhard Keiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q349507" start="7546" end="7559" title="Apostolo Zeno" label="Apostolo Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q311571" start="7613" end="7628" title="Antonio Caldara" label="Antonio Caldara"/>
<link wikidata="Q594181" start="7637" end="7661" title="Giuseppe Maria Orlandini" label="Giuseppe Maria Orlandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q571407" start="7670" end="7684" title="Giovanni Porta" label="Giovanni Porta"/>
<link wikidata="Q312788" start="7693" end="7707" title="Nicola Porpora" label="Nicola Porpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397669" start="7716" end="7729" title="Girolamo Abos" label="Girolamo Abos"/>
<link wikidata="Q455199" start="7738" end="7752" title="Giuseppe Sarti" label="Giuseppe Sarti"/>
<link wikidata="Q536729" start="7761" end="7774" title="Angelo Tarchi (composer)" label="Angelo Tarchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387662" start="7787" end="7804" title="Giuseppe Giordani" label="Giuseppe Giordani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7860" end="7873" title="Matteo Verazi" label="Matteo Verazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312891" start="7882" end="7898" title="Niccolò Jommelli" label="Niccolò Jommelli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7915" end="7942" title="Vittorio Amadeo Cigna-Santi" label="Vittorio Amadeo Cigna-Santi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384693" start="7951" end="7969" title="Ferdinando Bertoni" label="Ferdinando Bertoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659378" start="7980" end="7993" title="Carlo Franchi (composer)" label="Carlo Franchi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8010" end="8021" title="Luigi Serio" label="Luigi Serio"/>
<link wikidata="Q377409" start="8030" end="8052" title="Vicente Martín y Soler" label="Vicente Martín y Soler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8063" end="8076" title="Alessio Prati" label="Alessio Prati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8097" end="8115" title="Ferdinando Moretti" label="Ferdinando Moretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q505202" start="8124" end="8150" title="Niccolò Antonio Zingarelli" label="Niccolò Antonio Zingarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q20721" start="8161" end="8176" title="Luigi Cherubini" label="Luigi Cherubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q130759" start="8224" end="8249" title="Christoph Willibald Gluck" label="Christoph Willibald Gluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q248892" start="8263" end="8282" title="Iphigénie en Aulide" label="Iphigénie en Aulide"/>
<link wikidata="Q315374" start="8391" end="8409" title="Michael Cacoyannis" label="Michael Cacoyannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080171" start="8436" end="8445" title="Iphigenia (film)" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230563" start="8462" end="8473" title="Irene Papas" label="Irene Papas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765283" start="8575" end="8597" title="The Songs of the Kings" label="The Songs of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q715796" start="8607" end="8621" title="Barry Unsworth" label="Barry Unsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190508" start="8638" end="8651" title="P. D. Q. Bach" label="P. D. Q. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q965498" start="8695" end="8706" title="Neil LaBute" label="Neil LaBute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866747" start="8771" end="8788" title="Iphigenia in Orem" label="Iphigenia in Orem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751378" start="8842" end="8862" title="Caridad Svich" label="Caridad Svich&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143976" start="9257" end="9287" title="Female homicides in Ciudad Juárez" label="murders of the Women of Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065224" start="9290" end="9304" title="Charles L. Mee" label="Charles L. Mee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106823" start="9636" end="9651" title="Richard Heckler" label="Richard Heckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q975410" start="10036" end="10052" title="Yorgos Lanthimos" label="Yorgos Lanthimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q27492140" start="10079" end="10107" title="The Killing of a Sacred Deer" label="The Killing of a Sacred Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q913301" start="10150" end="10162" title="Image Comics" label="Image Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342745" start="10244" end="10258" title="Edward Einhorn" label="Edward Einhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056406" start="10275" end="10288" title="Eric Shanower" label="Eric Shanower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152506" start="12916" end="12927" title="Jane Lumley" label="Jane Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348992" start="12978" end="12991" title="Robert Potter (translator)" label="Robert Potter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13008" end="13021" title="Theadore. A. Buckley" label="T. A. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800630" start="13055" end="13065" title="Arthur Way" label="Arthur Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443201" start="13082" end="13101" title="Florence Stawell" label="Florence M. Stawell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476165" start="13118" end="13129" title="Moses Hadas" label="Moses Hadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q680368" start="13189" end="13201" title="W. S. Merwin" label="W. S. Merwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153290" start="13243" end="13253" title="Paul Roche" label="Paul Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439360" start="13333" end="13346" title="James Morwood" label="James Morwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293602" start="13363" end="13373" title="Don Taylor (English director and playwright)" label="Don Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342745" start="13409" end="13423" title="Edward Einhorn" label="Edward Einhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12359283" start="13432" end="13441" title="Anne Lill" label="Anne Lill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029533" start="13494" end="13508" title="Nicolas Billon" label="Nicolas Billon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439360" start="13560" end="13573" title="James Morwood" label="James Morwood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969554" wikidata="Q1151646" url="?curid=969554" title="Pretty Cure (2004 TV series)">
<text>, also sometimes stylized as PreCure, is a Japanese anime television series produced by Toei Animation and the first installment in the &quot;Pretty Cure&quot; metaseries created by Izumi Todo. It aired on ANN, with 96 episodes across two seasons.

The first season, directed by Daisuke Nishio, aired from February 1, 2004 to January 30, 2005, in the same timeslot as Izumi Todo&#x27;s previous series, &quot;Ashita no Nadja&quot;. It received an English-dubbed version, which aired in Canada from March 2009 to July 2010. In the season, two middle school students gain the power to transform into the “protectors of light”, Pretty Cure, and are tasked with collecting the Prism Stones to restore the Garden of Light while fighting against the forces of the Dark Zone, who caused its destruction. A second season, , aired in Japan from February 6, 2005, to January 29, 2006. It introduces another member of the group, Shiny Luminous, and follows the Cures’ efforts in collecting the twelve Heartiels to revive the Queen, whose life has taken the form of Hikari Kujo/Shiny Luminous. Two &quot;Max Heart&quot; movies were released on April 16, 2005, and December 10, 2005, respectively. It was succeeded by &quot;PreCure Splash Star&quot; in its timeslot. The series&#x27; main motif is yin and yang.

==Plot==
&quot;Pretty Cure&quot; follows two girls, Nagisa Misumi and Honoka Yukishiro, who one day encounter Mipple and Mepple, who are from the Garden of Light. They give them the power to transform into the emissaries of light, Cure Black and Cure White, to fight against the forces of the Dark Zone: a dimension of evil that attacked the Garden of Light and now plans to invade the Garden of Rainbows, Earth. The Cures search for the Prism Stones to restore the Garden of Light, placing them in the Prism Hopish, a device protected by the Guardian, Wisdom. Once the Prism Stones are recovered, their power transports them to the Garden of Light and repairs most of the damage done by the Dark Zone. Later on, Pollun, the Prince of the Garden of Light, grants them the power of the Rainbow Bracelets to defeat the Dark King. After the Dark King&#x27;s defeat, three new villains, known as the Seeds of Darkness, are born from him and seek the power of the Prism Stones for themselves.

In &quot;Max Heart&quot;, Nagisa and Honoka meet the mysterious Hikari Kujou, who is revealed to be the &quot;life&quot; of the Queen. Following her battle with the Dark King, the Queen was separated into three parts: the twelve Heartiels, which represent her will, the Queen Chairect, which represents her heart, and Kujou Hikari, who represents her life. Meanwhile, the remnants of the Dark Zone are protecting a mysterious boy, who is believed to be the &quot;life&quot; of the Dark King. Together with Hikari, who gains the power to transform into Shiny Luminous, the Cures once again fight against the Dark Zone in order to retrieve the Heartiels and restore the Queen.

==Characters==
Where appropriate, names on the left are from the original Japanese version, whilst names on the right without Japanese text are from both the Canadian and Singaporean English dubs. Character descriptions pertain to the Japanese version of the show.

===Pretty Cures===
:
:One of the two main protagonists. A 14/15-year-old girl and student in her second and later third year of Verone Academy&#x27;s Sakura Class, who is the ace of its lacrosse team. She is strong-willed but lazy, as she dislikes doing homework, and is also a food lover, her favorite dish being the takoyaki from Akane&#x27;s food stand. Although generally brave, she often becomes flustered around Shogo, whom she has a crush on. She is known for her catchphrase . As Cure Black, she specializes in physical combat. She introduces herself as Her theme color is black.
:
:One of the two main protagonists. A 14/15-year-old girl who is Nagisa&#x27;s classmate at Verone Academy and lives with her grandmother Sanae and her dog Chuutaro since her parents are working overseas. She is known as &quot;The Queen of Knowledge&quot; for her intelligence, and the members of Verone Academy&#x27;s science club, of which she is a member, look up to her. Although she has few friends, they are close to her, and she has come to appreciate Nagisa&#x27;s friendship. She introduces herself as Her theme color is white.

====Additional members====
:
:A shy blonde-haired girl who appears in &quot;Max Heart&quot;. She is physically 13 years old and is the &quot;life&quot; of the Queen in human form after the Queen was split apart following her encounter with the Dark King. Going under the guise of Akane&#x27;s cousin and working at her takoyaki stand, Hikari enrolls in Verone Academy as a freshman and befriends Nagisa and Honoka. At the end of &quot;Max Heart&quot;, although it was believed that she would have to sacrifice her existence for the Queen to be revived, she is reborn as a human separate from her. She gains power from Pollun to transform into Shiny Luminous, and later gains more power from Lulun. Despite her lack of fighting skills or strength, her abilities can hinder opponents and enhance Black and White&#x27;s attacks. She introduces herself as Her theme color is yellow.

===Garden of Light===
The is a realm ruled by the Queen and protected by the power of the Prism Stones, which the Dark Zone seeks for themselves. Prior to the events of &quot;Pretty Cure&quot;, they attacked the Garden of Light and stole five of the seven Prism Stones, with Mepple and Mipple being given the Red and Blue Stones, respectively, before being sent to Earth to find those who could become Pretty Cure and fight against the Dark Zone.
:
:The chosen protector of Mipple, the Princess of Hope, who gives Nagisa the power to transform into Cure Black and lives with her. He is selfish, as he often argues with Nagisa, is possessive of Mipple, and becomes jealous when Pollun does not pay attention to him. He ends his sentences with &quot;mepo&quot;. Mepple can only stay in his true form for a short time before growing tired, so on Earth he takes on an energy-saving form that resembles a cell phone.
:
:The Princess of Hope of the Garden of Light, who gives Honoka the power to transform into Cure White and lives with her; like her, she is generally more reserved. Although Mepple is implied to have feelings for her, Mipple sticking up for Pollun causes problems between them. She ends her sentences with &quot;mipo&quot;. Like Mepple, she usually stays in a cell phone-like form to conserve energy.
:
:The Prince of the Garden of Light, who is sent to Earth once the Cures have retrieved the Prism Stones, with the Queen giving a cryptic statement about his powers aiding them. Later, before Wisdom is captured, he places the power of the Prism Stones into Pollun, giving him the power to remain in his regular form while on Earth. He also gains the ability to communicate with the Garden of Light through a form called the Pretty Commune, and grants the Cures the power of light and the Rainbow Bracelets. He is energetic and tends to be selfish and childish. He lives mainly with Nagisa in &quot;Pretty Cure&quot; and Hikari in &quot;Pretty Cure Max Heart&quot;.
:
:Appearing in &quot;Max Heart.&quot; She is Pollun&#x27;s younger sister and is known as the Princess of Light who connects the future. She can give the power of the Heartiel Brooch to Luminous.
:
:The ruler of the Garden of Light, who aids the Cures when she can. During &quot;Max Heart&quot;, she is split into Hikari, the twelve Heartiels, and the Queen Chairect. Like the Dark King, she is animated using CGI.
:
:The guardian of the Prism Stones, who is often referred to as .
:
:A wise sage and resident of the Garden of Light. Despite his wisdom, he often forgets Nagisa and Honoka&#x27;s names and refers to them as the &quot;Pretty Cura&quot;.
:Twelve fairies who are the embodiments of the Queen&#x27;s will. The Cures must recover them in order to restore the Queen, placing them in the Queen Chairect, an item representing the Queen&#x27;s heart. When they want one of the Heartiels to help them, Seekun turns the knob around to let one of them out of the Chairect.
:
:The first of the Heartiels to be discovered, who represents the Queen&#x27;s sense of adventure and discovery, and as such is naive about the world and asks many questions. When the Cures need the help of another Heartiel, Seekun is responsible for calling them out of the Queen Chairect. She is the last Heartiel to enter the Chairect, with her symbol in the Chairect being a telescope. She seems to prefer Nagisa, as she enjoys spending time with her over Honoka.
:
:He is accompanied by a white dove. His symbol in the Chairect is a torch.
:
:She first appears in episode 9, but meets the Cures in episode 10. She is often seen with a treasure box, which is also her symbol in the Chairect.
:
:Her symbol in the Chairect is the snowflake.
:A Heartiel entrusted with the Book of Wisdom, which she uses to help the Cures find a way to oppose Baldez&#x27;s power. At first, she does not like Nagisa, but comes to like her after seeing her pure heart. Her symbol in the Chairect is the book.
:
:Her symbol in the Chairect is the mirror.
:
:His symbol in the Chairect is the key.
:
:First seen at the end of episode 31. Her symbol in the Chairect is the crown.
:
:His symbol in the Chairect is the pear.
:
:Her symbol in the Chairect is the bell.
:
:Her symbol in the Chairect is the ring.
:
:His symbol in the Chairect is the pocket watch.

===Dark Zone===
The villains of &quot;Pretty Cure.&quot; They come from the , a realm of darkness ruled by the Dark King.
:
:The imprisoned ruler of the Dark Zone, who seeks to acquire the Prism Stones to gain immortality and prevent the &quot;power to consume all things&quot; from eventually destroying his body—he believes that it is the fate of all things to be consumed by darkness. Like the Queen, he is animated using CGI.
:
:Monsters summoned by the servants of the Dark Zone, who combine them with objects or living things. Upon being defeated by a purifying move, they burst into several small star-shaped monsters called , who scurry off apologizing.

====Dark Five====
The Dark King&#x27;s first wave of servants, who each possess a Prism Stone.
:
:The guardian of the Green Prism Stone. He resembles a Kabuki actor in &quot;keshō&quot; (&quot;make up&quot;) due to having long hair and a painted face. His human disguise is .
:
:The guardian of the Blue Prism Stone and the strongest of the Dark Five, who relies on brawn over brains and has the highest fortitude of the group, as he can withstand being hit by the Marble Screw. 
:
:The guardian of the Orange Prism Stone, who often takes on a human disguise to gain the Cures trust before attacking. In her true form, she resembles a vampire, as she has pale skin and fangs.
:
:The youngest of the Dark Five and Poisony&#x27;s younger brother, who is the guardian of the Yellow Prism Stone. He comes to Earth to spy on Nagisa and Honoka, infiltrating Verone Academy under the guise of the freshman . Despite this, he ends up befriending them and develops a fondness and love for Honoka because of her showing kindness to him. Later on, his feelings for Honoka and his attempts to understand human emotions cause him to be unable to fight the Cures. This causes him to be sent back to the Dark Zone, but not before willingly giving up his Prism Stone to the Cures. After the Dark King is destroyed, he returns as a normal human.
:
:The leader of the Dark Five and their most powerful member, as well as the Dark King&#x27;s right-hand man and the guardian of the Purple Prism Stone. Despite his strength and being able to withstand the Marble Screw and other attacks, his fortitude is not as high as Gekidrago. He later appears on Earth, but does not start fighting the Cures until after Kiriya is sent back to the Dark Zone. He is defeated, but later returns and takes on a more monstrous and powerful form to fight the Cures in the Dark Zone.

====Three Seeds of Darkness====
A villainous trio who appear after the Dark Five and the Dark King are defeated, being born from the Dark King and initially normal humans until they awaken their powers and transform into their true selves. They are accompanied by a macaw and the Butler Zakenna.
:
:The leader of the Seeds of Darkness, whose human alias is . He is a plotter and a sadist who blends in by impersonating others. Due to his ego, it is always someone in a high position, such as a head doctor or principal.
:
:The only female of the trio, whose human alias is . When in human form, she has a tendency to mumble things, then suddenly scream. She is more confident in her dark form than her human form.
:
:The strongest member of the trio, whose human alias is 
:
:Zakenna who are capable of human speech and look after the mansion that the Three Seeds and the Four Guardians reside in. While they often bicker, they are unwaveringly loyal to them.

====Four Guardians====
What remains of the Dark Zone, serving as the protectors of the &quot;life&quot; of the Dark King as they seek to revive him.
:
:The strongest member of the Four Guardians and their leader, who is capable of withstanding Marble Screw, Luminous Heartiel Action and Extreme Luminario. It is later revealed that his true form is the spirit of the Dark King, who was revived and disguised himself as one of the Guardians.
:
:The apparent second-in-command of the Four Guardians, who serves as their &quot;leader&quot; in Baldez&#x27;s absence. He often argues with Uraganos.
:
:One of the Guardians, who is reckless and tends to accidentally destroy things due to his size and strength.
:
:The only female of the Guardians, who is more serious and intimidating than the others. She often scolds Uraganos and Circulas when they argue, and is also the type to never apologize, even when she is wrong.
:
:A mysterious boy who is the &#x27;life&#x27; of the Dark King, who is content with living in the mansion but seeks to experience life outside of it. He is seemingly connected to Hikari, as various incidents occur when they meet. At the end of &quot;Max Heart&quot;, he is reborn as Hikari&#x27;s younger brother, .

=== Cures&#x27; families ===
:
:Nagisa and Ryouta&#x27;s father and Rie&#x27;s husband.
:
:Takashi&#x27;s wife and Nagisa and Ryouta&#x27;s mother. Although her and Nagisa&#x27;s relationship tends to be estranged at times, she deeply cares for her family. She is also seemingly the only one who can break up Nagisa and Ryouta&#x27;s arguments.
:
:Nagisa&#x27;s younger brother, whom he often bickers with and pulls pranks on. Like the relationship between Nagisa and Mepple, he and Nagisa often bicker but still care for each other.
:
:Honoka&#x27;s grandmother, who takes care of her while her parents work overseas in France. She seems to know a lot about the Pretty Cure, as she found Mipple when she was younger, though keeps this secret from Honoka and Nagisa.
:
:Honoka&#x27;s father and Aya&#x27;s husband.
:
:Honoka&#x27;s mother and Taro&#x27;s wife.
:
:Honoka&#x27;s dog.

=== Verone Academy ===
:
:The teacher of Nagisa and Honoka&#x27;s class, who is romantic and quiet.
:
:Verone Academy&#x27;s principal, who is kind but clumsy.
:
:Verone Academy&#x27;s vice principal.
:
:Verone Academy&#x27;s math teacher.

=== Classmates ===
:
:Honoka&#x27;s childhood friend, who Nagisa has a crush on. He is nicknamed FujiP (Fergie in the English dub) by his friends, and is a player of his soccer team.
:
:One of Nagisa&#x27;s friends and a member of Verone Academy&#x27;s lacrosse team.
:
:One of Nagisa&#x27;s friends and a member of Verone Academy&#x27;s lacrosse team.
:
:Honoka&#x27;s friend and a member of Verone Academy&#x27;s science club.
:
:An artist inspired by Mario Piccasseci, an artist who made the painting &quot;Stardust Banquet&quot;.
:
:The captain of Verone Academy&#x27;s lacrosse team.
:
:A member of Verone Academy&#x27;s lacrosse team.

; and 
:Friends who idolize the Cures and cosplay as them.
:
:Nagisa and Honoka&#x27;s classmate, who likes to play the piano.
:
:A member of the Verone Junior Boys&#x27; Institute&#x27;s soccer team.
:
:Fujimura&#x27;s love interest.
:
:Nagisa and Honoka&#x27;s classmate, who is part of the choir and directs and plays the piano.
:
:A member of the Verone Junior Boys&#x27; Institute&#x27;s soccer team.

; and 
:Hikari&#x27;s classmates.

; and 
:Members of Verone Academy&#x27;s lacrosse team.

=== Other characters ===
:
:The previous captain of Verone Academy&#x27;s lacrosse team, who runs her own takoyaki stand, which Nagisa frequently visits. In &quot;Max Heart&quot;, she serves as Hikari&#x27;s guardian under the assumption she is her cousin.

==Media==
===Anime===

The original &quot;Pretty Cure&quot; anime aired in Japan between February 1, 2004, and January 30, 2005. The opening theme is by Mayumi Gojo whilst the ending theme is also by Gojo. The follow-up series, &quot;Max Heart&quot;, aired in Japan between February 6, 2005, and January 29, 2006. The opening theme is by Mayumi Gojo. The first ending theme, used for episodes 1-36, is by Mayumi Gojo with Young Fresh, whilst the second ending theme, used for episodes 37-47 is by Gojo. In March 2013, the anime was later re-aired on TV Asahi&#x27;s cable channel, TeleAsa Channel 1.

===Films===
Two animated films based on the &quot;Max Heart&quot; series were released. The first, , was released on April 16, 2005. The second movie, , was released December 10, 2005. The heroines also appear in all &quot;Pretty Cure All Stars&quot; movies, which ran between 2009 and 2016. Another crossover film, &quot;Hug! Pretty Cure × Pretty Cure&quot;, was released on October 27, 2018, celebrating the franchise&#x27;s 15th anniversary.

===Licensed Media and Dubs===
On February 24, 2006, 4Kids Entertainment announced broadcasting and distribution rights for &quot;Pretty Cure&quot; in the United States, though never produced an English version of it. In July 2008, Toei Animation began making episodes available through IGN&#x27;s Direct2Drive service subtitled into English, and have also started making those same episodes available for streaming on Crunchyrolland Tubi. The subtitles were produced by &quot;Nippon Golden Network&quot;, a Hawaii-based cable network that broadcasts Asian programming (mostly from Japan), and featured low-quality video and audio in the initial uploads, though the Crunchyroll streaming service later replaced the video and audio source and updated the subtitles. In April 2009, Funimation used to license the English-subtitled version of the series for online distribution on the company&#x27;s website.
Spain, RTVE Clan (TVE channel) Clan (TV channel) Cuatro (TV channel)

An English dub was produced by Toei and Ocean Productions using their Blue Water studio in Calgary, Alberta which aired on Canada&#x27;s YTV channel from March 6, 2009, to July 31, 2010. 

===Manga===
Both the television series and their movies received manga adaptation which were illustrated by Futago Kamikita in Kodansha&#x27;s &quot;Nakayoshi&quot; magazine as they aired.

===Video games===
Four video games based on the two series have been released in Japan by Bandai. An educational video game was released for the Sega Pico in 2004. A puzzle platformer, , was released for Game Boy Advance in 2004. A platformer, was released for Game Boy Advance in 2005. A side-scrolling beat &#x27;em up game, was also released in 2005 for the Nintendo DS.

==Reception==
The series&#x27; popularity quickly spawned it into a full franchise with many different series. In a TV Asahi opinion poll, &quot;Pretty Cure&quot; appeared in the 45th position, above other series of the magical girl genre like &quot;Cutie Honey&quot; (technically not a &quot;magical girl&quot; series in the same sense; see article for details), &quot;Cardcaptor Sakura&quot;, and &quot;Magical Angel Creamy Mami&quot;.

==References==
==External links==

* Toei Animation&#x27;s &quot;Pretty Cure&quot; website 
* Toei Animation&#x27;s &quot;Pretty Cure: Max Heart&quot; website 
* Crunchyroll&#x27;s &quot;Pretty Cure&quot; page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="52" end="57" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q730179" start="88" end="102" title="Toei Animation" label="Toei Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196203" start="142" end="153" title="Pretty Cure" label="Pretty Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="160" end="170" title="metaseries" label="metaseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146882" start="182" end="192" title="Izumi Todo" label="Izumi Todo"/>
<link wikidata="Q843772" start="206" end="209" title="All-Nippon News Network" label="ANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012184" start="279" end="293" title="Daisuke Nishio" label="Daisuke Nishio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330757" start="409" end="424" title="Ashita no Nadja" label="Ashita no Nadja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475446" start="1211" end="1230" title="PreCure Splash Star" label="PreCure Splash Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="1285" end="1297" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="3417" end="3425" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q905527" start="3549" end="3557" title="takoyaki" label="takoyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="7629" end="7632" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="9965" end="9968" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="10355" end="10361" title="Kabuki" label="Kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="10838" end="10845" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940269" start="10872" end="10877" title="fangs" label="fangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q219035" start="12315" end="12320" title="macaw" label="macaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285927" start="12430" end="12436" title="Sadistic personality disorder" label="sadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17379560" start="12454" end="12467" title="Impersonator" label="impersonating"/>
<link wikidata="Q142554" start="16056" end="16063" title="cosplay" label="cosplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q905527" start="16619" end="16627" title="takoyaki" label="takoyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087221" start="16924" end="16935" title="Mayumi Gojo" label="Mayumi Gojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897887" start="17595" end="17616" title="Pretty Cure All Stars" label="Pretty Cure All Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q45702099" start="17694" end="17710" title="Hug! Pretty Cure" label="Hug! Pretty Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q604775" start="17870" end="17889" title="4Kids Entertainment" label="4Kids Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17972" end="17985" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="18104" end="18107" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029361" start="18115" end="18127" title="Direct2Drive" label="Direct2Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142035" start="18236" end="18247" title="Crunchyroll" label="Crunchyroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189826" start="18251" end="18255" title="Tubi" label="Tubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="18597" end="18607" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="18723" end="18728" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54829" start="18730" end="18734" title="RTVE" label="RTVE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18735" end="18753" title="Clan (TVE channel)" label="Clan (TVE channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527617" start="18754" end="18771" title="Clan (TV channel)" label="Clan (TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q962340" start="18772" end="18791" title="Cuatro (TV channel)" label="Cuatro (TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076053" start="18833" end="18850" title="The Ocean Group" label="Ocean Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="18884" end="18900" title="Calgary, Alberta" label="Calgary, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="18916" end="18922" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789910" start="18930" end="18933" title="YTV (TV channel)" label="YTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="19047" end="19052" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040603" start="19090" end="19105" title="Futago Kamikita" label="Futago Kamikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q726081" start="19109" end="19117" title="Kodansha" label="Kodansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q749250" start="19131" end="19140" title="Nakayoshi" label="Nakayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="19195" end="19206" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q507269" start="19262" end="19268" title="Bandai" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374482" start="19317" end="19326" title="Sega Pico" label="Sega Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="19376" end="19392" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q401831" start="19476" end="19492" title="beat &amp;#x27;em up" label="beat &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="19533" end="19544" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="19663" end="19671" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q752321" start="19767" end="19779" title="magical girl" label="magical girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077402" start="19797" end="19808" title="Cutie Honey" label="Cutie Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49182" start="19917" end="19934" title="Cardcaptor Sakura" label="Cardcaptor Sakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q702501" start="19952" end="19977" title="Creamy Mami, the Magic Angel" label="Magical Angel Creamy Mami"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969562" wikidata="Q728866" url="?curid=969562" title="Superliner (railcar)">
<text>The Superliner is a type of bilevel intercity railroad passenger car used by Amtrak, the national rail passenger carrier in the United States. Amtrak commissioned the cars to replace older single-level cars on its long-distance trains in the Western United States. The design was based on the Budd Hi-Level cars used by the Santa Fe Railway on its &quot;El Capitan&quot; trains. Pullman-Standard built 284 cars, known as Superliner I, from 1975 to 1981; Bombardier Transportation built 195, known as Superliner II, from 1991 to 1996. The Superliner I cars were the last passenger cars built by Pullman.

Car types include coaches, dining cars, lounges, and sleeping cars. Most passenger spaces are on the upper level, which has windows on both sides. The Sightseer Lounge observation cars have distinctive floor-to-ceiling windows on the upper level. Boarding is on the lower level; passengers climb up a center stairwell to reach the upper level.

The first Superliner I cars entered service in February 1979, with deliveries continuing through 1981. Amtrak assigned the cars to both long-distance and short-distance trains in the Western United States. The first permanent assignment, in October 1979, was to the Chicago–Seattle &quot;Empire Builder&quot;. Superliner II deliveries began in 1993, enabling Amtrak to retire aging Hi-Level cars and to use Superliners in trains in the Eastern United States—although tunnel clearances prevent their use on the Northeast Corridor.

==History==
===Background===

On May 1, 1971, Amtrak assumed control of almost all private-sector intercity passenger rail service in the United States, with a mandate to reverse decades of decline. It retained about 184 of the 440 trains that had run the day before. To operate these trains, Amtrak inherited a fleet of 300 locomotives and 1,190 passenger cars, most of which dated from the 1940s and 1950s. No new sleeping cars had been built for service in the United States since 1956.

Conventional single-level cars made up most of Amtrak&#x27;s inherited fleet, but it also included 73 Hi-Level cars from the Santa Fe. The Budd Company built these between 1954 and 1964; the bilevel design, with its superior views and smooth riding characteristics, was well-suited to the long distances in the west. Michael R. Weinman, who worked at the design firm Louis T. Klauder &amp; Associates, recalled that when Amtrak issued a request for proposal (RFP) in 1973 for a &quot;totally new&quot; passenger car, it &quot;was assumed&quot; that the design would be bilevel. Thirteen companies responded to the RFP; Amtrak selected the Klauder proposal. The design was finished by mid-1974 and Amtrak invited four companies to bid on its construction: Boeing, Budd, Pullman-Standard, and Rohr. Pullman-Standard won the contract.

=== Superliner I ===

Amtrak ordered 235 Superliner I cars from Pullman-Standard on April 2, 1975, with deliveries scheduled for between January 1977 and June 1978. The order then consisted of 120 coaches, 55 sleepers, 34 diners, and 26 lounges. Amtrak soon increased the order to 284 cars: it added 30 coaches, 15 sleepers, 5 diners, and deleted 1 lounge. The initial order cost $143.6 million; with the additional cars and other payments the cost rose to $250 million.

The railroad asked its employees to name the new cars, and announced the winning entry in its internal newsletter of June 1, 1977: &quot;Vistaliner&quot;, harkening back to the Vista-Domes of the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad. But the newsletter went on to note that the name was already under copyright by another company, and so the cars would be dubbed &quot;Superliners&quot;, a name created by Needham, Harper &amp; Steers, then Amtrak&#x27;s advertising agency.

As the cars arrived in 1978 and 1979, Amtrak put them into use on short-haul routes radiating from Chicago. The first coaches entered regular service on February 26, 1979, running from Chicago to Milwaukee. The coaches, led by an EMD F40PH locomotive, displaced the regular Turboliner equipment. The equipment continued to operate on the run for several weeks. The &quot;Illini&quot; and &quot;Shawnee&quot; trains received Superliner coaches soon after; the first Superliner dining car ran on the &quot;Shawnee&quot; as a lounge.
=== Equipping the fleet ===
A public unveiling took place at Union Station in Chicago on October 11, 1979, followed by a short trip over the Burlington Northern Railroad to Lisle. The following day, the &quot;Shawnee&quot; had the dubious distinction of the first Superliner accident, a collision with an Illinois Central Gulf Railroad freight train at Harvey, IL, which claimed the lives of 2 crew members of the freight train.

Amtrak&#x27;s first choice for Superliner assignments had been the financially troubled &quot;Floridian&quot;, a Chicago–Florida long-distance train, but the two years&#x27; delay in delivery scuppered these plans. Amtrak turned next to the &quot;Empire Builder&quot;. This long-distance train ran between Chicago and Seattle through the plains of Montana and North Dakota. Winters in that part of the United States are harsh, featuring both blizzards and cold temperatures. Traditional steam-heated equipment often broke down, causing Amtrak to cancel service. The Superliners, with their electrical head-end power, were far better suited for the conditions. The &quot;Empire Builder&quot; became the first long-distance train to use Superliners, and the first train permanently assigned them, on October 28, 1979. Amtrak&#x27;s new national timetable depicted a Superliner coach on the front cover, and the listing for the &quot;Empire Builder&quot; carried a heading which read &quot;Amtrak&#x27;s Superliner is Special.&quot; At the same time, Superliners entered service on the short-haul &quot;Pacific International&quot; and &quot;Mount Rainier&quot; in the Pacific Northwest.

With the &quot;Empire Builder&quot; in operation, Amtrak began re-equipping the remaining long-distance trains in the west. The second permanent Superliner train was the &quot;Desert Wind&quot;, then a day train between Los Angeles and Ogden, Utah, which gained coaches on June 30, 1980. The &quot;San Francisco Zephyr&quot;, a long-distance train on the traditional Overland Route between Chicago and San Francisco, followed on July 7, 1980; it received the first of the Sightseer lounges on January 6, 1981. Amtrak assigned Superliners to another long-distance train, the Los Angeles–Chicago &quot;Southwest Limited&quot;, in October 1980. The &quot;Southwest Limited&quot;, formerly the &quot;Super Chief&quot;, traveled the same route as the &quot;El Capitan&quot;, whose Hi-Level cars had inspired the design. The management of the Santa Fe, impressed by the design, permitted Amtrak to restore the name &quot;Chief&quot; to the train, and Amtrak renamed it the &quot;Southwest Chief&quot; on October 28, 1984. The &quot;Chief&quot; was the first train to receive Superliner II sleeping cars in September 1993.

The &quot;Coast Starlight&quot; began operating with Superliners in January 1981. The &quot;Sunset Limited&quot;, a long-distance train running along the southern border of the United States between Los Angeles and New Orleans, gained them in February, resulting in a commendation from the Texas State Legislature. The &quot;Pioneer&quot; gained Superliner coaches on April 26. The &quot;Eagle&quot;, an overnight train between San Antonio and Chicago, began carrying Superliners in October on those days it connected with the &quot;Sunset Limited&quot; in San Antonio. Superliner assignments became permanent in the 1990s. Amtrak estimated that reequipping a train with Superliners boosted ridership on it by 25%. The last car of the order, a sleeper delivered in July 1981, was also the last car ever built by Pullman, and was named in honor of the company&#x27;s founder, George Mortimer Pullman.

In the mid-1980s, Canada&#x27;s Via Rail contemplated replacing its aging Budd-built steam-heated cars with Superliners. The order would have consisted of 130 cars, valued at , to be built by a consortium of Bombardier Transportation and the Urban Transportation Development Corporation. Via tested several Amtrak Superliners in revenue service between Edmonton and Winnipeg in 1984–85. Ultimately Via chose to rebuild its Budd cars to use head end power (HEP) instead of ordering new equipment.

=== Superliner II ===

Amtrak ordered 140 Superliner II cars from Bombardier Transportation in 1991; Bombardier had acquired the Superliner patents after Pullman-Standard&#x27;s closure. The order consisted of 55 sleeping cars, 38 coaches, 20 dining cars, 15 lounges, and 12 transition-dormitory cars. The initial order cost $340 million. In late 1993 Amtrak exercised the option for 55 cars at a cost of $110 million, bringing the total order of Superliner II cars to 195. The option included ten dining cars, ten lounges, and 35 transdorms. Bombardier built the order in Barre, Vermont.

The new order allowed the displacement of the remaining Hi-Level cars as well as the employment of Superliners on trains running with single-level cars. Amtrak converted three eastern long-distance trains to Superliners: the Chicago–New Orleans &quot;City of New Orleans&quot; (March 1994); the Chicago–Washington, D.C. &quot;Capitol Limited&quot; (October); and the Virginia–Florida &quot;Auto Train&quot; (March 1, 1995). A project to enlarge the First Street Tunnel in Washington, D.C., enabled the Chicago–Washington &quot;Cardinal&quot; to begin using Superliners in September 1995; these were withdrawn in 2002 because of equipment shortages. Superliners were used on the Chicago–Toronto &quot;International&quot; from November 1995 until early 2000. In 2017, Amtrak identified a need to replace the Superliners, noting that each car traveled the equivalent of &quot;seven trips around the world&quot; every year.

=== Future cars ===
In 2022, Amtrak announced that they would be replacing all of their current Superliner, Amfleet, and Viewliner I passenger cars by 2032. Amtrak issued a request for information from ten manufacturers in December 2022, followed by a formal request for proposals in December 2023.

== Design ==

The Superliners generally resembled the Hi-Level design, though at , they were taller. The Superliners also used Amtrak&#x27;s new 480-volt head-end power for heating and electricity. This was more reliable than the steam heat used by the Hi-Levels, whose own heaters and diesel generators would eventually be replaced by HEP equipment.

Initially, the cars could not be worked east of Chicago because of limited overhead clearances, but by the 1980s, many eastern railroads had raised clearances on their tracks to permit tri-level auto carriers and double-stack container trains, which also permitted the operation of the Superliners. To this day, inadequate tunnel clearances in and around New York City and Baltimore prevent the use of Superliners on Amtrak&#x27;s busiest line, the Northeast Corridor.

The Superliner I cars ride on Waggon Union MD-76 trucks, which require more frequent overhauls than comparable domestic designs and are &quot;notorious for their rough riding characteristics&quot;. The Superliner IIs ride on GSI-G70 outboard bearing trucks, also found on the Horizon single-level cars. Both models have a maximum speed of .

The Superliner I cars originally stored waste in tanks, then macerated and dumped it along the tracks once the train had attained a preset speed. This was an improvement on the Hi-Levels, which dumped directly to the tracks. Growing public concern about such dumping led Amtrak to order its Superliner IIs with a full-retention system. The Superliner I cars were retrofitted with a full-retention system in the early 1990s.

The &quot;New York Times&quot; described the Superliner I interior color scheme as &quot;soft hues of beige, rust, brown and green&quot;. For the Superliner IIs, Amtrak introduced a new scheme incorporating gray, aquamarine, and salmon.
=== Coaches ===

Pullman-Standard built 102 Superliner I coaches and 48 coach-baggage combine cars. Bombardier built 38 Superliner II coaches. As built, Superliner coaches could carry 62 passengers in the upper level and 15 passengers on the lower level. The lower level&#x27;s capacity would later be reduced to 12. The coach-baggage cars had a baggage compartment in lieu of the lower-level seating area, and squeezed 78 seats into the upper level. The total capacity of 75 to 78 represented a small increase over the 68 to 72 seats on the Hi-Level coaches, which lacked seating on the lower level. The Superliner I coach weighs ; the Superliner II coach weighs .

Seating on the upper and lower levels is 2×2 with reclining seats. The seats are wide with a pitch of . Included are adjustable footrests and retractable legrests, but no center armrest. There are overhead luggage racks on the upper level and a luggage storage area on the lower level across from the stairs. There are four unisex toilets per coach, all on the lower level. A shower was included in the original design, to be locked when the coaches were used in short-haul service, but deleted from the final design. After a grade crossing accident in 1999, the Transportation Safety Board of Canada faulted the layout on the lower level; the exterior door, when opened and locked in position, prevented egress from the wheelchair-accessible bathroom.

Two-piece windows are located at each seat row. Each window is . Integral blinds were rejected in favor of curtains on maintenance grounds, while an upper level of &quot;skylight&quot; windows, similar to those on the Sun Lounge cars, was rejected as too expensive. Full-height windows were incorporated into the lounge cars.
Eleven Superliner I coaches were rebuilt as &quot;snack coaches&quot;. These retained the 62 seats on the upper level but removed the lower-level seating in favor of a snack bar and lounge seats.

Amtrak rebuilt 34 of the coach-baggage cars as &quot;smoking coaches&quot; in 1996 and 1997. The baggage room was converted to a self-contained specially ventilated smoking lounge. After Amtrak banned smoking on long-distance trains in 2004, the cars were reconverted.

Five Superliner II coaches were rebuilt in 1996 and 1997 as &quot;family coaches&quot; or &quot;Kiddie Cars&quot;. These cars featured a children&#x27;s play area on the lower level instead of seating and were assigned to the &quot;Coast Starlight&quot;, a long-distance train between Los Angeles and Seattle along the West Coast of the United States. Amtrak rebuilt these five cars again in 2008 and 2009 as &quot;arcade cars&quot; with video game machines in the lower level. The cars were converted once more in 2015 to provide business class service on the &quot;Coast Starlight&quot;. The service began in June 2015.

The California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) paid to rebuild six Superliner I coaches and one baggage-coach, which had been wrecked in various accidents, for use in Amtrak California service. The seating capacity was increased to 76 on the upper level and 20 on the lower level.

=== Sleeping cars ===
Pullman-Standard built 70 Superliner I sleeping cars; Bombardier built 49 &quot;standard&quot; Superliner II sleepers and six &quot;deluxe&quot; sleepers. The standard Superliner sleeping car contains 14 roomettes, five bedrooms, a family bedroom, and an accessible bedroom. The deluxe sleeping car contains ten bedrooms, four roomettes, a family bedroom, and an accessible bedroom. As built, the standard sleeping car could hold a maximum of 44 passengers. The Superliner I sleeping car weighs ; the Superliner II sleeping car weighs . The Superliner II deluxe sleeper is slightly heavier at .

Roomettes measure × . In daytime configuration each features two facing seats; these are combined to form a bed. A second bed is folded down from the ceiling. Bedrooms measure × . Like the roomette, there are two berths; during the day the lower berth acts as a sofa. The room also contains a chair which faces the beds. Unlike the roomette, a bedroom includes a private combination toilet/shower, and a private sink.

The family bedroom is located at one end of the car&#x27;s lower level and measures × . It can hold up to two adults and two children in four berths. During the day the berths form a sofa and two seats. At the opposite end of the car from the family bedroom is the accessible bedroom, which measures × . It sleeps two people in two berths and includes a wheelchair-accessible toilet, but no shower.

The standard sleeping car has five bedrooms and ten roomettes on the upper level. The bedrooms are set against one side of the car with a hallway along the edge, while the roomettes are located to each side with the hallway running down the centerline. At the center of the car are the stairs to the lower level and a bathroom. A hallway runs through the centerline of the lower level with the accessible bedroom at one end and the family bedroom at the other. To one side of the stairs are three bathrooms and one shower, and to the other are four more roomettes. Luggage racks are located opposite the stairs. The layout of the deluxe sleeping car is similar. There are ten bedrooms on the upper level with a continuous hallway along one edge. The lower level contains opposed family and accessible bedrooms, four toilets, four roomettes, and a luggage rack. Two bedrooms may be combined to form a &quot;bedroom suite&quot;.

As delivered, the Superliner I sleeping cars had five bathrooms, all on the lower level, and no public shower. Roomettes were termed &quot;economy bedrooms&quot; and bedrooms &quot;deluxe bedrooms&quot;. During the 1980s, Amtrak retrofitted the cars to add a bathroom on the upper level and a public shower on the lower level, at the expense of one bathroom. The Superliner II cars incorporated these improvements into their design.

===Lounges===

Pullman-Standard and Bombardier each built 25 dedicated lounge cars, dubbed &quot;Sightseer&quot; lounges. Windows wrap upward into the ceiling, providing lateral views of scenery along the train&#x27;s route. This design element was drawn from the Hi-Level lounges and the Seaboard Air Line&#x27;s Sun Lounges. The Superliner I lounge weighs ; the Superliner II lounge weighs .

The upper level contains a mix of seating options. At one end are eight tables, four to each side, each seating four passengers. In the center is a lounge area with a wet bar and several groups of seats. The stairs to the lower level are located here as well. At the other end are swivel chairs. The lower level contains a bathroom, additional tables, and a café. As built, the lounges had seating for 73. The cars were built with an electric piano in the lower level, which has since been removed.

In addition to the Sightseer lounges, Amtrak converted five Superliner I dining cars to lounge cars in 1998 for use on the &quot;Auto Train&quot;, an automobile-carrying overnight train between Virginia and Florida. These cars may be distinguished from the Sightseer lounges by their conventional windows.
=== Dining cars ===

Pullman-Standard built 30 dining cars; Bombardier built another 39. The dining cars can seat a maximum of 72 people on the upper level in tables of four. The galley occupies the entire lower level. At the center of the car are stairs down to the kitchen. A dumbwaiter is used to bring food and drink to the dining level, as well as to return dishes, glasses, and cutlery for washing. A late 2010s overhaul added a refrigerator on the upper level for easy access and replaced incandescent lights with LED lighting. As built, the Superliner I dining car weighs ; the Superliner II dining car weighs .

Amtrak rebuilt 17 Superliner I dining cars as diner-lounges in the late 2000s. Dubbed the &quot;Cross-Country Cafe&quot;, they were intended to reduce food service losses by replacing both a traditional dining car and the Sightseer lounge on long-distance trains. One end of the car was converted into a café area, with tables and a small serving area near the stairs to the kitchen. The other side remained dedicated to traditional diner seating, but the standard two-by-two tables were replaced by booths.
=== Transition sleepers ===

As part of the Superliner II order, Bombardier built 47 &quot;transition sleeper&quot; or dormitory cars. The car had two purposes: to provide sleeping accommodations for train personnel; and to provide access to single level equipment from bilevel Superliner and Hi-Level cars. Hi-Level &quot;step-down&quot; coaches previously performed the latter role. Most transition dormitory (&quot;transdorm&quot;) cars have 16 roomettes on the upper level for crew accommodations, with an accessible bedroom and small crew lounge on the lower level. Bathrooms and showers are located on both levels. At one end of the car is a top level end-door; at the other end is a staircase and end door on the lower level. On some trains, Amtrak makes the roomettes closest to the upper level end door available for sale to passengers. The transition sleepers weigh .

=== Summary ===
Between them Pullman-Standard and Bombardier manufactured 479 cars (284 for Pullman, and 195 for Bombardier):
== Derivatives ==

The Superliners established a standard basic design for bilevel railcars, including the upper-floor height of above the top of rail. Built primarily for long-distance services, the Superliners were not ideal for use on corridor routes. They were not equipped for the volumes of passenger loading and unloading found on corridor routes, nor did they have amenities designed for these shorter trips. The 1990 passage of California propositions 108, 111 and 116 authorized the sale of nearly $3 billion in bonds for the creation of rail services across the state. Proposition 116 required the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) to create specifications for standardized railcars and locomotives that would be suitable for rail operations across the state.

The resulting California Car design, of which 66 were built by Morrison Knudsen from 1994 to 1997, offered a number of improvements on the Superliner design. The single vestibule and bent staircase of the Superliner design were replaced with two vestibules and two straight staircases to facilitate faster loading and unloading. The trainline-controlled power doors do not require a crew member at every door, thus reducing crew size requirements. The California Cars comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, with wheelchair lifts and accessible seating on the lower levels. Fourteen of the cars were built as cab cars, allowing push-pull operations rather than turning the whole train or moving the locomotive at terminals.

The success of the California Cars resulted in the procurement of the Surfliner cars by Amtrak and Caltrans in 1998. Alstom built 62 Surfliners from 2000 to 2002. The Surfliner is a modification of the California Car, with design changes including an improved accessible bathroom design and passenger amenities such as electric outlets. Surfliners and California Cars are mechanically and electrically compatible with each other and the Superliners, and they often are combined in trainsets on Amtrak California services.

Caltrans and Amtrak began drafting the specification for a third generation of the design in 2006. This specification, dubbed &quot;Corridor Car for the 21st Century&quot; or C21, became the basis for the design work undertaken by the Next Generation Corridor Equipment Pool Committee (NGCE) under the provisions of the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008 beginning in 2009. Caltrans and the Illinois Department of Transportation ordered 130 of these Next Generation Bi-Level Passenger Rail Cars from Sumitomo (with Nippon Sharyo as the builder) in 2012. In August 2015, a new car shell failed a buff strength compression test. Increasing the buff strength would require a complete redesign of the car, and would delay delivery beyond the expiration of a $220 million American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) grant that funded the order. In November 2017, Sumitomo cancelled their order of bilevel cars with Nippon Sharyo, and instead contracted with Siemens Mobility to build 137 single-level Siemens Venture cars based on the European Siemens Viaggio Comfort cars instead of the bilevel cars.

== Notes ==
== Footnotes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Current roster
* 3D tour of Superliner sleeping car</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q728866" start="4" end="14" title="Superliner (railcar)" label="Superliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243337" start="28" end="35" title="Bilevel rail car" label="bilevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q753779" start="55" end="68" title="passenger car (rail)" label="passenger car"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="77" end="83" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="242" end="263" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q960308" start="293" end="297" title="Budd Company" label="Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975661" start="298" end="306" title="Hi-Level" label="Hi-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="324" end="332" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350926" start="354" end="364" title="El Capitan (train)" label="El Capitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="379" end="395" title="Pullman-Standard" label="Pullman-Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q728866" start="421" end="433" title="Superliner (railcar)" label="Superliner I"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="454" end="479" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q728866" start="500" end="513" title="Superliner (railcar)" label="Superliner II"/>
<link wikidata="Q917028" start="631" end="641" title="dining car" label="dining car"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857982" start="644" end="651" title="lounge car" label="lounges"/>
<link wikidata="Q830565" start="657" end="669" title="sleeping car" label="sleeping car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1215" end="1222" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="1223" end="1230" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q197764" start="1237" end="1251" title="Empire Builder" label="Empire Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="1385" end="1406" title="Eastern United States" label="Eastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q904003" start="1416" end="1433" title="Structure gauge" label="tunnel clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="1459" end="1477" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="1526" end="1532" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975661" start="2073" end="2081" title="Hi-Level" label="Hi-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432075" start="2408" end="2428" title="request for proposal" label="request for proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="2726" end="2732" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q960308" start="2734" end="2738" title="Budd Company" label="Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="2740" end="2756" title="Pullman-Standard" label="Pullman-Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391081" start="2762" end="2766" title="Rohr, Inc." label="Rohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="2868" end="2884" title="Pullman Company" label="Pullman-Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q780451" start="3453" end="3464" title="dome car" label="Vista-Domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071790" start="3472" end="3511" title="Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad" label="Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152240" start="3685" end="3713" title="Needham, Harper &amp;amp; Steers" label="Needham, Harper &amp;amp; Steers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036098" start="3940" end="3960" title="Hiawatha (Amtrak train)" label="Chicago to Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497150" start="3985" end="3994" title="EMD F40PH" label="EMD F40PH"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853900" start="4029" end="4039" title="Turboliner" label="Turboliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096410" start="4126" end="4132" title="Illini (train)" label="Illini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491513" start="4149" end="4156" title="Shawnee (train)" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155989" start="4347" end="4360" title="Union Station (Chicago)" label="Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016648" start="4427" end="4455" title="Burlington Northern Railroad" label="Burlington Northern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558993" start="4459" end="4464" title="Lisle station" label="Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491513" start="4495" end="4502" title="Shawnee (train)" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078108" start="4573" end="4582" title="Harvey, Illinois train collision" label="collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="4591" end="4621" title="Illinois Central Gulf Railroad" label="Illinois Central Gulf Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461789" start="4810" end="4819" title="Floridian (train, 1971–1979)" label="Floridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="4829" end="4836" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="4837" end="4844" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q197764" start="4963" end="4977" title="Empire Builder" label="Empire Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="5034" end="5041" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="5064" end="5071" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="5076" end="5088" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q205418" start="5158" end="5166" title="blizzard" label="blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18385904" start="5816" end="5837" title="Pacific International" label="Pacific International"/>
<link wikidata="Q697217" start="5854" end="5867" title="Mount Rainier (train)" label="Mount Rainier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264059" start="6077" end="6088" title="Desert Wind" label="Desert Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6121" end="6132" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q52471" start="6137" end="6148" title="Ogden, Utah" label="Ogden, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414138" start="6199" end="6219" title="San Francisco Zephyr" label="San Francisco Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11293754" start="6268" end="6282" title="Overland Route (Union Pacific Railroad)" label="Overland Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6303" end="6316" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q770386" start="6501" end="6518" title="Southwest Chief" label="Southwest Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144178" start="6597" end="6608" title="Super Chief" label="Super Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q770386" start="6874" end="6889" title="Southwest Chief" label="Southwest Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q225313" start="7028" end="7043" title="Coast Starlight" label="Coast Starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q906130" start="7110" end="7124" title="Sunset Limited" label="Sunset Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="7233" end="7244" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="7308" end="7331" title="Texas State Legislature" label="Texas State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196631" start="7343" end="7350" title="Pioneer (train)" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q756538" start="7406" end="7411" title="Texas Eagle" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362760" start="7893" end="7916" title="George Mortimer Pullman" label="George Mortimer Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q876720" start="7951" end="7959" title="Via Rail" label="Via Rail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7993" end="8021" title="List of Via Rail rolling stock#Stainless steel" label="Budd-built steam-heated cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552199" start="8161" end="8205" title="Urban Transportation Development Corporation" label="Urban Transportation Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689297" start="8359" end="8373" title="head end power" label="head end power"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="8482" end="8507" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26071" start="8989" end="9003" title="Barre, Vermont (city)" label="Barre, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q633026" start="9257" end="9276" title="City of New Orleans (train)" label="City of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q756629" start="9332" end="9347" title="Capitol Limited (Amtrak train)" label="Capitol Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q430472" start="9396" end="9406" title="Auto Train" label="Auto Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453847" start="9455" end="9474" title="First Street Tunnel" label="First Street Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="9478" end="9494" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q858400" start="9533" end="9541" title="Cardinal (train)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="9692" end="9699" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980634" start="9706" end="9719" title="International (Amtrak train)" label="International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843168" start="10035" end="10042" title="Amfleet" label="Amfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928804" start="10048" end="10057" title="Viewliner" label="Viewliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689297" start="10381" end="10395" title="head-end power" label="head-end power"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="10934" end="10947" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="10952" end="10961" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="11028" end="11046" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539154" start="11079" end="11091" title="Waggon Union" label="Waggon Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="11098" end="11104" title="Bogie" label="trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532215" start="11274" end="11281" title="General Steel Industries" label="GSI-G70"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903351" start="11325" end="11332" title="Horizon (railcar)" label="Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="11424" end="11436" title="waste disposal" label="stored waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723254" start="11452" end="11461" title="Maceration (sewage)" label="macerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11826" end="11840" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950322" start="12139" end="12150" title="combine car" label="combine car"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975661" start="12595" end="12603" title="Hi-Level" label="Hi-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q84306784" start="12813" end="12818" title="seat pitch" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863" start="13096" end="13102" title="shower" label="shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625339" start="13246" end="13269" title="grade crossing accident" label="grade crossing accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928368" start="13283" end="13320" title="Transportation Safety Board of Canada" label="Transportation Safety Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q321046" start="13548" end="13554" title="Window blind" label="blinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q49005" start="13581" end="13588" title="curtain" label="curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985155" start="13692" end="13702" title="Sun Lounge (railcar)" label="Sun Lounge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13787" end="13798" title="#Lounges" label="lounge cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318768" start="13968" end="13977" title="snack bar" label="snack bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q225313" start="14499" end="14514" title="Coast Starlight" label="Coast Starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="14552" end="14563" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="14568" end="14575" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="14586" end="14617" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340505" start="14798" end="14812" title="business class" label="business class"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="14894" end="14933" title="California Department of Transportation" label="California Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q218438" start="15065" end="15082" title="Amtrak California" label="Amtrak California"/>
<link wikidata="Q830565" start="15241" end="15253" title="sleeping car" label="sleeping car"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366316" start="15406" end="15414" title="roomette" label="roomette"/>
<link wikidata="Q131514" start="16060" end="16064" title="sofa" label="sofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857" start="16181" end="16187" title="toilet" label="toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863" start="16188" end="16194" title="shower" label="shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q140565" start="16210" end="16214" title="sink" label="sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="16571" end="16581" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857982" start="18050" end="18060" title="lounge car" label="lounge car"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975661" start="18243" end="18251" title="Hi-Level" label="Hi-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q175292" start="18268" end="18285" title="Seaboard Air Line" label="Seaboard Air Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985155" start="18293" end="18304" title="Sun Lounge (railcar)" label="Sun Lounges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990002" start="18541" end="18548" title="wet bar" label="wet bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="18808" end="18822" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q917028" start="18947" end="18957" title="dining car" label="dining car"/>
<link wikidata="Q430472" start="19003" end="19013" title="Auto Train" label="Auto Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="19068" end="19076" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="19081" end="19088" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q497741" start="19359" end="19365" title="galley (kitchen)" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313763" start="19458" end="19468" title="dumbwaiter (elevator)" label="dumbwaiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q851782" start="19543" end="19549" title="Dishware" label="dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862987" start="19551" end="19558" title="glass (drinkware)" label="glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q81944" start="19564" end="19571" title="cutlery" label="cutlery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553201" start="19701" end="19713" title="LED lamp" label="LED lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975661" start="20602" end="20610" title="Hi-Level" label="Hi-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565537" start="21762" end="21791" title="List of California ballot propositions 1990–99" label="propositions 108, 111 and 116"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="21923" end="21962" title="California Department of Transportation" label="California Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q218438" start="22068" end="22100" title="Amtrak California" label="rail operations across the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954922" start="22117" end="22131" title="California Car (railcar)" label="California Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913993" start="22166" end="22182" title="Morrison Knudsen" label="Morrison Knudsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="22587" end="22626" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q910157" start="22729" end="22736" title="cab car" label="cab car"/>
<link wikidata="Q935330" start="22748" end="22757" title="push–pull train" label="push-pull"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985180" start="22915" end="22924" title="Surfliner (railcar)" label="Surfliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="22962" end="22968" title="Alstom" label="Alstom"/>
<link wikidata="Q218438" start="23339" end="23356" title="Amtrak California" label="Amtrak California"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398500" start="23688" end="23741" title="Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008" label="Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925114" start="23778" end="23815" title="Illinois Department of Transportation" label="Illinois Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087498" start="23837" end="23880" title="Next Generation Bi-Level Passenger Rail Car" label="Next Generation Bi-Level Passenger Rail Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q717318" start="23887" end="23895" title="Sumitomo" label="Sumitomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q682174" start="23902" end="23915" title="Nippon Sharyo" label="Nippon Sharyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588050" start="23982" end="23995" title="buff strength" label="buff strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q466637" start="24154" end="24200" title="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009" label="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q391895" start="24350" end="24366" title="Siemens Mobility" label="Siemens Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q96106536" start="24393" end="24408" title="Siemens Venture" label="Siemens Venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405661" start="24436" end="24459" title="Siemens Viaggio Comfort" label="Siemens Viaggio Comfort"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969565" wikidata="Q4794836" url="?curid=969565" title="R1–9 fleet">
<text>The R1–9s (colloquially known as Arnines by railfans) were the 1,703 similar New York City Subway cars built between 1930 and 1940 for the Independent Subway System. All were built by the American Car and Foundry Company, the Pressed Steel Car Company, and Pullman Standard. The name &quot;Arnines&quot; comes from the literal spelling out of the final contract under which these 1,703 cars were ordered – contract &quot;R9&quot;. 

The complete listing of contract numbers for cars in this group include: R1, R4, R6, R7/A, and R9. Also in the R1–9 family was the R8A, which was a revenue collection car, or money train.

The R1–9s entered service between 1931 and 1940 and remained in service until they were replaced between 1968 and 1977 with R40, R42, R44, and R46 cars. The last of the cars in this broad grouping were removed from passenger service in 1977. Many pieces of memorabilia, including rollsigns and car number plates, exist today in museums and private collections.

==Preservation==
Twenty of these cars are preserved by various museums, businesses, organizations, and private individuals.

The cars that remain on New York City Transit Authority property (and their owners) are:
*R1 100 (New York Transit Museum) – Operable
*R1 103 (Railway Preservation Corp.) – Operable
*R1 381 (Railway Preservation Corp.) – Operable
*R4 401 (Railway Preservation Corp.) – Operable
*R4 484 (New York Transit Museum) – Operable
*R6 923 (Railway Preservation Corp.) – Inoperable
*R6 925 (Railway Preservation Corp.) – Inoperable
*R6 1000 (Railway Preservation Corp.) – Operable
*R6 1300 (Railway Preservation Corp.) – Operable
*R7A 1575 – rebuilt to an R10 prototype in 1947 (New York Transit Museum) – Operable
*R9 1802 (Railway Preservation Corp.) – Operable

The other cars are located at the following locations:
*R1 175 is stored at the Seashore Trolley Museum. It does not have trucks, and two of its side doors were donated to R4 401.
*R4 800 is at the Seashore Trolley Museum and is in operable condition.
*R4 825 is at the Trolley Museum of New York. It is currently undergoing a cosmetic restoration and is operable.
*R6 978 was used as a dining room at Golden&#x27;s Deli in the Staten Island Mall until the deli closed in January 2012. The car was later sold to a private owner in Warwick, NY. This car is truckless with part of the car sliced away.
*R6 983 was on private property in Jacksonville, FL for over 35 years, after being purchased from the scrapyard in 1975 for use as a sidefront in a disco. It was purchased by the Craggy Mountain Line based in Asheville, NC in early 2013 and has been restored to operating service for their museum. The car uses trucks from scrapped R32s.
*R6 1144 is used as a cafeteria at the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre, England. This car has no trucks.
*R7 1440 is at the Seashore Trolley Museum and is in operable condition.
*R9 1689 is at the Shore Line Trolley Museum and is in operable condition.
*R9 1801 is at the New York State Museum, used as a static exhibit in the museum&#x27;s Metropolis Hall.

==References==
==External links==
*nycsubway.org: The Independent Fleet (1932-1939)
*nycsubway.org: Chapter 4, The Independent System</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4794836" start="4" end="9" title="R1–9 fleet" label="R1–9s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794836" start="33" end="40" title="R1–9 fleet" label="Arnines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323006" start="44" end="51" title="railfan" label="railfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="77" end="97" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097594" start="139" end="164" title="Independent Subway System" label="Independent Subway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842866" start="188" end="220" title="American Car and Foundry Company" label="American Car and Foundry Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241654" start="226" end="251" title="Pressed Steel Car Company" label="Pressed Steel Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="257" end="273" title="Pullman Company" label="Pullman Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274437" start="506" end="508" title="R1 (New York City Subway car)" label="R1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274785" start="510" end="512" title="R4 (New York City Subway car)" label="R4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274870" start="514" end="516" title="R6 (New York City Subway car)" label="R6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274909" start="518" end="522" title="R7/A (New York City Subway car)" label="R7/A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274949" start="528" end="530" title="R9 (New York City Subway car)" label="R9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274944" start="564" end="567" title="R8A (New York City Subway car)" label="R8A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899305" start="608" end="619" title="money train" label="money train"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274723" start="746" end="749" title="R40 (New York City Subway car)" label="R40"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274741" start="751" end="754" title="R42 (New York City Subway car)" label="R42"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274763" start="756" end="759" title="R44 (New York City Subway car)" label="R44"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274769" start="765" end="768" title="R46 (New York City Subway car)" label="R46"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="1133" end="1164" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="New York City Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503777" start="1207" end="1230" title="New York Transit Museum" label="New York Transit Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503777" start="1396" end="1419" title="New York Transit Museum" label="New York Transit Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274365" start="1656" end="1659" title="R10 (New York City Subway car)" label="R10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503777" start="1679" end="1702" title="New York Transit Museum" label="New York Transit Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262335" start="1845" end="1868" title="Seashore Trolley Museum" label="Seashore Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="1887" end="1893" title="Bogies" label="trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262335" start="1963" end="1986" title="Seashore Trolley Museum" label="Seashore Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845191" start="2035" end="2061" title="Trolley Museum of New York" label="Trolley Museum of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603999" start="2193" end="2211" title="Staten Island Mall" label="Staten Island Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708823" start="2296" end="2307" title="Warwick, NY" label="Warwick, NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="2400" end="2416" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, FL"/>
<link wikidata="Q113211939" start="2544" end="2564" title="Craggy Mountain Line" label="Craggy Mountain Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="2574" end="2587" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville, NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047797" start="2697" end="2700" title="R32 (New York City Subway car)" label="R32"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983267" start="2742" end="2772" title="Buckinghamshire Railway Centre" label="Buckinghamshire Railway Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262335" start="2826" end="2849" title="Seashore Trolley Museum" label="Seashore Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501308" start="2899" end="2924" title="Shore Line Trolley Museum" label="Shore Line Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875588" start="2974" end="2995" title="New York State Museum" label="New York State Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969566" wikidata="Q1258120" url="?curid=969566" title="Seal of Hawaii">
<text>The Great Seal of the State of Hawaii was designated officially by Act 272 of the 1959 Territorial Legislature and is based on the territorial seal. Modifications to the territorial seal included the use of the words &quot;State of Hawaii&quot; at the top and &quot;1959&quot; within the circle. Provisions for a seal for the state of Hawaii were enacted by the Territorial Legislature and approved by Governor William F. Quinn on June 8, 1959. The passage of the Admission Act in 1959, admitted Hawaii as the 50th State of the United States of America on August 21, 1959.

The seal of the Territory of Hawaii was the same as the seal of the republic, except that it had &quot;Territory of Hawaii&quot; placed at the top and &quot;1900&quot; (signifying the year that the territorial government officially was organized) within the circle. The 1901 Territorial Legislature authorized the modified republic seal as the Seal of the Territory of Hawaii.

The seal of the Republic of Hawaii had the words &quot;Republic of Hawaii&quot; at the top and &quot;MDCCCXCIV&quot; within the circle. The year 1894 signified the date that the republic was established. The republic seal was designed by Viggo Jacobsen, a Honolulu resident, and itself was derived from the Royal Arms of the Kingdom of Hawaii used during the reigns of King Kamehameha III, King Kalākaua and Queen Liliuokalani, which had been designed by the College of Arms in London in 1842 and officially adopted in 1845.

==State Seal==
The Great Seal of the State of Hawaii is circular in shape, two and three-quarters inches in diameter, and of the design being described, with the tinctures added as the basis for the coat of arms. The Hawaii state seal represents Hawaii&#x27;s nation.

==Coat of arms==
In the center of the seal is a heraldic shield which is quartered. The blazon is as follows

&quot;Quarterly, 1st and 4th, barry of eight Argent, Gules, and Azure; 2nd and 3rd, Or, a puloulou or sacred staff proper; en surtout, an inescutcheon Vert charged with a mullet Or.&quot;

===Supporters design===
On the left side is King Kamehameha I, standing in the as represented by the bronze statue in front of Ali&#x27;iolani Hale, Honolulu. His cloak and helmet (a mahiole) are in yellow. Kamehameha I&#x27;s figure is in proper. Kamehameha I unified the Hawaiian Islands into a single united kingdom. On the right side is goddess Liberty also wearing a Phrygian cap and laurel wreath. She is holding &quot;Ka Hae Hawaii&quot; in her right hand that is partly unfurled.

===Crest design===
A rising sun irradiated in gold surrounded by the legend &quot;State of Hawaii, 1959&quot; on a scroll in black lettering.

===Motto design===
The state motto: &quot;Ua Mau ke Ea o ka ʻĀina i ka Pono&quot; is on the scroll on the seal&#x27;s bottom in gold lettering. &quot;Ua Mau ke Ea o ka ʻĀina i ka Pono&quot; is roughly translated into English as &quot;The life of the land is perpetuated in righteousness.&quot; The motto was adopted by the Kingdom of Hawaii in 1843 and was used in an address by King Kamehameha III at ceremonies following the return of his kingdom from the British. British captain Lord George Paulet of demanded that Hawaii was ceded to Great Britain in response to claims of political abuses against British residents made by British Consul Richard Charlton. After Kamehameha III notified London of the captain&#x27;s actions, Admiral Richard Darton Thomas returned sovereignty back to the King. The motto is also featured in Israel Kamakawiwo&#x27;ole&#x27;s song &quot;Hawaii &#x27;78&quot; and is used on the Hawaii state quarter.

===Compartment design===
Below the heraldic shield, the bird phoenix has it wings outstretched arising from flames. The phoenix&#x27;s body is black and wings half yellow and half dark red. Below the heraldic shield are eight taro leaves having on either side banana foliage and sprays of maidenhair fern trailed upwardly.

==Symbolism==
*1959 represents the year of admission into the Union as a state.
*The rising sun replaced the royal crown from the original coat of arms. This represents the birth of a new state.
*King Kamehameha the Great and the Goddess of Liberty holding the Hawaiian flag replace the two warriors on the Royal Arms. This may represent the old government leader (King Kamehameha the Great) and the new government leader (The Goddess of Liberty).
*The quartered design of the heraldic shield is retained from the original coat of arms.
*The eight stripes in two of the quarters of the shield represent the eight main islands.
*The &quot;Puloulou&quot;, or &quot;tabu ball and stick&quot;, in the second and third quarters was carried before the king and placed before the door of his home, signifying his authority and power. In the seal it is a symbol of the authority and power of the government.
*The star in the middle of the shield signifies the fiftieth star added to the United States flag.
*The phoenix, symbol of death and resurrection, symbolizes the change from an absolute monarchy to a free, democratic form of government.
*The eight taro leaves, flanked by banana foliage and maidenhair fern are typical Hawaiian flora and represent the eight main islands. Taro is the traditional staff of life and has great spiritual significance. Taro is also still cultivated and is the ingredient of the popular dish called poi.
*The state motto, &quot;Ua Mau ke Ea o ka ʻĀina i ka Pono&quot;, &quot;The life of the land is perpetuated in righteousness,&quot; is retained from the royal coat of arms.

==Government seals of Hawaii==
==See also==
*Coat of Arms of the Hawaiian Kingdom - The historical coat of arms of Hawaii

==References==
==External links==
*The Great Seal of the State of Hawai&#x27;i</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1258120" start="4" end="37" title="Seal of Hawaii" label="Great Seal of the State of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="223" end="238" title="State of Hawaii" label="State of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q705567" start="411" end="427" title="William F. Quinn" label="William F. Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684233" start="464" end="477" title="Hawaii Admission Act" label="Admission Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="590" end="609" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="Territory of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057542" start="968" end="986" title="Republic of Hawaii" label="Republic of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q455795" start="1321" end="1340" title="Kamehameha III" label="King Kamehameha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="1342" end="1355" title="Kalākaua" label="King Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q107288" start="1360" end="1378" title="Liliuokalani" label="Queen Liliuokalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="1411" end="1426" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q214910" start="2090" end="2107" title="King Kamehameha I" label="King Kamehameha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336640" start="2173" end="2193" title="Ali&amp;#x27;iolani Hale" label="Ali&amp;#x27;iolani Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404720" start="2286" end="2292" title="Proper (heraldry)" label="proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="2319" end="2335" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q213240" start="2418" end="2430" title="Phrygian cap" label="Phrygian cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q219726" start="2465" end="2490" title="Flag of Hawaii" label="&amp;quot;Ka Hae Hawaii&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357912" start="2701" end="2712" title="state motto" label="state motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878470" start="2720" end="2753" title="Ua Mau ke Ea o ka ʻĀina i ka Pono" label="Ua Mau ke Ea o ka ʻĀina i ka Pono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2895" end="2902" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="3001" end="3018" title="Kingdom of Hawaii" label="Kingdom of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q455795" start="3057" end="3076" title="King Kamehameha III" label="King Kamehameha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063481" start="3161" end="3179" title="Lord George Paulet" label="Lord George Paulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154829" start="3197" end="3213" title="Paulet Affair (1843)" label="Hawaii was ceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="3217" end="3230" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357269" start="3322" end="3338" title="Richard Charlton (Hawaii)" label="Richard Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3370" end="3376" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916006" start="3408" end="3415" title="Admiral (Royal Navy)" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325096" start="3416" end="3437" title="Richard Darton Thomas" label="Richard Darton Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42180" start="3507" end="3533" title="Israel Kamakawiwo&amp;#x27;ole" label="Israel Kamakawiwo&amp;#x27;ole"/>
<link wikidata="Q529878" start="3600" end="3613" title="state quarter" label="state quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q251238" start="3619" end="3630" title="Compartment (heraldry)" label="Compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q48444" start="3677" end="3684" title="Phoenix (mythology)" label="phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="3842" end="3853" title="taro" label="taro leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="3876" end="3890" title="banana" label="banana foliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q673823" start="3905" end="3920" title="maidenhair fern" label="maidenhair fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q214910" start="4136" end="4161" title="King Kamehameha the Great" label="King Kamehameha the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q833490" start="4170" end="4188" title="Liberty (goddess)" label="Goddess of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q88872788" start="4578" end="4586" title="puloulou" label="Puloulou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4603" end="4612" title="tabu ball" label="tabu ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q48444" start="4944" end="4951" title="Phoenix (mythology)" label="phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="5017" end="5034" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="5046" end="5075" title="U.S. state" label="democratic form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="5088" end="5099" title="taro" label="taro leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="5112" end="5126" title="banana" label="banana foliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q673823" start="5131" end="5146" title="maidenhair fern" label="maidenhair fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036693" start="5367" end="5370" title="poi (food)" label="poi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878470" start="5396" end="5429" title="Ua Mau ke Ea o ka ʻĀina i ka Pono" label="Ua Mau ke Ea o ka ʻĀina i ka Pono"/>
<link wikidata="Q118719991" start="5590" end="5626" title="Coat of Arms of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Coat of Arms of the Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969571" wikidata="Q1654156" url="?curid=969571" title="Kano (Mortal Kombat)">
<text>Kano is a character from the &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; fighting game series, created by Midway Games and later developed by NetherRealm Studios under Warner Bros. Games. Introduced in &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; (1992) as a player character and the leader of the fictional Black Dragon crime organization. Kano is characterized by his cybernetic eye, in addition to knives, serving as his primary weapon. In the series, Kano is the main adversary of Special Forces officer Sonya Blade.

Kano has been featured in several sequels of the first game, appearing in ten major titles overall (excluding &quot;Mortal Kombat 4&quot; and &quot;Mortal Kombat: Deception&quot;). He also appears in the series&#x27; spin-offs and various media beyond the games, including live-action adaptations, animations, and comics. Outside of the &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; series, his likeness is present in the 2005 stop motion television series &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; and the 2012 animated film &quot;Wreck-It Ralph&quot;. Critics have acknowledged the character for his personality, mannerisms, representation of the Australian heritage, and portrayals by Trevor Goddard in the 1995 film and Josh Lawson in the 2021 film.

==Development and design==

Kano&#x27;s original design featured a helmet with red eyes, later revised to include a metal plate on his right eye based on Schwarzenegger&#x27;s Terminator. In &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; (1992), Richard Divizio was invited by one of the series&#x27; co-creators, John Tobias, to perform motion capture for Kano. Divizio worked alongside other motion capture artists in a makeshift studio, collaborating with the development team to animate his movements for the game. While developing Kano&#x27;s Fatality, Divizio initially proposed ripping out a heart, biting it, and raising it in the air. This idea was rejected by the team, leading him to suggest an alternative inspired by the Indiana Jones film series. He modified the concept by removing the biting and adding heartbeats for realism, which the team agreed to finalize. Divizio reprised his motion capture role in &quot;Mortal Kombat 3&quot; (1995). Kano&#x27;s absence in &quot;Mortal Kombat 4&quot; (1997) and &quot;Mortal Kombat: Deception&quot; (2004) led to the creation of two substitutes: Jarek and Kira.

Kano leads the Black Dragon crime syndicate and utilizes his cybernetic laser eye and knives as primary tools for combat. Originally represented as a Japanese-born American, his nationality was changed to Australian after actor Trevor Goddard&#x27;s portrayal in the 1995 &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; film. Kano conceals the injured side of his face with a metal plate, an injury attributed to fellow character Jax. For the first live-action adaptation, American filmmaker Lawrence Kasanoff cited Schwarzenegger&#x27;s Terminator as an influence for redesigning Kano. However, during a set visit by school children, one child became upset at the redesign and insisted Kano retain his uniqueness. Recognizing the audience&#x27;s attachment to the character, Kasanoff&#x27;s team reinstated Kano&#x27;s appearance. In the 2011 web series &quot;Mortal Kombat: Legacy&quot;, English actor Darren Shahlavi played Kano. In &quot;Mortal Kombat X&quot; (2015), Kano&#x27;s enhancements expanded beyond his cybernetic eye to include a cybernetic heart. Kano was redesigned for the 2022 animated film &quot;Mortal Kombat Legends: Snow Blind&quot;, featuring a mohawk hairstyle, a white beard, and the title &quot;King Kano&quot;.

For the 2021 &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; reboot film, Australian actor Josh Lawson portrayed Kano, with director Simon McQuoid balancing his comic relief role with the film&#x27;s serious tone. McQuoid explained that Kano, along with the original character Cole Young, served as an entry point to explain the franchise&#x27;s supernatural lore to the audience. Lawson described his interpretation of Kano as both immature and passionate, mixing his violent nature with humor, mentioning his catchphrase &quot;Kano wins!&quot; that was improvised during filming. Lawson ensured Kano&#x27;s personality remained faithful to his original characterization. Despite this, one major &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; character, Johnny Cage, was omitted from the film, as writer Greg Russo found Lawson&#x27;s role entertaining enough to exclude Cage. In addition, some of Kano&#x27;s traits are modified in this film: he lacks the metallic mask to cover his cybernetic eye, instead having scars around it, and he is depicted in less revealing attire. Lawson reprised the role for the sequel &quot;Mortal Kombat 2&quot; (2025), revealing that Kano experiences crucial character development shaped by his death in the prequel, marking a turning point that leads to &quot;Kano 2.0&quot; with altered motivations.

==Biography==
Kano is a recurring character in the &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; series, known for his affiliation with the Black Dragon clan, mercenary work, and shifting allegiances. Introduced in &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; (1992), he was pursued by United States Special Forces operative Sonya Blade, leading to their long-standing rivalry. After the first tournament, Kano was taken to a place known as Outworld, where he aligned himself with Emperor Shao Kahn and guided him with knowledge of weaponry. His involvement in Outworld&#x27;s conflicts continued, including a brief occupancy as Shao&#x27;s general and later service under the Deadly Alliance of sorcerers Shang Tsung and Quan Chi.

Kano frequently switched sides for personal gain, working for figures like Shao and the Deadly Alliance while clashing with Sonya and the Special Forces. During &quot;Mortal Kombat X&quot; (2015), he facilitated the sale of Elder God Shinnok&#x27;s amulet and later tried to assassinate Shao&#x27;s general Kotal Kahn, reinforcing his role in Outworld&#x27;s conflicts. Although his rivalry with Sonya remained central, leading to several confrontations. In &quot;Mortal Kombat 11&quot; (2019), a timeline alteration caused past and present selves of Kano to appear simultaneously, allowing them to interact. Kano&#x27;s cybernetic enhancements, including his laser eye, and his adaptability have kept him a notable presence in the series. His self-serving nature makes him a complex character within &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; lore.

==Appearances==
Kano&#x27;s main appearances in the &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; series span several installments, including the original &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat 3&quot; (and its updates), &quot;Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat: Armageddon&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat 9&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat X&quot; (and its accompanying comics), and &quot;Mortal Kombat 11&quot;. Across these games, his storyline frequently revolves around his rivalry with Sonya Blade. Kano also appears as a background character in &quot;Mortal Kombat II&quot;, as an opponent in &quot;&quot;, and as an assist character with the term &quot;Kameo Fighter&quot; in &quot;Mortal Kombat 1&quot;.

His appearances in the series&#x27; spin-offs include &quot;Mortal Kombat: Special Forces&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat Mobile&quot;, and &quot;Mortal Kombat: Onslaught&quot;. Besides video games, he has appeared in live-action productions: the 1995 film, &quot;Mortal Kombat: Legacy&quot;, the 2021 film, and the 2025 film; and in animations: &quot;Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm&quot;, &quot;Robot Chicken&quot;, &quot;Wreck-It Ralph&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion&#x27;s Revenge&quot;, and &quot;Mortal Kombat Legends: Snow Blind&quot;.

==Critical reception==
Edmond Tran from &quot;GameSpot&quot; published an article discussing Kano&#x27;s influence on Australia. In the article, Tran initially criticizes Kano as the sole overt villain in the original &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; (1992), showcasing moves like his knife projectile and cannonball roll. Despite his distinctive appearance (white gi, bandolier, and metallic faceplate), Kano was considered less engaging compared to other characters, such as the ninjas or those with magical abilities. Tran referenced Kano&#x27;s history, originally conceived with a Japanese-American background and later changed to Australian, inspired by Trevor Goddard portrayal in the 1995 film. While this change added some impact, Tran argued it did not necessarily make Kano a more compelling character. However, Tran expressed satisfaction with Kano&#x27;s Australian representation and redesign in &quot;Mortal Kombat 11&quot; (2019), examining several of his characteristics: skills in using knives, sense of humor, urinary habits, beer drinking, criminal behavior, clothing style, attitude, dialogues, and gameplay moves.

Devin Randall, a writer for the gay men&#x27;s lifestyle magazine Instinct, reported on &quot;Mortal Kombat 11&quot;″s depiction of Kano, interpreting his mannerisms as evocative of a gay fetish. This includes chugging and spitting out beer, urinating on the ground, and a self-centered personality, which Randall likened to themes associated with glory-hole sexual activity. These traits, combined with the names of some of his gameplay moves—such as &quot;Fist of Power&quot;, &quot;Chokehold&quot;, and &quot;Power Slam&quot;—have led to interpretations associating him with hyper-masculine gay subcultures. Publications like Gay Star News and discussions on social media platforms, including X, have further contributed to this perspective. However, Randall clarified that Kano is not canonically gay and identified Kung Jin as the series&#x27; sole confirmed gay character.

Authors Edward Elliot and Jessica Isserow used Kano and Sonya as a case study in &quot;Moral Kombat: Analytic Naturalism and Moral Disagreement&quot;, examining the nature of moral disagreements through a philosophical conflict between the two characters over gender inequality. In the analysis, Kano is distinguished as sexist for supporting policies that promote gender inequality, directly opposing Sonya&#x27;s view that such policies are morally wrong. The study explores whether their conflict represents a genuine moral debate or a verbal dispute. From the view of moral realism, the authors argue that, as members of the same cultural community, both characters likely share knowledge of the terms involved, suggesting that their disagreement is caused by opposing beliefs and not the lack of communication, showcasing the complexity of moral disputes.

Gavin Jasper of &quot;Den of Geek&quot; discussed Kano and his connections to other &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; characters, including Jarek, Hsu Hao, and Kira. Jasper noted that Jarek, who replaced Kano in &quot;Mortal Kombat 4&quot; (1997), lacked the distinctive qualities that made Kano notable. In contrast, Jasper considered Hsu Hao and Kira similar to Kano, with Hsu Hao becoming irrelevant in &quot;Mortal Kombat X&quot; (2015). Kira, however, was viewed as a fusion of Kano&#x27;s and Sonya&#x27;s gameplay properties. Jasper classified Kano as the series&#x27; &quot;bullseye&quot; and &quot;cockroach&quot;, emphasizing his selfishness in betraying humanity for power, survival, or amusement. He also praised Goddard&#x27;s portrayal of Kano, which helped make the character stand out. Kano&#x27;s portrayal by Josh Lawson in the 2021 film generally received positive commentary from the critics, including &quot;Screen Rant&quot; Max Ruscinski, &quot;CinemaBlend&quot; Mick Joest, and &quot;Junkee&quot; Molly Hunt.

==Further reading==
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1654156" start="0" end="4" title="Kano (Mortal Kombat)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q241163" start="35" end="48" title="Mortal Kombat" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="55" end="68" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q149947" start="88" end="100" title="Midway Games" label="Midway Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696696" start="124" end="143" title="NetherRealm Studios" label="NetherRealm Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319420" start="150" end="168" title="Warner Bros. Games" label="Warner Bros. Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q150294" start="190" end="203" title="Mortal Kombat (1992 video game)" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="222" end="238" title="player character" label="player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893188" start="448" end="462" title="United States Special Forces" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653903" start="471" end="482" title="Sonya Blade" label="Sonya Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q925269" start="601" end="616" title="Mortal Kombat 4" label="Mortal Kombat 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="633" end="657" title="Mortal Kombat: Deception" label="Mortal Kombat: Deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="892" end="903" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="928" end="941" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q28891" start="981" end="995" title="Wreck-It Ralph" label="Wreck-It Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006904" start="1137" end="1151" title="Trevor Goddard" label="Trevor Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q819196" start="1159" end="1168" title="Mortal Kombat (1995 film)" label="1995 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685650" start="1173" end="1184" title="Josh Lawson" label="Josh Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862159" start="1192" end="1201" title="Mortal Kombat (2021 film)" label="2021 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q150294" start="1401" end="1414" title="Mortal Kombat (1992 video game)" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q664637" start="1497" end="1508" title="John Tobias" label="John Tobias"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="1521" end="1535" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658401" start="1731" end="1739" title="Fatality (Mortal Kombat)" label="Fatality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562640" start="1917" end="1930" title="Indiana Jones" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q925253" start="2111" end="2126" title="Mortal Kombat 3" label="Mortal Kombat 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q925269" start="2170" end="2185" title="Mortal Kombat 4" label="Mortal Kombat 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2209" end="2233" title="Mortal Kombat: Deception" label="Mortal Kombat: Deception"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2287" end="2292" title="Characters of the Mortal Kombat series#Jarek" label="Jarek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2297" end="2301" title="Characters of the Mortal Kombat series#Kira" label="Kira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006904" start="2532" end="2546" title="Trevor Goddard" label="Trevor Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q819196" start="2576" end="2601" title="Mortal Kombat (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mortal Kombat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653758" start="2712" end="2715" title="Jax (Mortal Kombat)" label="Jax"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463435" start="2774" end="2791" title="Lawrence Kasanoff" label="Lawrence Kasanoff"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3143" end="3164" title="Mortal Kombat: Legacy" label="Mortal Kombat: Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390174" start="3186" end="3201" title="Darren Shahlavi" label="Darren Shahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118361" start="3224" end="3239" title="Mortal Kombat X" label="Mortal Kombat X"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3398" end="3431" title="Mortal Kombat Legends: Snow Blind" label="Mortal Kombat Legends: Snow Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q250209" start="3451" end="3467" title="mohawk hairstyle" label="mohawk hairstyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862159" start="3535" end="3560" title="Mortal Kombat (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mortal Kombat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685650" start="3591" end="3602" title="Josh Lawson" label="Josh Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q67171585" start="3633" end="3646" title="Simon McQuoid" label="Simon McQuoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114403" start="3661" end="3673" title="comic relief" label="comic relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655444" start="4234" end="4245" title="Johnny Cage" label="Johnny Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q110716642" start="4284" end="4294" title="Greg Russo" label="Greg Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117830073" start="4597" end="4624" title="Mortal Kombat 2 (film)" label="&amp;quot;Mortal Kombat 2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q150294" start="5018" end="5031" title="Mortal Kombat (1992 video game)" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653903" start="5103" end="5114" title="Sonya Blade" label="Sonya Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654161" start="5267" end="5276" title="Shao Kahn" label="Shao Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266031" start="5484" end="5495" title="Shang Tsung" label="Shang Tsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051987" start="5500" end="5508" title="Quan Chi" label="Quan Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118361" start="5678" end="5693" title="Mortal Kombat X" label="Mortal Kombat X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051987" start="5745" end="5752" title="Shinnok" label="Shinnok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051987" start="5818" end="5828" title="Kotal Kahn" label="Kotal Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q59511757" start="5975" end="5991" title="Mortal Kombat 11" label="Mortal Kombat 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q150294" start="6486" end="6499" title="Mortal Kombat (1992 video game)" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q925253" start="6513" end="6528" title="Mortal Kombat 3" label="Mortal Kombat 3"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6560" end="6590" title="Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance" label="Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6604" end="6629" title="Mortal Kombat: Armageddon" label="Mortal Kombat: Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q631367" start="6643" end="6672" title="Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe" label="Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074880" start="6686" end="6701" title="Mortal Kombat 9" label="Mortal Kombat 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118361" start="6715" end="6730" title="Mortal Kombat X" label="Mortal Kombat X"/>
<link wikidata="Q59511757" start="6778" end="6794" title="Mortal Kombat 11" label="Mortal Kombat 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653903" start="6880" end="6891" title="Sonya Blade" label="Sonya Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q843486" start="6946" end="6962" title="Mortal Kombat II" label="Mortal Kombat II"/>
<link wikidata="Q118374430" start="7078" end="7093" title="Mortal Kombat 1" label="Mortal Kombat 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7162" end="7191" title="Mortal Kombat: Special Forces" label="Mortal Kombat: Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7205" end="7233" title="Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks" label="Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106892238" start="7247" end="7267" title="Mortal Kombat Mobile" label="Mortal Kombat Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7285" end="7309" title="Mortal Kombat: Onslaught" label="Mortal Kombat: Onslaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q819196" start="7386" end="7395" title="Mortal Kombat (1995 film)" label="1995 film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7403" end="7424" title="Mortal Kombat: Legacy" label="Mortal Kombat: Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862159" start="7436" end="7445" title="Mortal Kombat (2021 film)" label="2021 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q117830073" start="7455" end="7464" title="Mortal Kombat 2 (film)" label="2025 film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7491" end="7528" title="Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm" label="Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="7542" end="7555" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q28891" start="7569" end="7583" title="Wreck-It Ralph" label="Wreck-It Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7597" end="7643" title="Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7661" end="7694" title="Mortal Kombat Legends: Snow Blind" label="Mortal Kombat Legends: Snow Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="7749" end="7757" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q150294" start="7927" end="7940" title="Mortal Kombat (1992 video game)" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006904" start="8356" end="8370" title="Trevor Goddard" label="Trevor Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q819196" start="8388" end="8397" title="Mortal Kombat (1995 film)" label="1995 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q59511757" start="8612" end="8628" title="Mortal Kombat 11" label="Mortal Kombat 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="8816" end="8824" title="gameplay" label="gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="8865" end="8872" title="gay men" label="gay men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664700" start="8899" end="8907" title="Instinct (magazine)" label="Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q207791" start="9021" end="9027" title="sexual fetishism" label="fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434843" start="9181" end="9191" title="glory-hole" label="glory-hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="9192" end="9207" title="sexual activity" label="sexual activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958297" start="9411" end="9426" title="hyper-masculine" label="hyper-masculine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528640" start="9462" end="9475" title="Gay Star News" label="Gay Star News"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="9495" end="9507" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="9529" end="9530" title="Twitter" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q19822358" start="9653" end="9661" title="Kung Jin" label="Kung Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="9918" end="9931" title="philosophical" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891097" start="9973" end="9990" title="gender inequality" label="gender inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="10034" end="10040" title="sexist" label="sexist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073063" start="10597" end="10608" title="Den of Geek" label="Den of Geek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10707" end="10712" title="Characters of the Mortal Kombat series#Jarek" label="Jarek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10714" end="10721" title="Characters of the Mortal Kombat series#Hsu Hao" label="Hsu Hao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10727" end="10731" title="Characters of the Mortal Kombat series#Kira" label="Kira"/>
<link wikidata="Q925269" start="10785" end="10800" title="Mortal Kombat 4" label="Mortal Kombat 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118361" start="10979" end="10994" title="Mortal Kombat X" label="Mortal Kombat X"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685650" start="11394" end="11405" title="Josh Lawson" label="Josh Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862159" start="11413" end="11422" title="Mortal Kombat (2021 film)" label="2021 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="11496" end="11507" title="Screen Rant" label="Screen Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q685018" start="11535" end="11546" title="CinemaBlend" label="CinemaBlend"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874827" start="11575" end="11581" title="Junkee" label="Junkee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969572" wikidata="Q15521507" url="?curid=969572" title="Henry Putzel Jr.">
<text>Henry Putzel Jr. (October 8, 1913 – September 2, 2013) was an American lawyer and the thirteenth Reporter of Decisions of the United States Supreme Court, serving from 1964 to 1979.

Born in Denver, Colorado, he received his B.A. from Yale University in 1935 and his law degree from Yale in 1938. He practiced law in St. Louis, Missouri from 1938 to 1941. During World War II, he worked for the Federal government at the Office of Price Administration (1942–1945) and the United States Department of Justice&#x27;s Foreign Agents Registration Section (1945–1948). At Justice he also worked on desegregation and civil rights cases in the Civil Rights Division where he was eventually head of the Elections Section prior to being recommended to Chief Justice Earl Warren for the position of reporter of decisions.

Putzel said the ideal reporter must be a lawyer, a &quot;word nut&quot;, and a &quot;double revolving peripatetic nit-picker.&quot;

Putzel died in Peterborough, New Hampshire on September 2, 2013, at the age of 99.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15521507" start="0" end="16" title="Henry Putzel Jr." label="Henry Putzel Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="97" end="118" title="Supreme Court of the United States Reporter of Decisions" label="Reporter of Decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="126" end="153" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="191" end="207" title="Denver, Colorado" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="225" end="229" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="235" end="250" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="317" end="336" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="363" end="375" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079289" start="421" end="451" title="Office of Price Administration" label="Office of Price Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="472" end="507" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="593" end="606" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="611" end="623" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="757" end="768" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021395" start="961" end="988" title="Peterborough, New Hampshire" label="Peterborough, New Hampshire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969576" wikidata="Q5183686" url="?curid=969576" title="Credenda/Agenda">
<text>Credenda/Agenda was a Christian cultural and theological journal, published under the auspices of Christ Church of Moscow, Idaho. Douglas Wilson served as editor, Douglas Jones as senior editor, and N. D. Wilson as managing editor. Editions were published quarterly in print form and also electronically on the internet. Canon Press, another ministry of Christ Church, also produced an audio edition.

&quot;Credenda/Agenda&quot; began appearing in 1989 as a loose-paper pamphlet, though the format was revised in 1997 to a full-page magazine. The title is Latin for &quot;Things to be believed/things to be done&quot;.

Publication appears to have ended in 2012, although back issues are still for sale at the CanonPress website.

==Subject matter==
The magazine&#x27;s subject matter was typically of a religious nature, though film and book reviews, satire of prominent news stories, poems, and short stories are common. Each issue had a general theme to which many of the articles relate. Past themes included escapism, paedocommunion, the Textus Receptus, sex, C. S. Lewis, P. G. Wodehouse, cheese and Beowulf, and special issues addressed the September 11, 2001 attacks and the editors&#x27; views on the New Perspective on Paul.

The magazine advocated a Reformed soteriology, a liturgical approach to worship, a Van Tillian approach to apologetics, the federal headship of men within the family, and the cultivation of the mind through the liberal arts and the Western tradition.

A number of the articles from the magazine have been collected and expanded into books, including some of Douglas and Nancy Wilson&#x27;s books on family life—&quot;Reforming Marriage&quot; (1995), &quot;Fruit of Her Hands&quot; (1997), &quot;Standing on the Promises&quot; (1997), &quot;Federal Husband&quot; (1999), and others—and Douglas Wilson and Douglas Jones&#x27;s volume on cultural vision, &quot;Angels in the Architecture&quot; (1998).

Crawford Gribben notes that &quot;&quot;Credenda Agenda&quot; featured wry and often satirical articles that popularized elements of Rushdoony&#x27;s political and eschatological vision while emphasizing the value of Reformed theology, life in community, and the importance of the liberal arts.&quot;

==See also==
*List of theological journals

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="22" end="31" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="32" end="40" title="culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="45" end="56" title="theology" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108753" start="98" end="111" title="Christ Church (Moscow, Idaho)" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q499927" start="115" end="128" title="Moscow, Idaho" label="Moscow, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302114" start="130" end="144" title="Douglas Wilson (theologian)" label="Douglas Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="155" end="161" title="Editing" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951629" start="199" end="211" title="N. D. Wilson" label="N. D. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068933" start="215" end="230" title="managing editor" label="managing editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="311" end="319" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191517" start="321" end="332" title="Canon Press" label="Canon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="534" end="542" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="557" end="562" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="805" end="814" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="853" end="859" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="898" end="911" title="short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q898449" start="1014" end="1022" title="escapism" label="escapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847503" start="1024" end="1038" title="paedocommunion" label="paedocommunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130001" start="1044" end="1059" title="Textus Receptus" label="Textus Receptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="1061" end="1064" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="1066" end="1077" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="1079" end="1094" title="P. G. Wodehouse" label="P. G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="1096" end="1102" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="1107" end="1114" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1149" end="1175" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q118208" start="1211" end="1234" title="New Perspective on Paul" label="New Perspective on Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q326255" start="1271" end="1282" title="soteriology" label="soteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="1286" end="1296" title="liturgy" label="liturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514663" start="1309" end="1316" title="worship" label="worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133986" start="1320" end="1331" title="Cornelius Van Til" label="Van Tillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118925" start="1344" end="1355" title="presuppositional apologetics" label="apologetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440533" start="1361" end="1377" title="federal headship" label="federal headship"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="1448" end="1460" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="1469" end="1486" title="Western culture" label="Western tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133223" start="2070" end="2079" title="Rushdoony" label="Rushdoony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643260" start="2253" end="2281" title="List of theological journals" label="List of theological journals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969582" wikidata="Q16990721" url="?curid=969582" title="Spaghetti strap">
<text>A spaghetti strap (also called a noodle strap) is a very thin shoulder strap used to support clothing, while providing minimal shoulder straps over otherwise bare shoulders. It is commonly used in garments such as swimwear, camisoles, crop tops, brassieres, sundresses, cocktail dresses, and evening gowns, so-named for its resemblance to the thin pasta strings called &quot;spaghetti.&quot;

Spaghetti straps are fragile suspenders meant to support a light clothing.

== Dress codes ==
Spaghetti straps may not meet some dress codes. For example, they are not welcome at Ascot Racecourse as well as in traditionalist societies like Saudi Arabia or Afghanistan.

==See also==
* Halterneck
* Sleeveless shirt

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16990721" start="2" end="17" title="Spaghetti strap" label="spaghetti strap"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990721" start="33" end="45" title="Spaghetti strap" label="noodle strap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217573" start="62" end="76" title="shoulder strap" label="shoulder strap"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="214" end="222" title="swimwear" label="swimwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q574526" start="224" end="232" title="camisole" label="camisole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468747" start="235" end="243" title="crop top" label="crop top"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639866" start="258" end="266" title="sundress" label="sundress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512004" start="270" end="284" title="cocktail dress" label="cocktail dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144456" start="292" end="304" title="evening gown" label="evening gown"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026" start="375" end="384" title="spaghetti" label="spaghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q723336" start="572" end="588" title="Ascot Racecourse" label="Ascot Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="633" end="645" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="649" end="660" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037319" start="678" end="688" title="Halterneck" label="Halterneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q340704" start="691" end="707" title="Sleeveless shirt" label="Sleeveless shirt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969583" wikidata="Q5720053" url="?curid=969583" title="Henry Curtis Lind">
<text>Henry Curtis Lind (October 12, 1921 – November 11, 2013) was an American lawyer and the fourteenth reporter of decisions of the United States Supreme Court from 1979 to 1987.

Born in Cranston, Rhode Island, he received his A.B. from Princeton University in 1943 and his law degree from Harvard University in 1949. He was in private practice from 1949 to 1957, when he joined the staff of the Lawyers Co-operative Publishing Company in Rochester, New York, editing the &quot;Lawyer&#x27;s Edition of the United States Reports&quot; and the &quot;United States Supreme Court Digest&quot;. He was assistant reporter of decisions for the court from 1973 to 1979 and oversaw the transition from hot lead to computer typesetting. He also wrote a manual of style and composition for judicial writing.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5720053" start="0" end="17" title="Henry Curtis Lind" label="Henry Curtis Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314158" start="99" end="120" title="Supreme Court of the United States Reporter of Decisions" label="reporter of decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="128" end="155" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q49197" start="184" end="206" title="Cranston, Rhode Island" label="Cranston, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="224" end="228" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="234" end="254" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="287" end="305" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984204" start="393" end="432" title="Lawyers Co-operative Publishing Company" label="Lawyers Co-operative Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="436" end="455" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="712" end="723" title="typesetting" label="typesetting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969586" wikidata="Q591399" url="?curid=969586" title="Drogue parachute">
<text>A drogue parachute, also called drag chute, is a parachute designed for deployment from a rapidly moving object. It can be used for various purposes, such as to decrease speed, to provide control and stability, as a pilot parachute to deploy a larger parachute or a combination of these. Vehicles that have used drogue parachutes include multistage parachutes, aircraft, and spacecraft recovery systems.

The drogue parachute was invented by Russian professor and parachute specialist Gleb Kotelnikov in 1912, who also invented the knapsack parachute. The Soviet Union introduced its first aircraft fitted with drogue parachutes during the mid 1930s; use of the technology expanded during and after the Second World War. A large number of jet-powered aircraft have been furnished with drogue parachutes, including the Boeing B-52 Stratofortress strategic bomber and the Eurofighter Typhoon multirole aircraft; they were also commonly used within crewed space vehicle recovery programmes, including Project Mercury and Project Gemini. The drogue parachute has also been extensively used upon ejection seats as a means of stabilisation and deceleration. 

==History==
The drogue parachute was first used during 1912 in a ground-based parachute test in the absence of airplanes, by Russian inventor Gleb Kotelnikov, who had patented an early canister-packed knapsack parachute a few months before this test. On a road near Tsarskoye Selo (now part of St. Petersburg), Kotelnikov successfully demonstrated the braking effects of such a parachute by accelerating a Russo-Balt automobile to its top speed and then opening a parachute attached to the back seat.
During 1937, the Soviet Union decided to adopt the drogue parachute for the first time on a limited number of their aircraft, specifically those assigned to operate within the Arctic to provide logistical support for the famous polar expeditions of the era, such as the first drifting ice stations North Pole-1, which was launched that same year. The drogue parachute was credited with enabling airplanes to land safely on smaller ice floes that were otherwise unfeasible landing sites.

One of the earliest production-standard military aircraft to use a drogue parachute to slow down and shorten its landings was the Arado Ar 234, a jet-powered reconnaissance-bomber used by the Luftwaffe. Both the trolley-and-skid undercarriage series of eight prototypes for the never-produced Ar 234A series — one on the aircraft, and a separate system on the aft surface of the trolley&#x27;s main axle — and the tricycle undercarriage-equipped Ar 234B production series were fitted with a drogue parachute deployment capability in the extreme rear ventral fuselage.

During the space race between the United States and the Soviet Union, drogue parachutes were adopted on numerous spacecraft. All human space programs managed by NASA and the Soviets in that time, including Project Mercury and the Apollo program, employed drogue parachutes in their vehicle recovery systems alongside the larger main parachutes. The large budget granted to NASA at the time allowed for the extensive development of parachutes, also including drogues that were designed for deployment in extreme conditions and proved useful for interplanetary missions. The Space Shuttle, which landed on a runway, also found benefit in using a drag chute during landing. Its solid rocket boosters were also recovered with the help of drogue parachutes.
==Design and characteristics==

In comparison to a conventional parachute, the drogue parachute is more elongated and has a far smaller surface area; as a result, it provides far less drag. The drogue parachute can be deployed at speeds at which conventional parachutes would be torn apart, although it will not slow an object as much as a conventional parachute would do. Due to its simpler design, the drogue parachute is also easier to deploy, minimizing the risk of becoming tangled while unfolding or failing to inflate properly.

==Use==
===Parachuting===

Drogue parachutes are sometimes used to deploy a main or reserve parachute by using the drag generated by the drogue to pull the main parachute out of its container. Such a drogue is referred to as a pilot chute when used in a single user (sports) parachute system. The pilot chute is only used to deploy the main or reserve parachute; it is not used for slowing down or for stability. Tandem systems are different; a drogue is deployed shortly after exiting the aircraft to reduce the terminal velocity of the pair of tandem jumpers during freefall. It is later used to deploy the main parachute as on single-person parachutes.

Numerous innovations and improvements have been made to drogue parachutes intended for this purpose; examples include a patent for an antispinning feature granted during 1972, and improved force distribution granted in 2011.

===Deceleration===
When used to shorten an aircraft&#x27;s landing distance, a drogue chute is called a drag parachute or braking parachute. They remain effective for landings on wet or icy runways and for high-speed emergency landings.

Braking parachutes are also employed to slow down cars during drag racing; the National Hot Rod Association requires their installation on all vehicles able to attain speeds of 150 miles per hour or greater. They have also been installed on multiple experimental vehicles intended to conduct land speed record attempts.

===Stability===

Drogue parachutes may also be used to help stabilise direction of objects in flight, such as thrown RKG-3 anti-tank grenades or air-dropped bombs. Stall recovery parachutes are used to mitigate risk of uncontrollable spins during airworthiness flight testing. It has been used for similar purposes when applied to several nuclear bombs, such as the B61 and B83, slowing the weapon&#x27;s descent to provide the aircraft that dropped it enough time to escape the nuclear blast.
Drogue parachutes have found use on ejection seats to both stabilise and to slow down almost immediately following deployment, examples include the ACES II personal escape system. Similarly, a number of escape capsules, used on both supersonic aircraft and spacecraft, have employed drogue parachutes both for stability and braking, allowing either a main chute to be deployed or for the pilot to exit the capsule and use a personal parachute.Drogue parachutes remain a key technology for spaceflight, because they can be used to gain control of very fast descents, including those of spacecraft during atmospheric entry. They are usually deployed until having established entry conditions that allow for the use of main parachutes or retropropulsion. These include the Boeing X-37 spaceplane, SpaceX Dragon capsules and fairing halves, Rocket Lab Electron first stages, ISRO&#x27;s Gaganyaan modules and the Chang&#x27;e 5 re-entry craft. The Stardust and OSIRIS-REx sample return capsules and all successful Mars landing missions as of January 2024 used supersonic drogue parachutes. Some high-altitude rockets have also used drogue chutes as part of a dual-deployment system, subsequently deploying a main parachute to control and slow their descent.

==See also==
* Air brake (aircraft)
* Drogue
* Sea anchor

==References==
==External links==
* Marine parachute drogues 
*PTK-10SK Parachute braking system
*PTK-29SK Parachute braking system
*PTK-25 Parachute braking system
*PTK-10240-65 series 2 Parachute braking system</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q591399" start="2" end="18" title="Drogue parachute" label="drogue parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q591399" start="32" end="42" title="Drogue parachute" label="drag chute"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="49" end="58" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="375" end="385" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="442" end="448" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q742217" start="485" end="500" title="Gleb Kotelnikov" label="Gleb Kotelnikov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="532" end="550" title="Parachute#Eve_of_World_War_I" label="knapsack parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="556" end="568" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="703" end="719" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522973" start="739" end="750" title="jet propulsion" label="jet-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="818" end="844" title="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress" label="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="845" end="861" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="870" end="889" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q850403" start="890" end="908" title="Multirole combat aircraft" label="multirole aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="998" end="1013" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="1018" end="1032" title="Project Gemini" label="Project Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="1091" end="1104" title="ejection seat" label="ejection seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="1420" end="1434" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1448" end="1462" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177339" start="1560" end="1570" title="Russo-Balt" label="Russo-Balt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="1831" end="1837" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640995" start="1883" end="1899" title="polar expedition" label="polar expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311083" start="1931" end="1951" title="drifting ice station" label="drifting ice station"/>
<link wikidata="Q478580" start="1953" end="1965" title="North Pole-1" label="North Pole-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378564" start="2086" end="2095" title="drift ice" label="ice floes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157335" start="2273" end="2285" title="Arado Ar 234" label="Arado Ar 234"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522973" start="2289" end="2300" title="jet propulsion" label="jet-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="2335" end="2344" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="2723" end="2733" title="space race" label="space race"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2873" end="2877" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="2886" end="2893" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="2918" end="2933" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="2942" end="2956" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q834235" start="3256" end="3279" title="Interplanetary spaceflight" label="interplanetary missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="3285" end="3298" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422862" start="3387" end="3408" title="Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster" label="solid rocket boosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="3649" end="3653" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194470" start="4228" end="4239" title="pilot chute" label="pilot chute"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="4414" end="4420" title="Tandem skydive" label="Tandem"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="4778" end="4784" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q46241" start="5184" end="5195" title="drag racing" label="drag racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536294" start="5201" end="5229" title="National Hot Rod Association" label="National Hot Rod Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q913270" start="5414" end="5431" title="land speed record" label="land speed record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331041" start="5560" end="5584" title="RKG-3 anti-tank grenade" label="RKG-3 anti-tank grenades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137468" start="5588" end="5605" title="Air-dropped bomb" label="air-dropped bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="5607" end="5612" title="Stall (fluid dynamics)" label="Stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q910917" start="5677" end="5682" title="Spin (aerodynamics)" label="spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093523" start="5690" end="5703" title="airworthiness" label="airworthiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319996" start="5704" end="5718" title="flight testing" label="flight testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q795325" start="5809" end="5812" title="B61 nuclear bomb" label="B61"/>
<link wikidata="Q795321" start="5817" end="5820" title="B83 nuclear bomb" label="B83"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="5973" end="5986" title="ejection seat" label="ejection seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650614" start="6085" end="6092" title="ACES II" label="ACES II"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="6540" end="6557" title="atmospheric entry" label="atmospheric entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q571875" start="6672" end="6687" title="retropropulsion" label="retropropulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q333859" start="6707" end="6718" title="Boeing X-37" label="Boeing X-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q193701" start="6731" end="6737" title="SpaceX" label="SpaceX"/>
<link wikidata="Q236448" start="6738" end="6744" title="SpaceX Dragon" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116319" start="6774" end="6784" title="Rocket Lab" label="Rocket Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q18471030" start="6785" end="6793" title="Rocket Lab Electron" label="Electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="6808" end="6819" title="ISRO" label="ISRO&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q580809" start="6820" end="6829" title="Gaganyaan" label="Gaganyaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="6846" end="6860" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q205747" start="6881" end="6889" title="Stardust (spacecraft)" label="Stardust"/>
<link wikidata="Q604428" start="6894" end="6904" title="OSIRIS-REx" label="OSIRIS-REx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773188" start="6947" end="6959" title="Mars landing" label="Mars landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004684" start="7207" end="7227" title="Air brake (aircraft)" label="Air brake (aircraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138390" start="7230" end="7236" title="Drogue" label="Drogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166667" start="7239" end="7249" title="Sea anchor" label="Sea anchor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969591" wikidata="Q1568197" url="?curid=969591" title="Edward Kennedy (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Ted Kennedy]] (Edward Moore Kennedy, 1932–2009) was a United States Senator from Massachusetts.

Edward Kennedy may also refer to:
*Edward Kennedy (priest) (died 1864), Dean of Clonfert from 1850 to 1864
*Edward Kennedy (Royal Navy officer) (1879–1939), Royal Navy sailor
*Edward Kennedy (journalist) (c. 1905–1963), journalist who first reported the German surrender in World War II
*Edward Dean Kennedy (1945–1992), American murderer executed in Florida
*Edward J. Kennedy (born 1951), American politician from Massachusetts
*Edward Joseph Kennedy (1851–?), Irish nationalist politician, Member of Parliament for South Sligo
*Edward M. Kennedy Jr. (born 1961), American businessman and son of U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy and Virginia Joan Bennett
*Edward Shirley Kennedy (1817–1898), English mountaineer
*Edward Stewart Kennedy (1912–2009), historian of science
*Eddie Kennedy (born 1960), Irish painter

==See also==
*Ed Kennedy (disambiguation)
*Ted Kennedy (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1568197" start="0" end="15" title="Edward Kennedy (disambiguation)" label="[[Ted Kennedy]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568197" start="99" end="113" title="Edward Kennedy (disambiguation)" label="Edward Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85758646" start="134" end="157" title="Edward Kennedy (priest)" label="Edward Kennedy (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28857104" start="207" end="242" title="Edward Kennedy (Royal Navy officer)" label="Edward Kennedy (Royal Navy officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343914" start="275" end="302" title="Edward Kennedy (journalist)" label="Edward Kennedy (journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111175018" start="387" end="406" title="Edward Dean Kennedy" label="Edward Dean Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q89025769" start="459" end="476" title="Edward J. Kennedy" label="Edward J. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343848" start="530" end="551" title="Edward Joseph Kennedy" label="Edward Joseph Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048622" start="630" end="651" title="Edward M. Kennedy Jr." label="Edward M. Kennedy Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3048675" start="749" end="771" title="Edward Shirley Kennedy" label="Edward Shirley Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345454" start="806" end="828" title="Edward Stewart Kennedy" label="Edward Stewart Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282859" start="864" end="877" title="Eddie Kennedy" label="Eddie Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335025" start="920" end="947" title="Ed Kennedy (disambiguation)" label="Ed Kennedy (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183874" start="949" end="977" title="Ted Kennedy (disambiguation)" label="Ted Kennedy (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969597" wikidata="Q2000619" url="?curid=969597" title="Eccentric anomaly">
<text>In orbital mechanics, the eccentric anomaly is an angular parameter that defines the position of a body that is moving along an elliptic Kepler orbit. The eccentric anomaly is one of three angular parameters (&quot;anomalies&quot;) that define a position along an orbit, the other two being the true anomaly and the mean anomaly.

==Graphical representation==

Consider the ellipse with equation given by:
:formula_1

where &quot;a&quot; is the &quot;semi-major&quot; axis and &quot;b&quot; is the &quot;semi-minor&quot; axis.

For a point on the ellipse, &quot;P&quot; = &quot;P&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;), representing the position of an orbiting body in an elliptical orbit, the eccentric anomaly is the angle &quot;E&quot; in the figure. The eccentric anomaly &quot;E&quot; is one of the angles of a right triangle with one vertex at the center of the ellipse, its adjacent side lying on the &quot;major&quot; axis, having hypotenuse &quot;a&quot; (equal to the &quot;semi-major&quot; axis of the ellipse), and opposite side (perpendicular to the &quot;major&quot; axis and touching the point &quot;P′&quot; on the auxiliary circle of radius &quot;a&quot;) that passes through the point &quot;P&quot;. The eccentric anomaly is measured in the same direction as the true anomaly, shown in the figure as formula_2. The eccentric anomaly &quot;E&quot; in terms of these coordinates is given by:
:formula_3

and
:formula_4

The second equation is established using the relationship
:formula_5,

which implies that . The equation is immediately able to be ruled out since it traverses the ellipse in the wrong direction. It can also be noted that the second equation can be viewed as coming from a similar triangle with its opposite side having the same length &quot;y&quot; as the distance from &quot;P&quot; to the &quot;major&quot; axis, and its hypotenuse &quot;b&quot; equal to the &quot;semi-minor&quot; axis of the ellipse.

==Formulas==

===Radius and eccentric anomaly===
The eccentricity &quot;e&quot; is defined as:

:formula_6

From Pythagoras&#x27;s theorem applied to the triangle with &quot;r&quot; (a distance &quot;FP&quot;) as hypotenuse:
:formula_7

Thus, the radius (distance from the focus to point &quot;P&quot;) is related to the eccentric anomaly by the formula
:formula_8

With this result the eccentric anomaly can be determined from the true anomaly as shown next.

===From the true anomaly===
The &quot;true anomaly&quot; is the angle labeled formula_2 in the figure, located at the focus of the ellipse. It is sometimes represented by or . The true anomaly and the eccentric anomaly are related as follows.

Using the formula for above, the sine and cosine of are found in terms of  :
:formula_10

Hence,
:formula_11

where the correct quadrant for is given by the signs of numerator and denominator, so that can be most easily found using an atan2 function.

Angle is therefore the adjacent angle of a right triangle with hypotenuse formula_12 adjacent side formula_13 and opposite side formula_14

Also,
:formula_15

Substituting   as found above into the expression for , the radial distance from the focal point to the point , can be found in terms of the true anomaly as well:
:formula_16
where
:formula_17
is called &quot;the semi-latus rectum&quot; in classical geometry.

===From the mean anomaly===

The eccentric anomaly &quot;E&quot; is related to the mean anomaly &quot;M&quot; by Kepler&#x27;s equation:
:formula_18

This equation does not have a closed-form solution for &quot;E&quot; given &quot;M&quot;. It is usually solved by numerical methods, e.g. the Newton–Raphson method. It may be expressed in a Fourier series as
:formula_19
where formula_20 is the Bessel function of the first kind.

==See also==
*Eccentricity vector
*Orbital eccentricity

==Notes and references==
==Sources==
* Murray, Carl D.; &amp; Dermott, Stanley F. (1999); &quot;Solar System Dynamics&quot;, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, GB
* Plummer, Henry C. K. (1960); &quot;An Introductory Treatise on Dynamical Astronomy&quot;, Dover Publications, New York, NY (Reprint of the 1918 Cambridge University Press edition)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q842433" start="3" end="20" title="orbital mechanics" label="orbital mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000619" start="26" end="43" title="Eccentric anomaly" label="eccentric anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q272626" start="50" end="67" title="keplerian element" label="angular parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="128" end="136" title="ellipse" label="elliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="137" end="149" title="Kepler orbit" label="Kepler orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264448" start="295" end="307" title="true anomaly" label="true anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="316" end="328" title="mean anomaly" label="mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q104486" start="1993" end="2005" title="eccentricity (mathematics)" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="2053" end="2078" title="Pythagoras&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Pythagoras&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264448" start="2439" end="2451" title="true anomaly" label="true anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q776598" start="2880" end="2885" title="atan2" label="atan2"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="3400" end="3412" title="mean anomaly" label="mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q932001" start="3430" end="3452" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="3497" end="3517" title="closed-form solution" label="closed-form solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="3581" end="3598" title="numerical methods" label="numerical methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q374195" start="3609" end="3630" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s method" label="Newton–Raphson method"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="3657" end="3671" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="3711" end="3726" title="Bessel function" label="Bessel function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755244" start="3761" end="3780" title="Eccentricity vector" label="Eccentricity vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="3782" end="3802" title="Orbital eccentricity" label="Orbital eccentricity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969598" wikidata="Q1065756" url="?curid=969598" title="Melanosome">
<text>A melanosome is an organelle found in animal cells and is the site for synthesis, storage and transport of melanin, the most common light-absorbing pigment found in the animal kingdom. Melanosomes are responsible for color and photoprotection in animal cells and tissues.

Melanosomes are synthesised in the skin in melanocyte cells, as well as the eye in choroidal melanocytes and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells. In lower vertebrates, they are found in melanophores or chromatophores.

==Structure==

Melanosomes are relatively large organelles, measuring up to 500 nm in diameter. They are bound by a bilipid membrane and are, in general, rounded, sausage-like, or cigar-like in shape. The shape is constant for a given species and cell type. They have a characteristic ultrastructure on electron microscopy, which varies according to the maturity of the melanosome, and for research purposes a numeric staging system is sometimes used.

==Synthesis of melanin==
Melanosomes are dependent for their pigment on certain enzymes, especially tyrosinase, that synthesise the large polymers of melanin within the cell. Before it generates sufficient pigment to be seen on light microscopy it is known as a pre-melanosome.

Dysfunction or absence of the melanin-synthesising enzymes (in conditions such as Chédiak–Higashi syndrome) leads to various patterns of albinism.

==Pseudopodia and tanning==
In some melanocytes, the melanosomes remain static within the cell. In others the cell can extend its surface lengthwise as temporary projections known as pseudopodia, which carry melanosomes away from the center of the cell, thereby increasing the cell&#x27;s effectiveness in absorbing light.

The pseudopodial process (aka the &quot;tanning&quot; process) happens slowly in dermal melanocytes in response to ultraviolet light and to production of new melanosomes and increased &quot;donation&quot; of melanosomes to adjacent keratinocytes, which are typical skin surface cells. Donation occurs when some keratinocytes engulf the end of the melanocyte pseudopodia, which contain many melanosomes. Cytoplasmic dynein will carry the vesicles containing the melanin to the center of the cell, which causes melanosomes to sequester the keratinocyte&#x27;s nucleus, providing optimal protection from UV rays. These changes are responsible for tanning of human skin after exposure to UV light or sunlight.

==In animals==
In many species of fish, amphibians, crustaceans, and reptiles, melanosomes can be highly mobile within the cell in response to hormonal (or sometimes neural) control, which leads to visible changes in colour that are used for behavioural signaling or photoprotection.

Melanosomes found in certain fish species contain pigments that control the color of the fish&#x27;s scales. Molecular motors, when signaled, will either carry melanosomes containing pigments out to the periphery of the cell, or concentrate them at the center. The motor protein dynein is responsible for concentrating the melanosomes toward the center of the cell, or the &quot;minus end&quot; of microtubules. Conversely, the protein kinesin is responsible for dispersing the melanosomes to the periphery of the cell, and are &quot;plus end&quot; directed motors. Because the plus ends of microtubules are oriented towards the periphery, kinesin will carry melanosomes to the periphery. Dispersing melanosomes to the periphery causes the cell to appear darker; concentrating melanosomes towards the center will cause the cell to appear lighter color. This is how a photoprotective system works for the fish on a molecular level.

Recently, melanosomes were found in spiders as well.

The beautiful and rapid colour changes seen in many cephalopods such as octopuses and squid, are based on a different system, the chromatophore organ.

==In fossils==
Recent (2008) discoveries by Xu Xing, a Chinese paleontologist, include fossilized feathers in rock formations dating from the Jurassic period (200 to 150 million years ago) to the late Paleogene and Neogene periods (66 to 2 million years ago). The feathers contain preserved residues of carbon that were previously thought to be traces of bacteria that decomposed feather tissues; however these (residues) are in fact microscopic organic imprints of fossilized melanosomes. Some of these structures still maintain an iridescent color typical of feather and fur tissues. It is conjectured that these microscopic structures could be further studied to reveal the original colors and textures of softer tissues in fossils. &quot;The discovery of ultra-structural detail in feather fossils opens up remarkable possibilities for the investigation of other features in soft-bodied fossils, like fur and even internal organs,&quot; said Derek Briggs of the Yale University study team.

Melanosomes were used to discover the true colors of fossil &quot;Anchiornis huxleyi&quot; by a collaborative team including members from the Beijing Museum of Natural History, Peking University, Yale University, the Peabody Museum of Natural History, the University of Akron, and the University of Texas at Austin.

Melanosomes have also been found in fossils from &quot;Tupandactylus&quot; cf. &quot;imperator&quot; pteurosaurs in the Lower Cretaceous Crato Formation, in the Araripe Basin, in Brazil.

==Templating==
Melanosomes are believed to template melanin polymerization by way of amyloidogenesis of the protein Pmel17, which is present in abundant quantities in melanosomes.

==References==
==External links==
* - &quot;Integument: pigmented skin&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065756" start="2" end="12" title="Melanosome" label="melanosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q45948" start="19" end="28" title="organelle" label="organelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187526" start="107" end="114" title="melanin" label="melanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="169" end="183" title="Animal" label="animal kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q676558" start="227" end="242" title="photoprotection" label="photoprotection"/>
<link wikidata="Q247101" start="316" end="326" title="melanocyte" label="melanocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q271762" start="356" end="365" title="choroidal" label="choroidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346242" start="382" end="408" title="retinal pigment epithelial" label="retinal pigment epithelial"/>
<link wikidata="Q504699" start="478" end="491" title="chromatophore" label="chromatophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="575" end="577" title="Nanometer" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q423279" start="611" end="627" title="Lipid bilayer" label="bilipid membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141316" start="780" end="794" title="ultrastructure" label="ultrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="798" end="817" title="electron microscopy" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85942926" start="1048" end="1058" title="tyrosinase" label="tyrosinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q187526" start="1098" end="1105" title="melanin" label="melanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="1176" end="1192" title="light microscopy" label="light microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q934034" start="1309" end="1333" title="Chédiak–Higashi syndrome" label="Chédiak–Higashi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="1364" end="1372" title="albinism" label="albinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165291" start="1558" end="1569" title="pseudopodia" label="pseudopodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1814" end="1831" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473931" start="1931" end="1943" title="keratinocyte" label="keratinocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q410134" start="2114" end="2120" title="dynein" label="dynein"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="2440" end="2444" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="2446" end="2455" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="2458" end="2468" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="2475" end="2482" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2648" end="2669" title="behavioural signaling" label="behavioural signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q676558" start="2673" end="2688" title="photoprotection" label="photoprotection"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="2741" end="2749" title="pigments" label="pigments"/>
<link wikidata="Q188488" start="2792" end="2798" title="Scale (zoology)" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q423905" start="2800" end="2816" title="Molecular motors" label="Molecular motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q410134" start="2970" end="2976" title="dynein" label="dynein"/>
<link wikidata="Q189933" start="3089" end="3100" title="microtubule" label="microtubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q15319390" start="3127" end="3134" title="kinesin" label="kinesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q676558" start="3558" end="3573" title="photoprotective" label="photoprotective"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="3729" end="3739" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="3749" end="3756" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="3763" end="3768" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q504699" start="3807" end="3820" title="chromatophore" label="chromatophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q793638" start="3873" end="3880" title="Xu Xing (paleontologist)" label="Xu Xing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="3892" end="3906" title="paleontology" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="3916" end="3922" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="3971" end="3986" title="Jurassic period" label="Jurassic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="4030" end="4039" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="4044" end="4058" title="Neogene period" label="Neogene period"/>
<link wikidata="Q957208" start="4362" end="4372" title="iridescence" label="iridescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q530161" start="4775" end="4787" title="Derek Briggs" label="Derek Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="4795" end="4810" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511041" start="4890" end="4908" title="Anchiornis huxleyi" label="Anchiornis huxleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q846583" start="4966" end="4999" title="Beijing Museum of Natural History" label="Beijing Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="5001" end="5018" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="5020" end="5035" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945" start="5041" end="5074" title="Peabody Museum of Natural History" label="Peabody Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346135" start="5080" end="5099" title="University of Akron" label="University of Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="5109" end="5138" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118470" start="5196" end="5209" title="Tupandactylus" label="Tupandactylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="5242" end="5253" title="Pterosaur" label="pteurosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25059170" start="5302" end="5315" title="Araripe Basin" label="Araripe Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5320" end="5326" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740853" start="5414" end="5421" title="amyloid" label="amyloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031504" start="5445" end="5451" title="SILV" label="Pmel17"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969603" wikidata="Q2264448" url="?curid=969603" title="True anomaly">
<text>In celestial mechanics, true anomaly is an angular parameter that defines the position of a body moving along a Keplerian orbit. It is the angle between the direction of periapsis and the current position of the body, as seen from the main focus of the ellipse (the point around which the object orbits).

The true anomaly is usually denoted by the Greek letters or , or the Latin letter , and is usually restricted to the range 0–360° (0–2π rad).

The true anomaly is one of three angular parameters (&quot;anomalies&quot;) that defines a position along an orbit, the other two being the eccentric anomaly and the mean anomaly.

==Formulas==

===From state vectors===
For elliptic orbits, the true anomaly can be calculated from orbital state vectors as:

:formula_1
::(if then replace by )

where: 
* v is the orbital velocity vector of the orbiting body,
* e is the eccentricity vector,
* r is the orbital position vector (segment &quot;FP&quot; in the figure) of the orbiting body.

====Circular orbit====
For circular orbits the true anomaly is undefined, because circular orbits do not have a uniquely determined periapsis. Instead the argument of latitude &quot;u&quot; is used:

:formula_2
::(if then replace )

where:
* n is a vector pointing towards the ascending node (i.e. the &quot;z&quot;-component of n is zero).
* &quot;rz&quot; is the &quot;z&quot;-component of the orbital position vector r

====Circular orbit with zero inclination====
For circular orbits with zero inclination the argument of latitude is also undefined, because there is no uniquely determined line of nodes. One uses the true longitude instead:

:formula_3
::(if then replace by )

where:
* &quot;rx&quot; is the &quot;x&quot;-component of the orbital position vector r
* &quot;vx&quot; is the &quot;x&quot;-component of the orbital velocity vector v.

===From the eccentric anomaly===
The relation between the true anomaly and the eccentric anomaly formula_4 is:

:formula_5

or using the sine and tangent:

:formula_6

or equivalently:

:formula_7

so

:formula_8

Alternatively, a form of this equation was derived by that avoids numerical issues when the arguments are near formula_9, as the two tangents become infinite. Additionally, since formula_10 and formula_11 are always in the same quadrant, there will not be any sign problems. 

:formula_12 where formula_13

so
:formula_14

===From the mean anomaly===
The true anomaly can be calculated directly from the mean anomaly formula_15 via a Fourier expansion:

:formula_16
with Bessel functions formula_17 and parameter formula_18.

Omitting all terms of order formula_19 or higher (indicated by formula_20), it can be written as

:formula_21

Note that for reasons of accuracy this approximation is usually limited to orbits where the eccentricity formula_22 is small.

The expression formula_23 is known as the equation of the center, where more details about the expansion are given.

===Radius from true anomaly===
The radius (distance between the focus of attraction and the orbiting body) is related to the true anomaly by the formula

:formula_24

where &quot;a&quot; is the orbit&#x27;s semi-major axis.

In celestial mechanics, Projective anomaly is an angular parameter that defines the position of a body moving along a Keplerian orbit. It is the angle between the direction of periapsis and the current position of the body in the projective space.

The projective anomaly is usually denoted by the formula_25 and is usually restricted to the range 0 - 360 degree (0 - 2 formula_26 radian).

The projective anomaly formula_25 is one of four angular parameters (&quot;anomalies&quot;) that defines a position along an orbit, the other two being the eccentric anomaly, true anomaly and the mean anomaly.

In the projective geometry, circle, ellipse, parabolla, hyperbolla are treated as a same kind of quadratic curves.

==projective parameters and projective anomaly==

An orbit type is classified by two project parameters formula_28 and formula_29 as follows, 

*circular orbit formula_30

*elliptic orbit formula_31

*parabolic orbit formula_32

*hyperbolic orbit formula_33

*linear orbit formula_34

*imaginary orbit formula_35

where

formula_36

formula_37

formula_38

formula_39

where &quot;formula_28&quot; is semi major axis,&quot;formula_22&quot; is eccentricity, &quot;formula_42&quot; is perihelion distance、&quot;formula_43&quot; is aphelion distance.

Position and heliocentric distance of the planet formula_44, formula_45 and formula_46 can be calculated as functions of the projective anomaly formula_25 :

formula_48

formula_49

formula_50

==Kepler&#x27;s equation==

The projective anomaly formula_25 can be calculated from the eccentric anomaly formula_52 as follows,

* Case : formula_53

formula_54

formula_55

* case : formula_56

formula_57

formula_58

* case : formula_59

formula_60

formula_61

The above equations are called Kepler&#x27;s equation.

==Generalized anomaly==

For arbitrary constant formula_62, the generalized anomaly formula_63 is related as

formula_64

The eccentric anomaly, the true anomaly, and the projective anomaly are the cases of formula_65, formula_66, formula_67, respectively.

* Sato, I., &quot;A New Anomaly of Keplerian Motion&quot;, Astronomical Journal Vol.116, pp.2038-3039, (1997)

==See also==
* Two body problem
* Mean anomaly
* Eccentric anomaly
* Kepler&#x27;s equation
* projective geometry
* Kepler&#x27;s laws of planetary motion
* Projective anomaly
* Ellipse
* Hyperbola

==References==
==Further reading==
* Murray, C. D. &amp; Dermott, S. F., 1999, &quot;Solar System Dynamics&quot;, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
* Plummer, H. C., 1960, &quot;An Introductory Treatise on Dynamical Astronomy&quot;, Dover Publications, New York. (Reprint of the 1918 Cambridge University Press edition.)

== External links ==

* Federal Aviation Administration - Describing Orbits</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="3" end="22" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264448" start="24" end="36" title="True anomaly" label="true anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="51" end="60" title="parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="112" end="127" title="Keplerian orbit" label="Keplerian orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="170" end="179" title="periapsis" label="periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="253" end="260" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="349" end="362" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="375" end="387" title="Latin script" label="Latin letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000619" start="589" end="606" title="eccentric anomaly" label="eccentric anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="615" end="627" title="mean anomaly" label="mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091138" start="730" end="751" title="orbital state vectors" label="orbital state vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091138" start="812" end="835" title="orbital velocity vector" label="orbital velocity vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755244" start="869" end="888" title="eccentricity vector" label="eccentricity vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091138" start="901" end="924" title="orbital position vector" label="orbital position vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261398" start="1014" end="1028" title="circular orbit" label="circular orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789754" start="1142" end="1162" title="argument of latitude" label="argument of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091138" start="1383" end="1406" title="orbital position vector" label="orbital position vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261398" start="1459" end="1473" title="circular orbit" label="circular orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560803" start="1609" end="1623" title="true longitude" label="true longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091138" start="1732" end="1755" title="orbital position vector" label="orbital position vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091138" start="1813" end="1836" title="orbital velocity vector" label="orbital velocity vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000619" start="1920" end="1937" title="eccentric anomaly" label="eccentric anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="1978" end="1982" title="sine" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="1987" end="1994" title="tangent" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="2459" end="2471" title="mean anomaly" label="mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="2489" end="2506" title="Fourier expansion" label="Fourier expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="2526" end="2542" title="Bessel functions" label="Bessel functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589424" start="2861" end="2883" title="equation of the center" label="equation of the center"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="3143" end="3158" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="3164" end="3183" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="3218" end="3227" title="parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="3279" end="3294" title="Keplerian orbit" label="Keplerian orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="3337" end="3346" title="periapsis" label="periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000619" start="3708" end="3725" title="eccentric anomaly" label="eccentric anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264448" start="3727" end="3739" title="true anomaly" label="true anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="3748" end="3760" title="mean anomaly" label="mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4280" end="4295" title="semi major axis" label="semi major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104486" start="4322" end="4334" title="Eccentricity (mathematics)" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="4362" end="4381" title="perihelion distance" label="perihelion distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="4408" end="4425" title="aphelion distance" label="aphelion distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q932001" start="4919" end="4941" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q232976" start="5328" end="5344" title="Two body problem" label="Two body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="5347" end="5359" title="Mean anomaly" label="Mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000619" start="5362" end="5379" title="Eccentric anomaly" label="Eccentric anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q932001" start="5382" end="5404" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177409" start="5407" end="5426" title="projective geometry" label="projective geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="5429" end="5467" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5470" end="5488" title="Projective anomaly" label="Projective anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="5491" end="5498" title="Ellipse" label="Ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="5501" end="5510" title="Hyperbola" label="Hyperbola"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969608" wikidata="Q735104" url="?curid=969608" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr.">
<text>Christopher Columbus Kraft Jr. (February 28, 1924 – July 22, 2019) was an American aerospace and NASA engineer who was instrumental in establishing the agency&#x27;s Mission Control Center and shaping its organization and culture. His protégé Glynn Lunney said in 1998: &quot;the Control Center today ... is a reflection of Chris Kraft&quot;.

Following his 1944 graduation from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University with a degree in aeronautical engineering, Kraft was hired by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), the predecessor organization to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). He worked for over a decade in aeronautical research and in 1958 joined the Space Task Group, a small team entrusted with the responsibility of putting America&#x27;s first man in space. Assigned to the flight operations division, Kraft became NASA&#x27;s first flight director. He was on duty during America&#x27;s first crewed spaceflight, first crewed orbital flight, and first spacewalk. At the beginning of the Apollo program, Kraft retired as a flight director to concentrate on management and mission planning. In 1972, he became director of the Manned Spacecraft Center (later Johnson Space Center), following his mentor Robert R. Gilruth, and held the position until his retirement in 1982.

Later, Kraft consulted for companies such as IBM and Rockwell International. In 1994, he was appointed chairman of a panel to make NASA&#x27;s Space Shuttle program more cost effective. The panel&#x27;s controversial report, known as the &quot;Kraft report&quot;, recommended that NASA&#x27;s Space Shuttle operations should be outsourced to a private contractor. It also recommended that NASA cut back on the organizational changes intended to improve safety that were made after the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster. This attracted even more critical comment after the Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot; disaster.

Kraft published his autobiography &quot;Flight: My Life in Mission Control&quot; in 2001. The Mission Control Center building was named after him in 2011. When he received the National Space Trophy from the Rotary Club in 1999, the organization described him as &quot;a driving force in the U.S. human space flight program from its beginnings to the Space Shuttle era, a man whose accomplishments have become legendary&quot;.

== Early life and education ==
Christopher Columbus Kraft Jr. was born in Phoebus, Virginia, on February 28, 1924. He was named after his father, Christopher Columbus Kraft, who was born in New York City in 1892 near the newly renamed Columbus Circle. Kraft&#x27;s father, the son of Bavarian immigrants, had found his name an embarrassment, but passed it along to his son nonetheless. In later years, Kraft—as well as other commentators—would consider it peculiarly appropriate. Kraft commented in his autobiography that, with the choice of his name, &quot;some of my life&#x27;s direction was settled from the start&quot;. His mother, Vanda Olivia ( Suddreth), was a nurse. As a boy, Kraft played in an American Legion drum-and-bugle corps and became the state champion bugler. He went to school in Phoebus, where the only school went to the ninth grade and attended Hampton High School. He was a keen baseball player and continued to play the sport in college; one year he had a batting average of .340.

In September 1941, Kraft began his studies at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech) and became a Cadet in the Corps of Cadets as a member of N-Squadron. The United States entered World War II in December 1941, and he attempted to enlist in the United States Navy as a V-12 aviation cadet, but was rejected because of a burned right hand that he had suffered at age three. He graduated in December 1944 with a Bachelor of Science degree in aeronautical engineering.

== NACA career ==
On graduation, Kraft accepted a job with the Chance Vought aircraft company in Connecticut. He had also applied to the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), a government agency whose Langley Research Center was in Hampton, Virginia; Kraft considered it to be too close to home, but applied as a back-up if he was not accepted elsewhere. On arrival at Chance Vought he was told that he could not be hired without his birth certificate, which he had not brought with him. Annoyed by the bureaucratic mindset of the company, he decided to accept the offer from NACA instead.

In the 1940s, NACA was a research and development organization, devoted to cutting-edge aeronautical research. At the Langley Research Center, advanced wind tunnels were used to test new aircraft designs, and studies were taking place on new concepts such as the Bell X-1 rocket plane. Kraft was assigned to the flight research division, where Robert R. Gilruth was then head of research. His work with NACA included the development of an early example of gust alleviation systems for aircraft flying in turbulent air. This involved compensating for variations in the atmosphere by automatically deflecting the control surfaces. He investigated wingtip vortices, and discovered that they, and not prop-wash, are responsible for most of the wake turbulence in the air that trails flying aircraft.

Although he enjoyed his work, Kraft found it increasingly stressful, especially since he did not consider himself to be a strong theoretician. In 1956, he was diagnosed with an ulcer and started thinking about a change of career.

== Flight director ==
=== Flight operations ===
In 1957, the Russian flight of Sputnik 1 prompted the United States to accelerate its fledgling space program. On July 29, 1958, President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the National Aeronautics and Space Act, which established NASA and subsumed NACA within this newly created organization. Langley Research Center became a part of NASA, as did Langley employees such as Kraft. Even before NASA began its official existence in October, Kraft was invited by Gilruth to become a part of a new group that was working on the problems of putting a man into orbit. Without much hesitation, he accepted the offer. When the Space Task Group was officially formed on November 5, Kraft became one of the original 33 personnel (25 of them engineers) to be assigned. This marked the beginning of America&#x27;s man-in-space program, which came to be called Project Mercury.

As a member of the Space Task Group, Kraft was assigned to the flight operations division, which made plans and arrangements for the operation of the Mercury spacecraft during flight and for the control and monitoring of missions from the ground. Kraft became the assistant to Chuck Mathews, the head of the division, and was given the responsibility of putting together a mission plan. Given Mathews&#x27; casual analysis of the problem, it almost sounded simple:

When Kraft began to plan NASA&#x27;s flight operations, no human being had yet flown in space. In fact, the task before him was vast, requiring attention to flight plans, timelines, procedures, mission rules, spacecraft tracking, telemetry, ground support, telecommunications networks and contingency management.
One of Kraft&#x27;s most important contributions to crewed spaceflight would be his origination of the concept of a mission control center. Many of the engineers in Project Mercury had previously worked on the flight test of aircraft, where the role for ground support was minimal. Kraft soon realized that an astronaut could only do so much, particularly during the fast-moving launch phase; the Mercury spacecraft would require real time monitoring and support from specialist engineers.

These concepts shaped the Mercury Control Center, which was at Cape Canaveral in Florida. Another important concept pioneered by Kraft was the idea of the flight director, the man who would coordinate the team of engineers and make real-time decisions about the conduct of the mission. As Mathews later recalled, Kraft came to him one day saying, &quot;There needs to be someone in charge of the flights while they&#x27;re actually going on, and I want to be that person.&quot; In this informal way, the position of flight director was created.

A pivotal experience for Kraft was the flight of Mercury-Atlas 5, which sent a chimpanzee named Enos on the first American orbital spaceflight carrying a live passenger. Coverage of these early missions that carried non-human passengers could often be tongue-in-cheek; a &quot;Time&quot; magazine article on the flight, for example, was titled &quot;Meditative Chimponaut&quot;. Yet Kraft viewed them as important tests for the men and procedures of Mission Control, and as rehearsals for the crewed missions that would follow. Originally, the flight of Mercury-Atlas 5 had been intended to last for three orbits. The failure of one of the hydrogen peroxide jets controlling the spacecraft&#x27;s attitude forced Kraft to make the decision to bring the capsule back to Earth after two orbits. After the flight, astronaut John Glenn stated that he believed a human passenger would have been able to bring the capsule under control without the need for an early re-entry, thus (in the words of &quot;Time&quot;) &quot;affirming the superiority of astronauts over chimponauts.&quot; Yet for Kraft, the flight of Enos represented proof of the importance of real-time decision-making in Mission Control. It gave him a sense of the responsibility he would have for the lives of others, whether human or chimpanzee.

=== Mercury ===

Kraft served as flight director during all six of the crewed Mercury missions. During the final flight—Mercury-Atlas 9, which lasted for over a day—he shared responsibility with his deputy John Hodge.

Mercury-Atlas 6, the February 20, 1962, flight of John Glenn, was a testing experience both for Mission Control and for Kraft. Space historians Charles Murray and Catherine Bly Cox described it as &quot;the single event that decisively shaped Flight Operations&quot;. The mission was the first orbital flight by an American, and unfolded normally until Glenn began his second orbit. At that point Kraft&#x27;s systems controller, Don Arabian, reported that telemetry was showing a &quot;Segment 51&quot; indicator. This suggested that the capsule&#x27;s landing bag, which was meant to deploy upon splashdown in order to provide a cushion, might have deployed early. Kraft believed that the Segment 51 indicator was due to faulty instrumentation rather than to an actual early deployment. If he was wrong, it would mean that the capsule&#x27;s heat shield, which fitted on top of the landing bag, was now loose. A loose heat shield could cause the capsule to burn up during re-entry.

On consulting with his flight controllers, Kraft became convinced that the indication was false, and that no action was needed. His superiors, including Mercury capsule designer Max Faget, overruled Kraft, telling him to instruct Glenn to leave the capsule&#x27;s retrorocket package on during re-entry. The reasoning was that the package, which was strapped over the heat shield, would hold the heat shield in place if it was loose. Kraft, however, felt that this was an unacceptable risk. &quot;I was aghast,&quot; he remembered. &quot;If any of three retrorockets had solid fuel remaining, an explosion could rip everything apart.&quot; Yet he agreed to follow the plan advocated by Faget and by Walt Williams, his superior in the flight operations division. The retrorockets would be kept on.

Glenn landed safely, but an inspection of his capsule revealed that one of the landing bag switches had been faulty. Kraft was right; the heat shield had not been loose after all. The lessons that he drew from this experience were clear.

His assistant on the mission, Gene Kranz, considered Glenn&#x27;s flight &quot;the turning point ... in Kraft&#x27;s evolution as a flight director.&quot;

Before the flight of Mercury-Atlas 7, Kraft had objected to the choice of Scott Carpenter as the astronaut for the mission, telling Walt Williams that Carpenter&#x27;s lack of engineering skills might put the mission or his own life in danger. The mission suffered from problems including an unusually high rate of fuel usage, a malfunctioning horizon indicator, a delayed retrofire for re-entry, and a splashdown that was downrange from the target area. Throughout the mission, Kraft found himself frustrated by the vagueness of Carpenter&#x27;s communications with Mission Control, and what he perceived as Carpenter&#x27;s inattention to his duties. &quot;Part of the problem,&quot; he recalled, &quot;was that Carpenter either didn&#x27;t understand or was ignoring my instructions.&quot;

While some of these problems were due to mechanical failures, and responsibility for some of the others is still being debated, Kraft did not hesitate to assign blame to Carpenter, and continued to speak out about the mission for decades afterwards. His autobiography, written in 2001, reopened the issue; the chapter that dealt with the flight of Mercury-Atlas 7 was titled &quot;The Man Malfunctioned&quot;. In a letter to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Carpenter called the book &quot;vindictive and skewed&quot;, and offered a different assessment of the reasons for Kraft&#x27;s frustration: &quot;in space things happen so fast that only the pilot knows what to do, and even ground control can&#x27;t help. Maybe that&#x27;s why he is still fuming after all these years.&quot;

=== Gemini ===
During the Gemini program, Kraft&#x27;s role changed again. He was now the head of mission operations, in charge of a team of flight directors, although still also serving as a flight director. Due to the greater length of Gemini missions, Mission Control was now manned on a three-shift basis. &quot;Clearly, with flight control facing a learning curve,&quot; space historian David Harland has said, &quot;these arrangements were an experiment in their own right.&quot; Yet, Kraft proved to be remarkably successful at passing on responsibility to his fellow flight directors—arguably too successful, as Gene Kranz found during his first shift handover on Gemini 4. As Kranz recalled, &quot;He just said, &#x27;You&#x27;re in charge,&#x27; and walked out.&quot;

The Gemini program represented a string of firsts for NASA—the first flight with two astronauts, the first rendezvous in space, the first spacewalk—and Kraft was on duty during many of these historic events. America&#x27;s first spacewalk happened during the Gemini 4 mission; Kraft, at his console, found that he had to force himself to concentrate on his work, distracted by Ed White&#x27;s &quot;mesmerizing&quot; descriptions of the Earth below. He could easily understand the euphoria that White felt at the spectacle, yet he also was mindful of the discipline required to keep the flight safe. White delayed his return to the capsule, and a communication problem prevented capsule communicator Gus Grissom from getting the crew to hear the order to terminate the spacewalk. When contact was finally re-established, Kraft expressed his frustration on his ground link to Grissom:

After Gemini 7, Kraft stepped back from his work at Mission Control, allowing other flight directors to take charge of the remaining missions so that he could devote more time to planning for the Apollo program. He served on two review boards at North American Aviation, the contractor responsible for the Apollo capsule. Yet Kraft still felt pangs at not being at the center of the action, particularly after the emergency re-entry of Gemini 8. Both astronauts and mission controllers had made the right decisions, but, as Kraft confessed to Robert Gilruth, he found himself wishing that he had been the one on the spot.

=== Apollo 1 fire ===
With the beginning of the Apollo program, Kraft expected to resume at Mission Control. He would have been lead flight director on the first crewed Apollo mission (later known as Apollo 1), scheduled to launch in early 1967. On January 27, 1967, the three crew members were killed in a fire during a countdown test on the pad. At the time, Kraft was in Mission Control in Houston, listening in on the Cape test conductor&#x27;s voice loop. There was nothing anyone could do; before the crew at the pad could get the door open, the three astronauts were dead, having been overcome by toxic gases. Kraft was asked by Betty Grissom, the widow of astronaut Gus Grissom, to be one of the pallbearers at Grissom&#x27;s funeral at Arlington National Cemetery, Virginia.

=== Public profile ===
Kraft was a household name in America throughout the 1960s. He appeared on the cover of the August 27, 1965, issue of &quot;Time&quot;, profiled as the &quot;Conductor in a Command Post&quot;. In the article, he compared himself to Christopher Columbus, and displayed what the magazine described as &quot;an almost angry pride&quot; in his work. &quot;We know a lot more about what we have to do than he did&quot; Kraft said. &quot;And we know where we&#x27;re going.&quot; The article described Kraft&#x27;s role in the Gemini 5 mission, and drew on his frequent comparisons of his position as flight director with that of an orchestra conductor.

Kraft was surprised at &quot;Time&quot;″s decision to put him on the cover and told the NASA public affairs officer that &quot;they&#x27;ve got the wrong guy. It should be Bob Gilruth ... not me.&quot; He eventually came to terms with the idea, and the portrait painted for the cover became one of his prized possessions.

=== Relations with astronaut corps ===
After John Glenn&#x27;s flight, Kraft had vowed that he would no longer allow his decisions as flight director to be overruled by anyone outside Mission Control. The mission rules, whose drafting had been overseen by Kraft, stated that &quot;the flight director may, after analysis of the flight, choose to take any necessary action required for the successful completion of the mission.&quot; For Kraft, the power that the flight director held over every aspect of the mission extended to his control over the actions of the astronauts. In his 1965 interview with &quot;Time&quot;, he stated:

Occasionally, Kraft intervened in order to ensure that his conception of the flight director&#x27;s authority was maintained. By the time that the Apollo 7 mission flew, he had been promoted to head of the flight operations division; thus, it was Glynn Lunney who served as lead flight director and had to deal directly with behavior by the crew that Kraft considered &quot;insubordinate&quot;. As Kraft commented in his memoirs, &quot;it was like having a ringside seat at the Wally Schirra Bitch Circus&quot;. Mission commander Wally Schirra, annoyed by last-minute changes in the crew&#x27;s schedule and suffering from a bad cold, repeatedly refused to accept orders from the ground. Although Schirra&#x27;s actions were successful in the short term, Kraft decreed in consultation with astronaut chief Deke Slayton that none of the Apollo 7 crew would fly again. Schirra had decided before the flight that he would retire after Apollo 7.

Kraft had made a similar pronouncement before, in the case of astronaut Scott Carpenter. After Carpenter&#x27;s troubled Mercury mission, Kraft wrote, &quot;I swore an oath that Scott Carpenter would never again fly in space.&quot; The result: &quot;He didn&#x27;t.&quot;

== Manager and mentor ==
=== Apollo mission planning ===
After the Apollo 1 fire in 1967, Kraft had reluctantly concluded that his responsibilities as a manager would keep him from serving as a flight director on the next crewed mission, Apollo 7, and on missions thereafter. Henceforth his involvement in the Apollo program would be at a higher level.

As the director of Flight Operations, Kraft was closely involved in planning the broad outlines of the program. He was one of the first NASA managers to become involved in the decision to send Apollo 8 on a circumlunar flight. Due to problems with Lunar Module development in 1968, NASA faced the possibility of a full Apollo test mission being delayed until 1969. As a substitute, George Low, the manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, came up with the idea of assigning a new mission profile to Apollo 8, one that could be flown without the lunar module. The idea was discussed in early August at a meeting between Low, Kraft, Gilruth and Deke Slayton:
Low&#x27;s plan was to fly the mission in December, which left little time for the flight operations division to train and prepare. After agreeing that the mission was possible in principle, Kraft went to his mission planners and flight directors to determine whether they and their teams could be ready within the projected tight schedule. &quot;My head was abuzz with the things we&#x27;d have to do,&quot; remembered Kraft. &quot;But it was one hell of a challenge.&quot;

On August 9, Gilruth, Low, Kraft and Slayton flew to Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, where they briefed NASA managers including Wernher von Braun and Rocco Petrone on the planned mission. On August 14, they, along with the Huntsville group, traveled to NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. to brief Deputy Administrator Thomas O. Paine. In turn, Paine recommended the mission to Administrator James E. Webb, who gave Kraft and his colleagues the authority to begin preparations for the mission.

In planning for Apollo 8, one of Kraft&#x27;s responsibilities was ensuring that a fleet would be waiting to recover the crew when they splashed down at the end of the mission. This proved an unusual challenge, because much of the Navy&#x27;s Pacific Fleet would be on leave over the Christmas and New Year&#x27;s Eve period. Kraft had to personally meet with Admiral John McCain to persuade him to make the requisite resources available to NASA.

=== Apollo missions ===
On Christmas Eve, 1968, Apollo 8 went into orbit around the Moon. Only ten years earlier, Kraft had joined Gilruth&#x27;s newly founded Space Task Group. Now, the two men sat together in Mission Control, reflecting on how far they had come. Around them, the room was filled with cheers, but Kraft and Gilruth celebrated more quietly.

Kraft again found himself a spectator during the landing of Apollo 11, which he viewed from Mission Control, sitting with Gilruth and George Low. He played a more active role in events during the unfolding of the Apollo 13 crisis. Called into Mission Control by Gene Kranz almost immediately after the accident, he led discussions on whether Apollo 13 should attempt a direct abort, or go around the Moon and return on a free trajectory; the latter option was taken.

=== Mentor ===
Many Apollo engineers, later to become top managers, considered Kraft to have been one of the best managers in the program. He personally hand-picked and trained an entire generation of NASA flight directors, including John Hodge, Glynn Lunney and Gene Kranz, the last of whom referred to Kraft as &quot;The Teacher&quot;. In the words of the space historians Murray and Cox, Kraft &quot;set the tone for one of the most striking features of Flight Operations: unquestioning trust—not of superiors by subordinates, but the other way around.&quot;

The principles that Kraft had inculcated continued to have an impact at Johnson Space Center long after he retired. As Lunney reflected in 1998:

Kraft could, however, be a tough taskmaster, making it clear that there was no place in the flight operations division for those who failed to live up to his exacting standards. &quot;To err is human&quot;, went one of his favorite sayings, &quot;but to do so more than once is contrary to Flight Operations Directorate policy.&quot; Subordinates who seriously displeased Kraft could find themselves deprived of the opportunity to make it up to him. Kraft possessed the power to end careers at Johnson Space Center; as mission controller Sy Liebergot recalled, &quot;if he was behind you, you had as much leverage as you needed; if he was against you, you were dead meat.&quot;

== Center director ==
In 1969, Kraft was named deputy director of the Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC). On January 14, 1972, he became the director of the MSC, replacing Gilruth, for whom Kraft had worked since his arrival at Langley in 1945. Space commentator Anthony Young has described Kraft as a &quot;superb successor&quot; to Gilruth, second only to him in the history of center directors.

Kraft was eligible to retire in the early 1980s, but he chose not to take the option. He remained as center director in the status of a &quot;reemployed annuitant,&quot; receiving his government pension, but still employed by NASA. In 1981 he had been involved in a conflict with the NASA Administrator and other top officials over the conduct of the STS-2 mission, and over issues relating to NASA organization and management. This contributed to making his position at NASA more tenuous.

In April 1982, Kraft made what newspaper reports called a &quot;surprise announcement&quot; that he intended to step down as center director at the end of the year. He denied that his resignation had anything to do with the threatened possibility of Johnson Space Center losing its leading role in Space Shuttle operations or in the development of NASA&#x27;s Space Station Freedom.

== Retirement ==
=== Consultant ===
After his retirement, Kraft served as a consultant for Rockwell International and IBM, and as director-at-large of the Houston Chamber of Commerce. In 1994, he was appointed chairman of the space shuttle management independent review team, a panel made up of leading aerospace experts, whose remit was to investigate how NASA could make its Space Shuttle program more cost effective. The panel&#x27;s report, known as the &quot;Kraft report&quot;, was published in February 1995. It recommended that NASA&#x27;s Space Shuttle operations should be outsourced to a single private contractor, and that &quot;NASA should consider ... progression towards the privatization of the space shuttle.&quot; It criticized the effect of safety changes made by NASA after the &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster, saying that they had &quot;created a safety environment that is duplicative and expensive.&quot; Fundamental to the report was the idea that the Space Shuttle had become &quot;a mature and reliable system ... about as safe as today&#x27;s technology will provide.&quot;

The report was controversial even at the time of its publication. John Pike, space policy director for the Federation of American Scientists, commented that &quot;the &quot;Kraft report&quot; is a recipe for disaster. They are basically saying dismantle the safety and quality assurance mechanisms set in place after the &quot;Challenger&quot; accident.&quot; NASA&#x27;s Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel took issue with the report, saying in May 1995 that &quot;the assumption that the Space Shuttle systems are now &#x27;mature&#x27; smacks of a complacency which may lead to serious mishaps.&quot; Nonetheless, NASA accepted the recommendations of the report, and in November 1995, responsibility for shuttle operations was turned over to the United Space Alliance.

Nine years later, the &quot;Kraft report&quot; was again criticized, this time by the &quot;Columbia&quot; Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) as part of its consideration of the organizational and cultural causes of the &quot;Columbia&quot; disaster. &quot;The report,&quot; it said, &quot;characterized the Space Shuttle program in a way that the Board judges to be at odds with the realities of the Shuttle Program.&quot; According to the CAIB, the &quot;Kraft report&quot; had contributed to the undesirable safety culture within NASA, allowing NASA to view the shuttle as an operational—rather than experimental—vehicle, and distracting attention from continuing engineering anomalies.

=== Autobiography ===
In 2001, Kraft published his autobiography, &quot;Flight: My Life in Mission Control&quot;. It dealt with his life up until the end of the Apollo program, only briefly mentioning his time as center director in the epilogue. &quot;The New York Times&quot; review space writer Henry S. F. Cooper Jr. called it a &quot;highly readable memoir&quot;, while the &quot;Kirkus Review&quot; summed it up as a &quot;[s]nappy, highly detailed account of ... 20th century America&#x27;s most dramatic technological achievement.&quot; Reviewers almost unanimously commented on the outspokenness of Kraft&#x27;s storytelling, and his readiness to personally criticize those with whom he had disagreed. Cooper noted that Kraft &quot;pull[s] no punches about some of [his colleagues&#x27;] shortcomings&quot;, and &quot;Kliatt&quot; magazine said that he &quot;isn&#x27;t afraid to name names&quot;.

== Personal life ==

In 1950, Kraft married Betty Anne Kraft ( Turnbull) whom he had met in high school. They had two children, Gordon and Kristi-Anne. In his autobiography, Kraft acknowledged the sacrifices that his family had made as a result of his work for NASA, saying that &quot;I was ... more of a remote authority figure to Gordon and Kristi-Anne than a typical American father.&quot;

Kraft was an Episcopalian, serving as a lay reader at his local church. During the sixties, the Kraft family was deeply involved in church activities: Betty Anne taught Sunday school and served on the altar guild; Gordon was an acolyte; and Kristi-Anne sang in the choir. In addition to his duties as a lay reader, Kraft spent some time teaching a class in adult Bible study. As he recalled:

Kraft had been an avid golfer ever since he was introduced to the game in the 1940s by his friend and NASA colleague Sig Sjoberg. He cited the good golfing as a reason for staying in Houston after his retirement.

Kraft died on July 22, 2019, in Houston, aged 95, two days after the 50th anniversary of the Apollo 11 moonwalks. The cause was not announced.

== Awards and honors ==
Kraft received numerous awards and honors for his work. At the end of the Mercury program, he was invited to attend a ceremony in the White House Rose Garden, where he received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal from President John F. Kennedy and Administrator of NASA James E. Webb. &quot;None of us have many days in our lives like that one,&quot; Kraft remembered. The NASA Distinguished Service Medal was awarded to him twice in 1969 (for Apollo 8 and Apollo 11), in 1981 for the Space Shuttle, and in 1982 as a special award.

He won the Distinguished Citizen Award, given to him by the city of Hampton, Virginia in 1966; the John J. Montgomery Award in 1963; the ASME Medal in 1973; and the Goddard Memorial Trophy, awarded by the National Space Club, and the Roger W. Jones Award for Executive Leadership in 1979. In 1999, he was awarded the National Space Trophy from the Rotary National Award for Space Achievement Foundation, which described him as &quot;a driving force in the U.S. human space flight program from its beginnings to the Space Shuttle era, a man whose accomplishments have become legendary&quot;.

In 2006, NASA gave Kraft the Ambassador of Exploration Award, which carried with it a sample of lunar material brought back by Apollo 11. Kraft in turn presented the award to his alma mater, Virginia Tech, for display in its College of Engineering. He was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame, on October 1, 2016. The Mission Control Center at the Johnson Space Center was renamed the &quot;Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center&quot; in his honor in 2011, and Kraft Elementary School in Hampton, Virginia, near his hometown, was named for him.

== In media ==
Kraft was portrayed by Stephen Root in the 1998 miniseries &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot;. He has been interviewed in numerous documentaries about the space program, including &quot;Apollo 13: To the Edge and Back&quot; (PBS). In 2018, he was portrayed in the film &quot;First Man&quot; by J. D. Evermore. In 2020, he was portrayed in the mini-series &quot;The Right Stuff&quot; by Eric Ladin. In the 2019 BBC Proms live performance of their album &quot;The Race for Space&quot;, a few days after Kraft&#x27;s death, Public Service Broadcasting dedicated their performance of &quot;Go!&quot; to Kraft&#x27;s memory.

== References ==
== Works cited ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Interview with Christopher Columbus Kraft Jr. for NOVA series: To the Moon WGBH Educational Foundation, raw footage, 1998
* National Aviation Hall of Fame reveals names of four to be inducted in Class of 2016 at the National Aviation Hall of Fame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q735104" start="0" end="30" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr." label="Christopher Columbus Kraft Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="83" end="92" title="Aerospace engineering" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="97" end="101" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757070" start="166" end="188" title="Mission control center" label="Mission Control Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032002" start="243" end="255" title="Glynn Lunney" label="Glynn Lunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="379" end="430" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="448" end="472" title="Aerospace engineering" label="aeronautical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="497" end="540" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q721154" start="715" end="731" title="Space Task Group" label="Space Task Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888510" start="812" end="824" title="Man in Space Soonest" label="man in space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="901" end="916" title="Flight controller#Flight Director (FLIGHT)" label="flight director"/>
<link wikidata="Q623903" start="955" end="979" title="Mercury-Redstone 3" label="first crewed spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q498533" start="981" end="1008" title="Mercury-Atlas 6" label="first crewed orbital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q747769" start="1014" end="1029" title="Gemini 4" label="first spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="1055" end="1069" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="1224" end="1244" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q254785" start="1268" end="1285" title="Robert R. Gilruth" label="Robert R. Gilruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1385" end="1388" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="1393" end="1415" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="1483" end="1504" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle program"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="1825" end="1870" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q580867" start="1924" end="1967" title="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112041" start="2064" end="2095" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center" label="Mission Control Center building"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="2177" end="2188" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q845732" start="2471" end="2488" title="Phoebus, Virginia" label="Phoebus, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2587" end="2600" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q109968" start="2632" end="2647" title="Columbus Circle" label="Columbus Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="2681" end="2688" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="3102" end="3117" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646219" start="3266" end="3285" title="Hampton High School (Virginia)" label="Hampton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="3301" end="3309" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="3451" end="3502" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934609" start="3545" end="3560" title="Virginia Tech Corps of Cadets" label="Corps of Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3614" end="3626" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3679" end="3697" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="3703" end="3707" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459258" start="3708" end="3722" title="aviation cadet" label="aviation cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="3844" end="3863" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="3874" end="3898" title="aeronautical engineering" label="aeronautical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q644459" start="3964" end="3977" title="Vought" label="Chance Vought"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="3998" end="4009" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="4038" end="4081" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q618731" start="4116" end="4139" title="Langley Research Center" label="Langley Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="4147" end="4164" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="Hampton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="4658" end="4669" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="4769" end="4777" title="Bell X-1" label="Bell X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q254785" start="4850" end="4867" title="Robert R. Gilruth" label="Robert R. Gilruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14613383" start="5151" end="5167" title="wingtip vortices" label="wingtip vortices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303209" start="5203" end="5212" title="prop-wash" label="prop-wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037959" start="5246" end="5261" title="wake turbulence" label="wake turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567921" start="5480" end="5485" title="ulcer" label="ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="5613" end="5622" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="5721" end="5741" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014059" start="5753" end="5787" title="National Aeronautics and Space Act" label="National Aeronautics and Space Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q618731" start="5870" end="5893" title="Langley Research Center" label="Langley Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q721154" start="6195" end="6211" title="Space Task Group" label="Space Task Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="6424" end="6439" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="7138" end="7147" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="7165" end="7182" title="telecommunication" label="telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757070" start="7337" end="7359" title="mission control center" label="mission control center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319996" start="7431" end="7442" title="flight test" label="flight test"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="7775" end="7789" title="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station" label="Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q605092" start="8307" end="8322" title="Mercury-Atlas 5" label="Mercury-Atlas 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="8337" end="8347" title="chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q605394" start="8354" end="8358" title="Enos (chimpanzee)" label="Enos"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="8529" end="8545" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="9079" end="9089" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q498722" start="9688" end="9703" title="Mercury-Atlas 9" label="Mercury-Atlas 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239469" start="9774" end="9784" title="John Hodge (engineer)" label="John Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q498533" start="9787" end="9802" title="Mercury-Atlas 6" label="Mercury-Atlas 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="9837" end="9847" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q218455" start="10081" end="10088" title="orbital spaceflight" label="orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q923972" start="10950" end="10959" title="Maxime Faget" label="Max Faget"/>
<link wikidata="Q711493" start="11839" end="11849" title="Gene Kranz" label="Gene Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q498680" start="11986" end="12001" title="Mercury-Atlas 7" label="Mercury-Atlas 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q335503" start="12039" end="12054" title="Scott Carpenter" label="Scott Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13190" end="13208" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="13570" end="13584" title="Project Gemini" label="Gemini program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236922" start="13936" end="13949" title="David M. Harland" label="David Harland"/>
<link wikidata="Q747769" start="14216" end="14224" title="Gemini 4" label="Gemini 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q216726" start="14700" end="14708" title="Ed White (astronaut)" label="Ed White"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15002" end="15022" title="Flight controller#CAPCOM" label="capsule communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="15023" end="15034" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q119807" start="15214" end="15222" title="Gemini 7" label="Gemini 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q519560" start="15454" end="15477" title="North American Aviation" label="North American Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q617651" start="15644" end="15652" title="Gemini 8" label="Gemini 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="15879" end="15893" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q194082" start="15987" end="16014" title="Apollo 1" label="first crewed Apollo mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="16505" end="16516" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="16576" end="16603" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="16605" end="16613" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="16871" end="16891" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725849" start="17160" end="17168" title="Gemini 5" label="Gemini 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q254785" start="17460" end="17471" title="Robert R. Gilruth" label="Bob Gilruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188486" start="18392" end="18400" title="Apollo 7" label="Apollo 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032002" start="18492" end="18504" title="Glynn Lunney" label="Glynn Lunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q110450" start="18775" end="18788" title="Wally Schirra" label="Wally Schirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="19051" end="19063" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q335503" start="19260" end="19275" title="Scott Carpenter" label="Scott Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19300" end="19324" title="Scott Carpenter#NASA career" label="troubled Mercury mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q188486" start="19699" end="19707" title="Apollo 7" label="Apollo 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="20008" end="20016" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="20063" end="20075" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028610" start="20197" end="20207" title="George Low" label="George Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="21009" end="21037" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="21041" end="21060" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q57384" start="21105" end="21122" title="Wernher von Braun" label="Wernher von Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q328110" start="21127" end="21140" title="Rocco Petrone" label="Rocco Petrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="21251" end="21267" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1367762" start="21298" end="21313" title="Thomas O. Paine" label="Thomas O. Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q537520" start="21371" end="21384" title="James E. Webb" label="James E. Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q665850" start="21842" end="21853" title="John S. McCain, Jr." label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="22341" end="22350" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="22494" end="22503" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167883" start="23996" end="24008" title="Seymour Liebergot" label="Sy Liebergot"/>
<link wikidata="Q217538" start="24883" end="24888" title="STS-2" label="STS-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="25498" end="25520" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="25525" end="25528" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="25784" end="25805" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle program"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="26205" end="26236" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="&amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q762201" start="26616" end="26649" title="Federation of American Scientists" label="Federation of American Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541150" start="27254" end="27275" title="United Space Alliance" label="United Space Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q715059" start="27364" end="27413" title="Columbia Accident Investigation Board" label="&amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; Accident Investigation Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q580867" start="27499" end="27528" title="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster" label="&amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506998" start="28267" end="28289" title="Henry S. F. Cooper Jr." label="Henry S. F. Cooper Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="29284" end="29296" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505427" start="29311" end="29321" title="lay reader" label="lay reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q420421" start="29499" end="29506" title="acolyte" label="acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q672618" start="30180" end="30203" title="White House Rose Garden" label="White House Rose Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286908" start="30227" end="30260" title="NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal" label="NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="30266" end="30275" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="30276" end="30291" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q358841" start="30296" end="30317" title="Administrator of NASA" label="Administrator of NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q537520" start="30318" end="30331" title="James E. Webb" label="James E. Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286902" start="30421" end="30453" title="NASA Distinguished Service Medal" label="NASA Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25316239" start="30680" end="30704" title="John J. Montgomery Award" label="John J. Montgomery Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298662" start="30718" end="30728" title="ASME Medal" label="ASME Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932247" start="30815" end="30860" title="Roger W. Jones Award for Executive Leadership" label="Roger W. Jones Award for Executive Leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="31364" end="31377" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="31447" end="31477" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="31683" end="31700" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="Hampton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464320" start="31779" end="31791" title="Stephen Root" label="Stephen Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="31821" end="31847" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="31985" end="31988" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q42708010" start="32035" end="32044" title="First Man (film)" label="First Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385901" start="32054" end="32068" title="J. D. Evermore" label="J. D. Evermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120961" start="32121" end="32136" title="The Right Stuff (TV series)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386930" start="32146" end="32156" title="Eric Ladin" label="Eric Ladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="32170" end="32179" title="BBC Proms" label="BBC Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627530" start="32218" end="32236" title="The Race for Space (album)" label="The Race for Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257602" start="32281" end="32308" title="Public Service Broadcasting (band)" label="Public Service Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="32677" end="32707" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969613" wikidata="Q2915" url="?curid=969613" title="Dairy cattle">
<text>Dairy cattle (also called dairy cows) are cattle bred with the ability to produce large quantities of milk, from which dairy products are made. Dairy cattle generally are of the species &quot;Bos taurus&quot;.

Historically, little distinction was made between dairy cattle and beef cattle, with the same stock often being used for both meat and milk production. Today, the bovine industry is more specialized and most dairy cattle have been bred to produce large volumes of milk.

== Management ==

Dairy cows may be found either in herds or dairy farms, where dairy farmers own, manage, care for, and collect milk from them, or on commercial farms. Herd sizes vary around the world depending on landholding culture and social structure. The United States has an estimated 9 million cows in around 75,000 dairy herds, with an average herd size of 120 cows. The number of small herds is falling rapidly, with 51% of U.S. milk in 2007 produced by the 3,100 herds with over 500 cows. The United Kingdom dairy herd overall has nearly 1.5 million cows, with about 100 head reported on an average farm. In New Zealand, the average herd has more than 375 cows, while in Australia, there are approximately 220 cows in the average herd.

The United States dairy herd produced of milk in 2007, up from in 1950, yet there were only about 9 million cows on U.S. dairy farms—about 13 million fewer than there were in 1950. The top breed of dairy cow within Canada&#x27;s national herd category is Holstein, taking up 93% of the dairy cow population, have an annual production rate of of milk per cow that contains 3.9% butter fat and 3.2% protein.

Dairy farming, like many other livestock-rearing methods, can be split into intensive and extensive management systems.

Intensive systems focus towards maximum production per cow in the herd. This involves formulating their diet to provide ideal nutrition and housing the cows in a confinement system such as free stall or tie stall. These cows are housed indoors throughout their lactation and may be put to pasture during their 60-day dry period before ideally calving again. Free stall-style barns involve cattle loosely housed where they can have free access to feed, water, and stalls, but are moved to another part of the barn to be milked multiple times a day. In a tie-stall system, the milking units are brought to the cows during each milking. These cattle are tethered within their stalls with free access to water and feed provided. In extensive systems, cattle are mainly outside on pasture for most of their lives. These cattle are generally lower in milk production and are herded multiple times daily to be milked. The systems used greatly depend on the climate and available land of the region in which the farm is situated.

To maintain lactation, a dairy cow must be bred and produce calves. Depending on market conditions, the cow may be bred with a &quot;dairy bull&quot; or a &quot;beef bull.&quot; Female calves (heifers) with dairy breeding may be kept as replacement cows for the dairy herd. If a replacement cow turns out to be a substandard producer of milk, she then goes to market and can be slaughtered for beef. Male calves can either be used later as a breeding bull or sold and used for veal or beef. Dairy farmers usually begin breeding or artificially inseminating heifers around 13 months of age. A cow&#x27;s gestation period is about nine months. Newborn calves are separated from their mothers quickly, usually within three days, as the mother/calf bond intensifies over time and delayed separation can cause extreme stress on both cow and calf.

Domestic cows can live beyond 20 years; however, those raised for dairy rarely live that long, as the average cow is removed from the dairy herd around age six and marketed for beef. In 2014, roughly 9.5% of the cattle slaughtered in the U.S. were culled dairy cows – cows that can no longer be seen as an economic asset to the dairy farm. These animals may be sold due to reproductive problems or common diseases of milk cows such as mastitis and lameness.

== Calf ==
Most heifers (female calves) are kept on farm to be raised as replacement heifers, bred to enter the production cycle. Market calves are generally sold at two weeks of age and bull calves may fetch a premium over heifers due to their size, either current or potential. Calves may be sold for veal, or for one of several types of beef production, depending on available local crops and markets. Such bull calves may be castrated if turnout onto pastures is envisaged, to make them less aggressive. Purebred bulls from elite cows may be put into progeny testing schemes to find out whether they might become superior sires for breeding. Such animals can become extremely valuable.

Most dairy farms separate calves from their mothers within a day of birth to reduce transmission of disease and simplify management of milking cows. Studies have been done allowing calves to remain with their mothers for 1, 4, 7 or 14 days after birth. Cows whose calves were removed longer than one day after birth showed increased searching, sniffing and vocalizations. However, calves allowed to remain with their mothers for longer periods showed weight gains at three times the rate of early removals as well as more searching behavior and better social relationships with other calves.

After separation, some young dairy calves subsist on commercial milk replacer, a feed based on dried milk powder. Milk replacer is an economical alternative to feeding whole milk because it is cheaper, can be bought at varying fat and protein percentages, and is typically less contaminated than whole milk when handled properly. Some farms pasteurize and feed calves milk from the cows in the herd instead of using replacer. A day-old calf consumes around 5 liters of milk per day.

Cattle are social animals; their ancestors tended to live in matriarchal groups of mothers and offspring. The formation of &quot;friendships&quot; between two cows is common and long lasting. Traditionally individual housing systems were used in calf rearing, to reduce the risk of disease spread and provide specific care. However, due to their social behaviour the grouping of offspring may be better for the calves&#x27; overall welfare. Social interaction between the calves can have a positive effect on their growth. It has been seen that calves housed in grouped penning were found to eat more feed than those in single pens, suggesting social facilitation of feeding behaviour in the calves. Play behaviour in pre-weaned dairy calves has also been suggested to help build social skills for later in life. It has been seen that those reared in grouped housing are more likely to become the dominant cattle in a new combination of animals. These dominant animals have a priority choice of feed or lying areas and are generally stronger animals. For these reasons, it has become common practice to group or pair calves in their housing. It has become common in Canada to see paired or grouped housing in outdoor hutches or in an indoor pack penning.

== Bull ==
A bull calf with high genetic potential may be reared for breeding purposes. It may be kept by a dairy farm as a herd bull, to provide natural breeding for the herd of cows. A bull may service up to 50 or 60 cows during a breeding season. Any more and the sperm count declines, leading to cows &quot;returning to service&quot; (needing to be bred again). A herd bull may only stay for one season, as when most bulls reach over two years old their temperament becomes too unpredictable.

Bull calves intended for breeding are commonly bred on specialized dairy breeding farms, not production farms. These farms are the major source of stocks for artificial insemination.

== Milk production levels ==

The dairy cow produces large amounts of milk in its lifetime. Production levels peak at around 40 to 60 days after calving. Production declines steadily afterwards until milking is stopped at about 10 months. The cow is &quot;dried off&quot; for about sixty days before calving again. Within a 12 to 14-month inter-calving cycle, the milking period is about 305 days or 10 months long. Among many variables, certain breeds produce more milk than others within a range of around of milk per year.

The Holstein Friesian is the main breed of dairy cattle in Australia, and said to have the &quot;world&#x27;s highest&quot; productivity, at of milk per year. The average for a single dairy cow in the US in 2007 was per year, excluding milk consumed by her calves, whereas the same average value for a single cow in Israel was reported in the Philippine press to be in 2009. High production cows are more difficult to breed at a two-year interval. Many farms take the view that 24 or even 36 month cycles are more appropriate for this type of cow.

Dairy cows may continue to be economically productive for many lactation cycles. In theory a longevity of 10 lactations is possible. The chances of problems arising which may lead to a cow being culled are high, however; the average herd life of US Holstein is today fewer than 3 lactations. This requires more herd replacements to be reared or purchased. Over 90% of all cows are slaughtered for 4 main reasons:

*Infertility – failure to conceive and reduced milk production.
:Cows are at their most fertile between 60 and 80 days after calving. Cows remaining &quot;open&quot; (not with calf) after this period become increasingly difficult to breed, which may be due to poor health. Failure to expel the afterbirth from a previous pregnancy, luteal cysts, or metritis, an infection of the uterus, are common causes of infertility

*Mastitis – a persistent and potentially fatal mammary gland infection, leading to high somatic cell counts and loss of production.
:Mastitis is recognized by a reddening and swelling of the infected quarter of the udder and the presence of whitish clots or pus in the milk. Treatment is possible with long-acting antibiotics but milk from such cows is not marketable until drug residues have left the cow&#x27;s system, also called withdrawal period.

*Lameness – persistent foot infection or leg problems causing infertility and loss of production.
:High feed levels of highly digestible carbohydrate cause acidic conditions in the cow&#x27;s rumen. This leads to laminitis and subsequent lameness, leaving the cow vulnerable to other foot infections and problems which may be exacerbated by standing in faeces or water soaked areas.

*Production – some animals fail to produce economic levels of milk to justify their feed costs.
:Production below of milk per day is not economically viable.

Cow longevity is strongly correlated with production levels. Lower production cows live longer than high production cows, but may be less profitable. Cows no longer wanted for milk production are sent to slaughter. Their meat is of relatively low value and is generally used for processed meat. Another factor affecting milk production is the stress the cow is faced with. Psychologists at the University of Leicester, UK, analyzed the musical preference of milk cows and found out that music actually influences the dairy cow&#x27;s lactation. Calming music can improve milk yield, probably because it reduces stress and relaxes the cows in much the same way as it relaxes humans.

=== Cow comfort and its effects on milk production ===
Certain behaviors such as eating, ruminating, and lying down can be related to the health of the cow and cow comfort. These behaviors can also be related to the productivity of the cows. Likewise, stress, disease, and discomfort negatively affect milk productivity. Therefore, it can be said that it is in the best interest of the farmer to increase eating, rumination, and lying down and decrease stress, disease, and discomfort to achieve the maximum productivity possible. Also, estrous behaviors such as mounting can be a sign of cow comfort, because if a cow is lame, nutritionally deficient, or housed in an overcrowded barn, its estrous behaviors are altered.

Feeding behaviors are important for the dairy cow, as feeding is how the cow ingests dry matter. However, the cow must ruminate to fully digest the feed and utilize the nutrients in the feed. Dairy cows with good rumen health are likely to be more profitable than cows with poor rumen health—as a healthy rumen aids in digestion of nutrients. An increase in the time a cow spends ruminating is associated with the increase in health and an increase in milk production. The productivity of dairy cattle is most efficient when the cattle have a full rumen. Also, the standing action while feeding after milking has been suggested to enhance udder health. The delivery of fresh feed while the cattle are away for milking stimulates the cattle to feed upon return, potentially reducing the prevalence of mastitis as the sphincters have time to close while standing. This makes the pattern of feeding directly after being milked an ideal method of increasing the efficiency of the herd.

Cows have a high motivation to lie down. They should lie down for at least five to six hours after every meal to ruminate well. When the lactating dairy cow lies down, blood flow is increased to the mammary gland which in return results in a higher milk yield. When they stand too long, cows become stressed, lose weight, get sore feet, and produce less milk.

To ensure that the dairy cows lie down as much as needed, the stalls must be comfortable. A stall should have a rubber mat and bedding, and be large enough for the cow to lie down and get up comfortably. Signs that the stalls may not be comfortable enough for the cows are the cows are standing, either ruminating or not, instead of lying down, or perching, which is when the cow has its front end in the stall and their back end out of the stall. Dried manure, almond shells, straw, sand, or waterbeds are used for cow bedding.

There are two types of housing systems in dairy production, free style housing and tie stall. Free style housing is where the cow is free to walk around and interact with its environment and other members of the herd. Tie stall housing is when the cow is chained to a stanchion stall with the milking units and feed coming to them.

Artificial light and daylight inlets have an impact on milk production and cow behavior. For cows in lactation a light program of 16 hours light and 8 hours of darkness is recommended, while for non-lactating pregnant cows 8 hours of light and 16 hours of darkness seem to be a better fit.

== By-products and processing ==
Pasteurization is the process of heating milk to a high enough temperature for a short period of time to kill the microbes in the milk and increase keep time and decrease spoilage time. By killing the microbes, decreasing the transmission of infection, and elimination of enzymes the quality of the milk and the shelf life increases. Pasteurization is either completed at for thirty minutes or a flash pasteurization is completed for 15 seconds at . By-products of milk include butterfat, cream, curds, and whey. Butterfat is the main lipid in milk. The cream contains 18–40% butterfat. The industry can be divided into 2 market territories; fluid milk and industrialized milk such as yogurt, cheeses, and ice cream.

Whey protein makes up about 20% of milk&#x27;s protein composition and is separated from the casein (80% of milk&#x27;s protein make up) during the process of curdling cheese. This protein is commonly used in protein bars, beverages and concentrated powder, due to its high quality amino acid profile. It contains levels of both essential amino acids as well as branched that are above those of soy, meat, and wheat. &quot;Diafiltered&quot; milk is a process of ultrafiltration of the fluid milk to separate lactose and water from the casein and whey proteins. This process allows for more efficiency in cheese making and gives the potential to produce low-carb dairy products.

== Reproduction ==

Since the 1950s, artificial insemination (AI) is used at most dairy farms; these farms may keep no bull. Artificial insemination uses estrus synchronization to indicate when the cow is going through ovulation and is susceptible to fertilization. Advantages of using AI include its low cost and ease compared to maintaining a bull, ability to select from a large number of bulls, elimination of diseases in the dairy industry, improved genetics and improved animal welfare. Rather than a large bull jumping on a smaller heifer or weaker cow, AI allows the farmer to complete the breeding procedure within 5 minutes with minimum stress placed on the individual female&#x27;s body.

Dairy cattle are polyestrous, meaning they cycle continuously throughout the year. They tend to be on a 21 day estrus cycle. However for management purposes, some operations use synthetic hormones to synchronize their cows or heifers to have them breed and calve at the ideal times. These hormones are short term and only used when necessary. For example, one common protocol for synchronization involves an injection of GnRH (gonadotrophin releasing hormone). which increases the levels of follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone in the body. Then, seven days later prostaglandin F2-alpha is injected, followed by another GnRH injection 48 hours later. This protocol causes the animal to ovulate 24 hours later.

Estrus is often called standing heat in cattle and refers to the time in their cycle where the female is receptive towards the male. Estrus behaviour can be detected by an experienced stockman. These behaviours can include standing to be mounted, mounting other cows, restlessness, decreased milk production, and decreased feed intake.

More recently, embryo transfer has been used to enable the multiplication of progeny from elite cows. Such cows are given hormone treatments to produce multiple embryos. These are then &#x27;flushed&#x27; from the cow&#x27;s uterus. 7–12 embryos are consequently removed from these donor cows and transferred into other cows who serve as surrogate mothers. This results in between three and six calves instead of the normal single or (rarely) twins.

As a result of long-term cooperation between USDA and dairy farmers which led to a revolution in dairy cattle productivity, the United States has since 1992 been the world’s largest supplier of dairy bull semen.

== Hormone use ==
Farmers in some countries sometimes administer hormone treatments to dairy cows to increase milk production and reproduction.

About 17% of dairy cows in the United States are injected with Bovine somatotropin, also called recombinant bovine somatotropin (rBST), recombinant bovine growth hormone (rBGH), or artificial growth hormone. The use of this hormone increases milk production by 11%–25%. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has ruled that rBST recombinant bovine somatotropin (rBST), recombinant bovine growth hormone (rBGH) is harmless to people, while the American Cancer Society finds that the use of rBGH can cause adverse health effects in cows. Though the evidence for potential harm to humans is inconclusive and would require more research. The use of rBST is banned in Canada, parts of the European Union, as well as Australia and New Zealand due to possible opposing views and of lack of findings.

In the United States the Pasteurized Milk Ordinance requires a milk sample is taken from every farm and from every load of milk delivered to a processing plant. These samples are then tested for antibiotic and any milk testing positive is discarded and farm identified. Traceback to the dairy is undertaken by the FDA with further consequences including the possibility revocation of ability to sell milk.

== Nutrition ==

Nutrition plays an important role in keeping cattle healthy and strong. Implementing an adequate nutrition program can also improve milk production and reproductive performance. Nutrient requirements may not be the same depending on the animal&#x27;s age and stage of production. Diets are formulated to meet the dairy cow&#x27;s energy and amino acid requirements for lactation, growth, and/or reproduction.

Forages, which refer especially to anything grown in the field such as hay, straw, corn silage, or grass silage, are the most common type of feed used. The base of most lactating dairy cattle diets is high quality forage. Cereal grains, as the main contributors of starch to diets, are important in helping to meet the energy needs of dairy cattle. Barley is an excellent source of balanced amounts of protein, energy, and fiber.

Ensuring adequate body fat reserves is essential for cattle to produce milk and also to keep reproductive efficiency. However, if cattle get excessively fat or too thin, they run the risk of developing metabolic problems and may have problems with calving. Scientists have found that a variety of fat supplements can benefit conception rates of lactating dairy cows. Some of these different fats include oleic acids, found in canola oil, animal tallow, and yellow grease; palmitic acid found in granular fats and dry fats; and linolenic acids which are found in cottonseed, safflower, sunflower, and soybean.

Diets may additionally be formulated to strategically reduce methane emissions. Ruminants such as the cow have microbes in their rumen called methanogens which are capable of digesting down plant material so it can be utilized for energy, but also generates methane as a byproduct which is then released into the atmosphere by belching. 

== Breeds ==

According to the Purebred Dairy Cattle Association, PDCA, there are 7 major dairy breeds in the United States. These are: Holstein Black/White and Red/White, Brown Swiss, Guernsey, Ayrshire, Jersey, and Milking Shorthorn.

Holstein cows originate from the Netherlands and have distinct black and white or more rarely red and white markings. Holstein cows are the biggest of all dairy breeds. A full mature Holstein cow usually weighs around and is tall at the shoulder. They are known for their outstanding milk production among the main breeds of dairy cattle. An average Holstein cow produces around of milk each lactation. Of the 9 million dairy cows in the U.S., approximately 90% of them are of the Holstein descent. The top breed of dairy cow within Canada&#x27;s national herd category is Holstein, taking up 93% of the dairy cow population, have a production rate of of milk per cow that contains 3.9% butter fat and 3.2% protein

Brown Swiss cows are widely accepted as the oldest dairy cattle breed, originally coming from a part of northeastern Switzerland. Some experts think that the modern Brown Swiss skeleton is similar to one found that looks to be from around the year 4000 BC Also, there is evidence that monks started breeding these cows about 1000 years ago.

The Ayrshire breed first originated in the County of Ayr in Scotland. It became regarded as a well established breed in 1812. The different breeds that were crossed to form the Ayrshire are not exactly known. However, there is evidence that several breeds were crossed with the native cattle to create the breed.

Guernsey cows originated just off the coast of France on the small Isle of Guernsey. The breed was first known as a separate breed around 1700. Guernseys are known for their ability to produce very high quality milk from grass. Also, the term &quot;Golden Guernsey&quot; is very common as Guernsey cattle produce rich, yellow milk rather than the standard white milk other cow breeds produce.

The Jersey originates on the island of Jersey in the Channel Islands. Cows usually weigh some . The milk is rich and has a yellowish tinge; the fat content may exceed 6%. American Jerseys have been selectively bred for higher milk yield, and are often larger and coarser than the island stock.

== Animal welfare ==

Animal welfare refers to both the physical and mental state of an animal, and how it is coping with its situation. An animal is considered in a good state of welfare if it is able to express its innate behaviour, comfortable, healthy, safe, well nourished, and is not suffering from harmful states such as distress, fear and pain. Good animal welfare requires disease prevention and veterinary treatment, appropriate shelter, management, nutrition, and humane handling. If the animal is slaughtered then it is no longer &quot;good animal welfare&quot;. It is the human responsibility of the animals&#x27; wellbeing in all husbandry and management practices including humane euthanasia.

Proper animal handling, or stockmanship, is crucial to dairy animals&#x27; welfare as well as the safety of their handlers. Improper handling techniques can stress cattle leading to impaired production and health, such as increased slipping injuries. Additionally, the majority of nonfatal worker injuries on a dairy farm are from interactions with cattle. Dairy animals are handled on a daily basis for a wide variety of purposes including health-related management practices and movement from freestalls to the milking parlor. Due to the prevalence of human-animal interactions on dairy farms, researchers, veterinarians, and farmers alike have focused on furthering our understanding of stockmanship and educating agriculture workers. Stockmanship is a complex concept that involves the timing, positioning, speed, direction of movement, and sounds and touch of the handler.

A recent survey of Minnesota dairy farms revealed that 42.6% of workers learned stockmanship techniques from family members, and 29.9% had participated in stockmanship training. However, as the growing U.S. dairy industry increasingly relies on an immigrant workforce, stockmanship training and education resources become more pertinent. Clearly communicating and managing a large culturally diverse workforce brings new challenges such as language barriers and time limitations. 
Organizations like the Upper Midwest Agriculture Safety and Health Center offer resources such as bilingual training videos, fact sheets, and informational posters for dairy worker training. Additionally the Beef Quality Assurance Program offer seminars, live demonstrations, and online resources for stockmanship training.

For cows to reach high performance in milk yields and reproduction, they must be in great condition and comfortable in the system. Once an individual&#x27;s welfare is reduced, so does her efficiency and production. This creates more cost and time on the operation, therefore most farmers strive to create a healthy, hygienic, atmosphere for their cattle. As well as provide quality nutrition that keep the cows yield high.

The production of milk requires that the cow be in lactation, which is a result of the cow having given birth to a calf. The cycle of insemination, pregnancy, parturition, and lactation is followed by a &quot;dry&quot; period of about two months before calving, which allows udder tissue to regenerate. A dry period that falls outside this time frames can result in decreased milk production in subsequent lactation. Dairy operations therefore include both the production of milk and the production of calves. Bull calves are either castrated and raised as steers for beef production or used for veal.

The practice of dairy production has been criticized by animal rights proponents. Some of the ethical reasons regarding dairy production cited include how often the dairy cattle are impregnated needed to produce milk, the separation of calves from their mothers to obtain the milk meant for their calves and the fact that dairy cows are considered &quot;spent&quot; and culled at a relatively young age, another reason is that most male calves are of no use to the dairy industry and are sold for beef or veal, as well as environmental concerns regarding any cattle production.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2915" start="0" end="12" title="Dairy cattle" label="Dairy cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="42" end="48" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="102" end="106" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="119" end="132" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="178" end="185" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="192" end="202" title="Bos taurus" label="Bos taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208989" start="278" end="289" title="beef cattle" label="beef cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q209542" start="534" end="538" title="herd" label="herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="543" end="554" title="dairy farming" label="dairy farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="611" end="615" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359171" start="2075" end="2085" title="Dry cow" label="dry period"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="2793" end="2802" title="lactation" label="lactation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2974" end="2980" title=":wikt:heifer" label="heifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q957434" start="3258" end="3262" title="veal" label="veal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="3266" end="3270" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="3384" end="3393" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740042" start="3872" end="3878" title="culled" label="culled"/>
<link wikidata="Q835061" start="4059" end="4067" title="mastitis" label="mastitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909116" start="4072" end="4080" title="lameness" label="lameness"/>
<link wikidata="Q957434" start="4386" end="4390" title="veal" label="veal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16643467" start="4423" end="4438" title="beef production" label="beef production"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="4512" end="4521" title="castration" label="castrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626970" start="5431" end="5444" title="milk replacer" label="milk replacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501844" start="7374" end="7385" title="sperm count" label="sperm count"/>
<link wikidata="Q207122" start="7763" end="7786" title="artificial insemination" label="artificial insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962315" start="9573" end="9583" title="afterbirth" label="afterbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q147362" start="9618" end="9623" title="Ovarian cyst" label="cysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q840910" start="9628" end="9636" title="metritis" label="metritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q543088" start="9701" end="9709" title="Mastitis in dairy cattle" label="Mastitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917352" start="9788" end="9806" title="somatic cell count" label="somatic cell count"/>
<link wikidata="Q624043" start="9915" end="9920" title="udder" label="udder"/>
<link wikidata="Q427652" start="10345" end="10350" title="rumen" label="rumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339973" start="10366" end="10375" title="laminitis" label="laminitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="11039" end="11045" title="stress (physiology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333399" start="11090" end="11113" title="University of Leicester" label="University of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="11249" end="11254" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="11468" end="11478" title="ruminating" label="ruminating"/>
<link wikidata="Q388121" start="11916" end="11923" title="Estrous cycle" label="estrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q427652" start="12315" end="12320" title="rumen" label="rumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189961" start="13284" end="13297" title="mammary gland" label="mammary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938096" start="13573" end="13580" title="bedding (animals)" label="bedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q649066" start="13939" end="13947" title="waterbed" label="waterbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="14633" end="14647" title="Pasteurization" label="Pasteurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q207122" start="16067" end="16090" title="artificial insemination" label="artificial insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q388121" start="16184" end="16190" title="estrus" label="estrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="16249" end="16258" title="ovulation" label="ovulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q237118" start="17809" end="17824" title="embryo transfer" label="embryo transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="18019" end="18025" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="18032" end="18038" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334645" start="18132" end="18148" title="surrogate mother" label="surrogate mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="18290" end="18294" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q277287" start="18666" end="18685" title="Bovine somatotropin" label="Bovine somatotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="18877" end="18910" title="Food and Drug Administration (United States)" label="U.S. Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="19271" end="19277" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="19292" end="19306" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19319" end="19328" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="19333" end="19344" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="19878" end="19885" title="healthy" label="healthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="20004" end="20012" title="Nutrient" label="Nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="20458" end="20470" title="Cereal grain" label="Cereal grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="20555" end="20561" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="20585" end="20591" title="Barley" label="Barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="20638" end="20645" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="20647" end="20653" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="20659" end="20664" title="Dietary fiber" label="fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="20685" end="20693" title="body fat" label="body fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="20924" end="20934" title="Scientists" label="Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q207688" start="21071" end="21082" title="oleic acids" label="oleic acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q697248" start="21093" end="21103" title="canola oil" label="canola oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104079" start="21229" end="21239" title="cottonseed" label="cottonseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q156625" start="21241" end="21250" title="safflower" label="safflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="21252" end="21261" title="sunflower" label="sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="21267" end="21274" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="21338" end="21345" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="21419" end="21430" title="methanogens" label="methanogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q209789" start="21604" end="21612" title="belching" label="belching"/>
<link wikidata="Q58910" start="21752" end="21760" title="Holstein Friesian cattle" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q991030" start="21788" end="21799" title="Brown Swiss" label="Brown Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q890780" start="21801" end="21809" title="Guernsey cattle" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q793281" start="21811" end="21819" title="Ayrshire cattle" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q987965" start="21821" end="21827" title="Jersey cattle" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858093" start="21833" end="21850" title="Milking Shorthorn" label="Milking Shorthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="21886" end="21897" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q991030" start="22569" end="22580" title="Brown Swiss" label="Brown Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="22686" end="22697" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="23300" end="23308" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="23817" end="23833" title="selectively bred" label="selectively bred"/>
<link wikidata="Q459426" start="23936" end="23950" title="Animal welfare" label="Animal welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="24610" end="24620" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="26784" end="26793" title="lactation" label="lactation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27290" end="27296" title="Cattle#Terminology" label="steers"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="27392" end="27405" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27430" end="27472" title="Ethics of eating meat#Non-meat products" label="ethical reasons regarding dairy production"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969617" wikidata="Q657215" url="?curid=969617" title="Woyzeck">
<text>Woyzeck () is a stage play written by Georg Büchner. Büchner wrote the play between July and October 1836, yet left it incomplete at his death in February 1837. The play first appeared in 1877 in a heavily edited version by Karl Emil Franzos, and was first performed at the Residence Theatre in Munich on 8 November 1913.

Since then, &quot;Woyzeck&quot; has become one of the most influential and most often-performed German plays. Due to its unfinished nature, the play has inspired many diverging adaptations.

==Composition and textual history==
Büchner probably began writing the play between June and September 1836. It is loosely based on the true story of Johann Christian Woyzeck, a Leipzig wigmaker who later became a soldier. In 1821, Woyzeck, in a fit of jealousy, murdered Christiane Woost, a 46-year-old widow with whom he had been living; he was later publicly beheaded. Büchner&#x27;s work remained in a fragmentary state at the time of his early death in 1837.

The play was first made public in a heavily edited and augmented version by Karl Emil Franzos, who published it in periodicals in 1875 and 1877, before including it in his edition of Büchner&#x27;s collected works in 1879. Franzos mistakenly understood the title character&#x27;s name in the manuscripts as &quot;Wozzeck&quot;; the play bore that title in its first stage productions, and in subsequent published editions based on Franzos&#x27; version. The play was not performed until November 8, 1913 at the Residenztheater, Munich, where it was produced by Max Reinhardt.

Not only did Franzos have to cope with Büchner&#x27;s &quot;microscopically small&quot; handwriting, but the pages had faded so badly that they had to be chemically treated to make the text decipherable at all. Franzos was unaware of the real-life basis of the drama. The play was first generally disseminated in 1921 through the appearance of a new edition, edited by Georg Witkowski, which introduced the corrected title &quot;Woyzeck&quot;.

==Plot summary==
Franz Woyzeck, a lonely soldier stationed in a provincial German town, is living with Marie, the mother of his child who is not blessed by the church as the child was born out of wedlock. Woyzeck earns extra money for his family by performing menial jobs for the Captain and agreeing to take part in medical experiments conducted by the Doctor. At one of these experiments, the Doctor tells Woyzeck that he must eat nothing but peas. Woyzeck&#x27;s mental health is breaking down and he begins to experience a series of apocalyptic visions. Meanwhile, Marie grows tired of Woyzeck and turns her attentions to a handsome drum major who, in an ambiguous scene taking place in Marie&#x27;s bedroom, sleeps with her.

With his jealous suspicions growing, Woyzeck confronts the drum major, who beats Woyzeck up and humiliates him. Finally, Woyzeck stabs Marie to death by a pond. While a third act trial is claimed by some, notably A. H. J. Knight and Fritz Bergemann, to have been part of the original conception (what may be the beginning of a courtroom scene survives), the fragment, as left by Büchner, ends with Woyzeck disposing of the knife in the pond while trying to clean himself of the blood.

Here Franzos inserted the stage direction &quot;ertrinkt&quot; (he drowns), and although this emendation according to Knight &quot;almost amounts to a forgery&quot;, most versions employ drowning as an appropriate resolution to the story.

==Notable productions==
Since the original play was unfinished, many productions have taken liberties with the play&#x27;s dialogue and scene order. Notable productions include:
* a 1913 first production at residenztheater, Munich, produced by Max Reinhardt
* a 1969 stage adaptation at the Royal Dramatic Theatre in Stockholm directed by Ingmar Bergman starring Thommy Berggren. The translation Bergman used was by Per Erik Wahlund, and in 1970 the translation was published by Sällskapet Bokvännerna, in Stockholm, with 24 woodcuts by the Swedish artist Torsten Billman.
* In the 1975 staging by the Classic Stage Company starring Ron Perlman, Christopher Martin &quot;stressed the fluidity of the play&#x27;s movement, and its sullen realism&quot; according to Clive Barnes.
* a 1990 stage adaptation at Hartford Stage directed by Richard Foreman starring David Patrick Kelly
* a 1997 stage version by Keith Fowler. Fowler prepared his own translation for the &quot;Woyzeck&quot; he directed at the University of California, Irvine. In considering the traditional arrangements of scenes — whether to start with the scene in which Woyzeck is shaving his captain, the doctor&#x27;s lecture, or when Woyzeck is in the woods and hears voices below the ground; and whether to end with Woyzeck&#x27;s trial or his drowning — Fowler notes how each arrangement makes a different thematic statement, viz.:
** Start: Shaving / End: Trial / Statement: Oppression of the lower classes by those in power.
** Start: Woods / End: Drowning / Statement: Deranged Woyzeck destroys himself.
** Start: Lecture / End: Drowning / Statement: Society disregards Woyzeck&#x27;s humanity, eventually discards him...
** Start: Lecture / End: Trial / Statement: ...or judges him.
*: But, as Fowler also comments, what truly counts is &quot;the totality of Büchner&#x27;s world, for however the scenes are arranged, we will still have what G. Wilson Knight calls the ‘burning core’ of the drama...&quot;
* production of the play by Vesturport, an Iceland-based theatre company, directed by Gísli Örn Garðarsson.
* A November 2002 Cape Cod Community College production, adapted and directed by Victor Warren
* a 2007 production at the Carnegie Mellon University School of Drama, &quot;Woyzeck&quot; was re-worked by Director Dan Rigazzi to take place in 1951 and reflect themes of racial pressure in the army. Also, with the help of the Carnegie Mellon University German Language Department, pieces of the original Clarus Report were translated to English and incorporated in the text and structure of the production.
* A play in 2009 at the Malthouse Theatre, Melbourne, Australia. Director Michael Kantor with Music by Nick Cave &amp; Warren Ellis
* Production of the play by Toto Funds the Arts and Rafiki; adapted and directed by Anmol Vellani (India)
* A modernized version of &quot;Woyzeck&quot; played by the Belgian theatre group NTGent and Toneelgroep Ceremonia in fall 2010. The director, Eric De Volder, died the night after the première.
* &quot;Woyzeck&quot;, a 2010 Cameri Theater Tel-Aviv production, translated into Hebrew by Dori Parnas, edited and directed by Itay Tiran, who also stars as Woyzeck. Tiran&#x27;s version sets the action in a psychiatric hospital and features Hebrew translations of songs by Tom Waits.
* A 2012 re-translation by Campbell Babson and directed by Ben Roberts took place at The Headwaters Theatre in Portland, Oregon.
* &quot;Woyzeck&quot;, a free adaptation by Neil LaBute that premiered at the Virginia Tech School of Performing Arts and Cinema on November 1, 2012 and ran through November 11, 2012. The adaptation was directed by 3-time OBIE winner Bob McGrath.
* A 2014 adaptation by Dylan Gamblin performed by Ghostlight Theater Company of New England in collaboration with die Karneval von Wahnsinn.
* An adaptation of the play set in 1980s Berlin, adapted by Jack Thorne, played at the Old Vic Theatre in 2017. It starred John Boyega as Woyzeck.
* In 2018 playwright Leo Butler&#x27;s adaptation, according to The Stage newspaper, &quot;preserves the absurd logic of the original amidst uber-contemporary references to drone strikes, automation, data privacy and fast food chains&quot;. It was directed by Roxana Silbert for the Birmingham Repertory Theatre, with a 100-strong cast.
* A 2018 adaptation by renowned ensemble physical theatre company Spies Like Us debuted at The Pleasance on August 1. The production was praised for its &quot;contemporary intensity&quot;, and featured just five actors, five buckets and a crate.

==Adaptations==
The many adaptations of &quot;Woyzeck&quot; include:
* &quot;Wozzeck&quot;, an opera by Alban Berg, completed 1922, premiered in Berlin in December 1925.
* &quot;Wozzeck&quot;, an opera by Manfred Gurlitt, premiered in Bremen in April 1926.
* &quot;Wozzeck&quot;, a 1947 film by Georg C. Klaren
* &quot;Woyzeck&quot;, a 1979 film by Werner Herzog
* &quot;Wodzeck&quot;, a 1984 film by Oliver Herbrich
* &quot;Different Drummer&quot;, a 1984 one-act ballet by Kenneth MacMillan
* &quot;Woyzeck&quot;, a 1994 film by János Szász
* &quot;Woyzeck&quot;, a musical conceived by Robert Wilson, with lyrics and music by Tom Waits and Kathleen Brennan; the songs from which are on Waits&#x27;s &quot;Blood Money&quot; album
* &quot;&quot;, a modernized play by Jeremy Gable (in which Georg Büchner becomes a character in his own play)
* &quot;The Drowned Man: A Hollywood Fable&quot;, a production by Punchdrunk based on &quot;Woyzeck&quot; but set in a 1960s film studio. The production ran from 20 June 2013 – 6 July 2014.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="16" end="26" title="stage play" label="stage play"/>
<link wikidata="Q154014" start="38" end="51" title="Georg Büchner" label="Georg Büchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q78846" start="224" end="241" title="Karl Emil Franzos" label="Karl Emil Franzos"/>
<link wikidata="Q883454" start="274" end="291" title="Residence Theatre" label="Residence Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="295" end="301" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="692" end="699" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855380" start="867" end="884" title="Public execution" label="publicly beheaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q78846" start="1055" end="1072" title="Karl Emil Franzos" label="Karl Emil Franzos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1507" end="1513" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="1540" end="1553" title="Max Reinhardt" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309091" start="2638" end="2648" title="Drum major (military)" label="drum major"/>
<link wikidata="Q883454" start="3665" end="3680" title="Residence Theatre" label="residenztheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140265" start="3749" end="3771" title="Royal Dramatic Theatre" label="Royal Dramatic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="3797" end="3811" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362286" start="3821" end="3836" title="Thommy Berggren" label="Thommy Berggren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576169" start="4014" end="4029" title="Torsten Billman" label="Torsten Billman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128221" start="4060" end="4081" title="Classic Stage Company" label="Classic Stage Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q220698" start="4091" end="4102" title="Ron Perlman" label="Ron Perlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134493" start="4222" end="4234" title="Clive Barnes" label="Clive Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149500" start="4292" end="4307" title="Richard Foreman" label="Richard Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210076" start="4317" end="4336" title="David Patrick Kelly" label="David Patrick Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384368" start="4363" end="4375" title="Keith Fowler" label="Keith Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q14845432" start="5464" end="5474" title="Vesturport" label="Vesturport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15929501" start="5522" end="5542" title="Gísli Örn Garðarsson" label="Gísli Örn Garðarsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4987910" start="6369" end="6375" title="NTGent" label="NTGent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028633" start="6511" end="6525" title="Cameri Theater" label="Cameri Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675238" start="6609" end="6619" title="Itay Tiran" label="Itay Tiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="6878" end="6894" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q965498" start="6940" end="6951" title="Neil LaBute" label="Neil LaBute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115483" start="7344" end="7355" title="Jack Thorne" label="Jack Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="7371" end="7386" title="Old Vic Theatre" label="Old Vic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699385" start="7407" end="7418" title="John Boyega" label="John Boyega"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523601" start="7452" end="7462" title="Leo Butler" label="Leo Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235126" start="7495" end="7504" title="The Stage" label="The Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916786" start="7714" end="7742" title="Birmingham Repertory Theatre" label="Birmingham Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16898562" start="7859" end="7872" title="The Pleasance" label="The Pleasance"/>
<link wikidata="Q45784" start="8092" end="8099" title="Wozzeck" label="Wozzeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="8119" end="8129" title="Alban Berg" label="Alban Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228309" start="8193" end="8200" title="Wozzeck (Gurlitt)" label="Wozzeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q446453" start="8220" end="8235" title="Manfred Gurlitt" label="Manfred Gurlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629689" start="8280" end="8287" title="Wozzeck (film)" label="Wozzeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503879" start="8310" end="8325" title="Georg C. Klaren" label="Georg C. Klaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142377" start="8334" end="8341" title="Woyzeck (1979 film)" label="Woyzeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="8364" end="8377" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949939" start="8386" end="8393" title="Wodzeck" label="Wodzeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q61957196" start="8416" end="8431" title="Oliver Herbrich" label="Oliver Herbrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208752" start="8440" end="8457" title="Different Drummer (ballet)" label="Different Drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q661555" start="8490" end="8507" title="Kenneth MacMillan" label="Kenneth MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21020853" start="8516" end="8523" title="Woyzeck (1994 film)" label="Woyzeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301554" start="8546" end="8557" title="János Szász" label="János Szász"/>
<link wikidata="Q60774305" start="8566" end="8573" title="Woyzeck (musical)" label="Woyzeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q541526" start="8604" end="8617" title="Robert Wilson (director)" label="Robert Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="8644" end="8653" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q434943" start="8658" end="8674" title="Kathleen Brennan" label="Kathleen Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q584194" start="8723" end="8734" title="Blood Money (Tom Waits album)" label="Blood Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221741" start="8784" end="8796" title="Jeremy Gable" label="Jeremy Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060389" start="8866" end="8900" title="The Drowned Man" label="The Drowned Man: A Hollywood Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259979" start="8924" end="8934" title="Punchdrunk (theatre company)" label="Punchdrunk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969618" wikidata="Q1240958" url="?curid=969618" title="Mount Adams">
<text>Mount Adams most often refers to:
* Mount Adams (Washington) (3,743 m), a volcano in the Cascades and second highest mountain in the Washington state

==Other mountains==
* Mount Adams (New Hampshire) (1,760 m) in the White Mountains near Mount Washington, second highest in New England
* Mount Adams (Colorado) (4,248 m) in the Rocky Mountains near the Crestones

* Mount Adams (Montana) (2,344 m), a mountain in Flathead County, Montana
* Mount Adams (New York) (1,073 m)
* Mount Adams (New Zealand) (2,208 m)
* Mount Adams (Western Australia) (258 m)
* Chief peak of Adams Mountains, Antarctica

==Other uses==
* Mount Adams, Cincinnati, a neighborhood in the Ohio city, centered on the eponymous hill
* Mount Adams (Bel Air, Maryland), a house on the National Register of Historic Places

==See also==
* Mount Quincy Adams (disambiguation)
* Mount Adam (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1240958" start="0" end="11" title="Mount Adams" label="Mount Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q267646" start="36" end="60" title="Mount Adams (Washington)" label="Mount Adams (Washington)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840432" start="173" end="200" title="Mount Adams (New Hampshire)" label="Mount Adams (New Hampshire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919249" start="289" end="311" title="Mount Adams (Colorado)" label="Mount Adams (Colorado)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="367" end="388" title="Mount Adams (Montana)" label="Mount Adams (Montana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629418" start="402" end="438" title="List of mountains in Flathead County, Montana (M-Z)" label="mountain in Flathead County, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8519036" start="441" end="463" title="Mount Adams (New York)" label="Mount Adams (New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919252" start="476" end="501" title="Mount Adams (New Zealand)" label="Mount Adams (New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q642818" start="514" end="545" title="Mount Adams (Western Australia)" label="Mount Adams (Western Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12713220" start="570" end="585" title="Adams Mountains" label="Adams Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919248" start="616" end="639" title="Mount Adams, Cincinnati" label="Mount Adams, Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919246" start="707" end="738" title="Mount Adams (Bel Air, Maryland)" label="Mount Adams (Bel Air, Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950664" start="808" end="843" title="Mount Quincy Adams (disambiguation)" label="Mount Quincy Adams (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950339" start="846" end="873" title="Mount Adam (disambiguation)" label="Mount Adam (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969622" wikidata="Q7832895" url="?curid=969622" title="Train of Many Colors">
<text>The Train of Many Colors (also referred to as TOMC) is one of the New York Transit Museum&#x27;s nostalgia trains used for A Division excursions, which is made up of cars that were formerly used on Interborough Rapid Transit Company (IRT) lines. The name comes from the fact that the cars are painted in many varying schemes from different eras.

During the 2004 Subway Centennial, some of the cars were used for regular service on the 42nd Street Shuttle route. In addition, the cars may be used to commemorate a special occasion (e.g. the opening of CitiField in Queens).

Some of the cars are housed in the New York Transit Museum when not used for excursions (R12, R15, R17, and R33S). Others are stored at the 207th Street Yard.

== List of cars and colors ==
There are 19 cars painted in various schemes, as listed below.

==References==

*New York City Transit Subway Centennial press release, describing two museum trains that ran in 2004 in route service.
*New York City Transit&#x27;s &#x27;Train of Many Colors&#x27;

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7832895" start="4" end="24" title="Train of Many Colors" label="Train of Many Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832895" start="46" end="50" title="Train of Many Colors" label="TOMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503777" start="66" end="89" title="New York Transit Museum" label="New York Transit Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316245" start="97" end="113" title="Restored train" label="nostalgia trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296790" start="123" end="133" title="A Division (New York City Subway)" label="A Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419725" start="134" end="144" title="excursion train" label="excursions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523955" start="198" end="232" title="Interborough Rapid Transit Company" label="Interborough Rapid Transit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q126698" start="436" end="461" title="42nd Street Shuttle" label="42nd Street Shuttle route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072882" start="552" end="561" title="CitiField" label="CitiField"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="565" end="571" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481369" start="715" end="732" title="207th Street Yard" label="207th Street Yard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969623" wikidata="Q7707332" url="?curid=969623" title="Texans for Truth">
<text>Texans for Truth (TfT) was a political advocacy organization, registered under Section 527 of the United States tax code, formed to oppose George W. Bush&#x27;s re-election efforts in the 2004 presidential election. In September 2004, the group began airing advertisements in various swing states that questioned Bush&#x27;s National Guard record, particularly as to whether or not he fulfilled his obligations to serve.

==Membership and organization==
On its website, the TfT stated that it was established by &quot;the 20,000-member Texas online activist group, DriveDemocracy.org&quot;. DriveDemocracy.org is an organization started in April 2004 by MoveOn.org, a large advocacy group opposing Bush. Glenn W Smith of Austin, the founder and head of TfT, is a former political reporter for the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; and &quot;Houston Post&quot;. He has worked as a Democratic political consultant on several campaigns, including Democrat Tony Sanchez&#x27;s campaign for governor of Texas in 2002. Smith said he started TfT in response to another 527 group, Swift Boat Veterans for Truth, that challenged the legitimacy of how Senator John Kerry received his Vietnam War medals as well as his accounts about the Vietnam War. 

The Bush-Cheney campaign dismissed TfT as &quot;a smear group launching baseless attacks on behalf of John Kerry&#x27;s campaign that will be rejected by the American people&quot; , and maintains that &quot;the president served honorably in the National Guard, fulfilled his duties and was honorably discharged.&quot; Various questions about his National Guard record, including those based on information from military documents, have been raised against Bush since the 2000 presidential campaign and even before that, in 1994 and 1998 when he twice won election as the Governor of Texas. This article describes only the participation in this long-standing dispute by the Texans for Truth organization. For a comprehensive review of the allegations, responses, and evidence, see George W. Bush military service controversy.

==Media activities==
===First television advertisement===
The first advertisement features testimony from Bob Mintz, a lieutenant colonel in the 187th Alabama Air National Guard unit in 1972, where Bush was assigned to serve that year. In the video, Mintz claims that he never saw Bush, and is quoted contending that &quot;It would be impossible to be unseen in a unit of that size.&quot; The ad concludes by asking: &quot;Was George W. Bush AWOL in Alabama?&quot;

===Second television advertisement===
The second advertisement reiterates the charges against George W. Bush that he did not fulfill his military service requirements but also accuses George H. W. Bush of pulling strings in order for his son to get into the Texas Air National Guard. In addition, the advertisement quotes Bush&#x27;s statement on &quot;Meet the Press&quot; (February 8, 2004) that he would authorize release of his records, and it criticizes him because he has not signed the actual form (Standard Form 180) to effect the release: &quot;You pledged to release all of your military records, but you&#x27;ve not signed the papers to do so. Sign them now. Keep your word.&quot;

== FEC complaint ==

On September 25, 2004, the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; reported that Democracy 21, the Campaign Legal Center and OpenSecrets had filed a complaint with the Federal Election Commission against Texans for Truth, alleging violations of campaign finance laws.

These watchdog organizations also previously complained to the FEC about Swift Boat Veterans for Truth and other pro-Republican groups.

==News articles about Texans for Truth==
*&quot;&#x27;Texans for Truth&#x27; ad challenges Bush on Guard service&quot; &quot;USA Today&quot;, September 7, 2004
*&quot;Records Say Bush Balked at Order&quot; - &quot;Washington Post&quot;, September 9, 2004
*&quot;TV writer gives $100G to Texans for Truth&quot; ABC News - September 9, 2004
*&quot;Swift Boat Vets, Texans Battle for &#x27;Truth&#x27; &quot; Adweek.com - September 23, 2004

==External links==
*Texans for Truth at Sourcewatch</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7707332" start="0" end="16" title="Texans for Truth" label="Texans for Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707332" start="18" end="21" title="Texans for Truth" label="TfT"/>
<link wikidata="Q242712" start="79" end="90" title="527 group" label="Section 527"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="98" end="111" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="112" end="115" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="139" end="153" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="188" end="214" title="U.S. presidential election, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="284" end="295" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545549" start="313" end="346" title="George W. Bush military service controversy" label="Bush&amp;#x27;s National Guard record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="536" end="541" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="591" end="609" title="DriveDemocracy.org" label="DriveDemocracy.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633547" start="654" end="664" title="MoveOn.org" label="MoveOn.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460234" start="704" end="717" title="Glenn W Smith" label="Glenn W Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="721" end="727" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="803" end="820" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390845" start="837" end="849" title="Houston Post" label="Houston Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="876" end="886" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19276933" start="949" end="961" title="Tony Sanchez (politician)" label="Tony Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="982" end="999" title="governor of Texas" label="governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372717" start="1069" end="1098" title="Swift Boat Veterans for Truth" label="Swift Boat Veterans for Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="1146" end="1156" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1170" end="1181" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545549" start="2018" end="2061" title="George W. Bush military service controversy" label="George W. Bush military service controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="3277" end="3294" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255484" start="3315" end="3327" title="Democracy 21" label="Democracy 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027755" start="3333" end="3354" title="Campaign Legal Center" label="Campaign Legal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q127231756" start="3359" end="3370" title="OpenSecrets" label="OpenSecrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705072" start="3402" end="3429" title="Federal Election Commission" label="Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="3854" end="3869" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059762" start="4119" end="4130" title="Sourcewatch" label="Sourcewatch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969624" wikidata="Q389463" url="?curid=969624" title="Collision attack">
<text>In cryptography, a collision attack on a cryptographic hash tries to find two inputs producing the same hash value, i.e. a hash collision. This is in contrast to a preimage attack where a specific target hash value is specified.

There are roughly two types of collision attacks:
;Classical collision attack: Find two different messages &quot;m&quot;1 and &quot;m&quot;2 such that &quot;hash&quot;(&quot;m&quot;1) = &quot;hash&quot;(&quot;m&quot;2).
More generally:
;Chosen-prefix collision attack: Given two different prefixes &quot;p&quot;1 and &quot;p&quot;2, find two suffixes &quot;s&quot;1 and &quot;s&quot;2 such that &quot;hash&quot;(&quot;p&quot;1 ∥ &quot;s&quot;1) = &quot;hash&quot;(&quot;p&quot;2 ∥ &quot;s&quot;2), where ∥ denotes the concatenation operation.

==Classical collision attack==
Much like symmetric-key ciphers are vulnerable to brute force attacks, every cryptographic hash function is inherently vulnerable to collisions using a birthday attack. Due to the birthday problem, these attacks are much faster than a brute force would be. A hash of &quot;n&quot; bits can be broken in 2&quot;n&quot;/2 time steps (evaluations of the hash function).

Mathematically stated, a collision attack finds two different messages and , such that formula_1. In a classical collision attack, the attacker has no control over the content of either message, but they are arbitrarily chosen by the algorithm.

More efficient attacks are possible by employing cryptanalysis to specific hash functions. When a collision attack is discovered and is found to be faster than a birthday attack, a hash function is often denounced as &quot;broken&quot;. The NIST hash function competition was largely induced by published collision attacks against two very commonly used hash functions, MD5 and SHA-1. The collision attacks against MD5 have improved so much that, as of 2007, it takes just a few seconds on a regular computer. Hash collisions created this way are usually constant length and largely unstructured, so cannot directly be applied to attack widespread document formats or protocols.

However, workarounds are possible by abusing dynamic constructs present in many formats. In this way, two documents would be created which are as similar as possible in order to have the same hash value. One document would be shown to an authority to be signed, and then the signature could be copied to the other file. Such a malicious document would contain two different messages in the same document, but conditionally display one or the other through subtle changes to the file:

* Some document formats like PostScript, or macros in Microsoft Word, have conditional constructs. (if-then-else) that allow testing whether a location in the file has one value or another in order to control what is displayed.
*TIFF files can contain cropped images, with a different part of an image being displayed without affecting the hash value.
*PDF files are vulnerable to collision attacks by using color value (such that text of one message is displayed with a white color that blends into the background, and text of the other message is displayed with a dark color) which can then be altered to change the signed document&#x27;s content.

==Chosen-prefix collision attack==
An extension of the collision attack is the chosen-prefix collision attack, which is specific to Merkle–Damgård hash functions. In this case, the attacker can choose two arbitrarily different documents, and then append different calculated values that result in the whole documents having an equal hash value. This attack is normally harder, a hash of n bits can be broken in 2(n/2)+1 time steps, but is much more powerful than a classical collision attack.

Mathematically stated, given two different prefixes &quot;p&quot;1, &quot;p&quot;2, the attack finds two suffixes &quot;s&quot;1 and &quot;s&quot;2 such that &quot;hash&quot;(&quot;p&quot;1 ∥ &quot;s&quot;1) = &quot;hash&quot;(&quot;p&quot;2 ∥ &quot;s&quot;2) (where ∥ is the concatenation operation).

More efficient attacks are also possible by employing cryptanalysis to specific hash functions. In 2007, a chosen-prefix collision attack was found against MD5, requiring roughly 250 evaluations of the MD5 function. The paper also demonstrates two X.509 certificates for different domain names, with colliding hash values. This means that a certificate authority could be asked to sign a certificate for one domain, and then that certificate (specially its signature) could be used to create a new rogue certificate to impersonate another domain.

A real-world collision attack was published in December 2008 when a group of security researchers published a forged X.509 signing certificate that could be used to impersonate a certificate authority, taking advantage of a prefix collision attack against the MD5 hash function. This meant that an attacker could impersonate any SSL-secured website as a man-in-the-middle, thereby subverting the certificate validation built in every web browser to protect electronic commerce. The rogue certificate may not be revokable by real authorities, and could also have an arbitrary forged expiry time. Even though MD5 was known to be very weak in 2004, certificate authorities were still willing to sign MD5-verified certificates in December 2008, and at least one Microsoft code-signing certificate was still using MD5 in May 2012.

The Flame malware successfully used a new variation of a chosen-prefix collision attack to spoof code signing of its components by a Microsoft root certificate that still used the compromised MD5 algorithm.

In 2019, researchers found a chosen-prefix collision attack against SHA-1 with computing complexity between 266.9 and 269.4 and cost less than 100,000 US dollars. In 2020, researchers reduced the complexity of a chosen-prefix collision attack against SHA-1 to 263.4. 

==Attack scenarios==
Many applications of cryptographic hash functions do not rely on collision resistance, thus collision attacks do not affect their security. For example, HMACs are not vulnerable. For the attack to be useful, the attacker must be in control of the input to the hash function.

===Digital signatures===
Because digital signature algorithms cannot sign a large amount of data efficiently, most implementations use a hash function to reduce (&quot;compress&quot;) the amount of data that needs to be signed down to a constant size. Digital signature schemes often become vulnerable to hash collisions as soon as the underlying hash function is practically broken; techniques like randomized (salted) hashing will buy extra time by requiring the harder preimage attack.

The usual attack scenario goes like this:
# Mallory creates two different documents A and B that have an identical hash value, i.e., a collision. Mallory seeks to deceive Bob into accepting document B, ostensibly from Alice.
# Mallory sends document A to Alice, who agrees to what the document says, signs its hash, and sends the signature to Mallory.
# Mallory attaches the signature from document A to document B.
# Mallory then sends the signature and document B to Bob, claiming that Alice signed B. Because the digital signature matches document B&#x27;s hash, Bob&#x27;s software is unable to detect the substitution.

In 2008, researchers used a chosen-prefix collision attack against MD5 using this scenario, to produce a rogue certificate authority certificate. They created two versions of a TLS public key certificate, one of which appeared legitimate and was submitted for signing by the RapidSSL certificate authority. The second version, which had the same MD5 hash, contained flags which signal web browsers to accept it as a legitimate authority for issuing arbitrary other certificates.

===Hash flooding===
Hash flooding (also known as HashDoS) is a denial of service attack that uses hash collisions to exploit the worst-case (linear probe) runtime of hash table lookups. It was originally described in 2003 as an example of an algorithmic complexity attack. To execute such an attack, the attacker sends the server multiple pieces of data that hash to the same value and then tries to get the server to perform slow lookups. As the main focus of hash functions used in hash tables was speed instead of security, most major programming languages were affected, with new vulnerabilities of this class still showing up a decade after the original presentation.

To prevent hash flooding without making the hash function overly complex, newer keyed hash functions are introduced, with the security objective that collisions are hard to find as long as the key is unknown. They may be slower than previous hashes, but are still much easier to compute than cryptographic hashes. As of 2021, Jean-Philippe Aumasson and Daniel J. Bernstein&#x27;s SipHash (2012) is the most widely-used hash function in this class. (Non-keyed &quot;simple&quot; hashes remain safe to use as long as the application&#x27;s hash table is not controllable from the outside.)

It is possible to perform an analogous attack to fill up Bloom filters using a (partial) preimage attack.

==See also==

* Puzzle friendliness

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Meaningful Collisions&quot;, attack scenarios for exploiting cryptographic hash collisions
* Fast MD5 and MD4 Collision Generators - Bishop Fox (formerly Stach &amp; Liu). Create MD4 and MD5 hash collisions using groundbreaking new code that improves upon the techniques originally developed by Xiaoyun Wang. Using a 1.6 GHz Pentium 4, MD5 collisions can be generated in an average of 45 minutes, and MD4 collisions can be generated in an average of 5 seconds. Originally released on 22Jun2006.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3" end="15" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q389463" start="19" end="35" title="Collision attack" label="collision attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="41" end="59" title="cryptographic hash" label="cryptographic hash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195184" start="123" end="137" title="hash collision" label="hash collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187426" start="164" end="179" title="preimage attack" label="preimage attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="748" end="761" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="815" end="835" title="symmetric-key cipher" label="symmetric-key cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q869370" start="855" end="873" title="brute force attack" label="brute force attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="882" end="909" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q615485" start="957" end="972" title="birthday attack" label="birthday attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q339000" start="985" end="1001" title="birthday problem" label="birthday problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="1468" end="1481" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229223" start="1660" end="1690" title="NIST hash function competition" label="NIST hash function competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q185235" start="1789" end="1792" title="MD5" label="MD5"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="1797" end="1802" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="2613" end="2623" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q629579" start="2628" end="2633" title="macro (computer science)" label="macro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="2638" end="2652" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q215106" start="2813" end="2817" title="TIFF" label="TIFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="2937" end="2940" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757463" start="3367" end="3396" title="Merkle–Damgård construction" label="Merkle–Damgård hash functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="4005" end="4018" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="4086" end="4099" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065865" start="4280" end="4285" title="X.509" label="X.509"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="4373" end="4394" title="certificate authority" label="certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065865" start="4697" end="4702" title="X.509" label="X.509"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="4759" end="4780" title="certificate authority" label="certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="4909" end="4912" title="Transport Layer Security" label="SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="4934" end="4951" title="man-in-the-middle" label="man-in-the-middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="5014" end="5025" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="5037" end="5056" title="electronic commerce" label="electronic commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066619" start="5411" end="5416" title="Flame (malware)" label="Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338870" start="5504" end="5516" title="code signing" label="code signing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="5683" end="5688" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779448" start="5970" end="5990" title="collision resistance" label="collision resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669397" start="6058" end="6062" title="HMAC" label="HMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="6214" end="6231" title="digital signature" label="digital signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187426" start="6653" end="6668" title="preimage attack" label="preimage attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q185235" start="7363" end="7366" title="MD5" label="MD5"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="7407" end="7428" title="certificate authority" label="certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="7473" end="7476" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q274758" start="7477" end="7499" title="public key certificate" label="public key certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406" start="7839" end="7856" title="denial of service" label="denial of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q207440" start="7942" end="7952" title="hash table" label="hash table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="8530" end="8549" title="keyed hash function" label="keyed hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q92865" start="8803" end="8822" title="Daniel J. Bernstein" label="Daniel J. Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525546" start="8830" end="8837" title="SipHash" label="SipHash"/>
<link wikidata="Q885373" start="9096" end="9108" title="Bloom filter" label="Bloom filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q124518107" start="9162" end="9181" title="Puzzle friendliness" label="Puzzle friendliness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969628" wikidata="Q4603363" url="?curid=969628" title="2004 Toronto International Film Festival">
<text>The 29th [[Toronto International Film Festival]] ran from September 9 through September 18. The festival screened 328 films of which 253 were features and 75 were shorts (148 of the films screened were in a language other than English).

==Awards==
No first or second runners-up were officially named for the People&#x27;s Choice Award; however, festival director Piers Handling did provide the media with a list of numerous other films that had been in the running, including &quot;Crash&quot;, &quot;Gunner Palace&quot;, &quot;I, Claudia&quot;, &quot;Up and Down&quot;, &quot;3-Iron&quot;, &quot;Ma Mère&quot;, &quot;The Holy Girl&quot;, &quot;Red Dust&quot;, &quot;Brides&quot;, &quot;Saving Face&quot; and &quot;Sideways&quot;.

==Programmes==

===Canada First===
* &quot;CQ2 (Seek You Too)&quot; (Carole Laure)
* &quot;I, Claudia&quot; (Chris Abraham)
* &quot;Ill Fated&quot; (Mark A. Lewis)
* &quot;It&#x27;s All Gone Pete Tong&quot; (Michael Dowse)
* &quot;Jimmywork&quot; (Simon Sauvé)
* &quot;Phil the Alien&quot; (Rob Stefaniuk)
* &quot;Saint Ralph&quot; (Michael McGowan)
* &quot;Seven Times Lucky&quot; (Gary Yates)
* &quot;Tideline (Littoral)&quot; (Wajdi Mouawad)
* &quot;White Skin&quot; (Daniel Roby)

=== Canadian Open Vault ===
* &quot;The Rowdyman&quot; (Peter Carter)

=== Canadian Retrospective ===
* &quot;Attiuk&quot; — René Bonnière
* &quot;Land Without Trees, or the Mouchouânipi (Le Pays de la terre sans arbre ou le Mouchouânipi)&quot; — Pierre Perrault
* &quot;Pour la suite du monde&quot; — Pierre Perrault, Michel Brault
* &quot;The River Schooners (Les Voitures d&#x27;eau)&quot; — Pierre Perrault
* &quot;The Shimmering Beast (La bête lumineuse)&quot; — Pierre Perrault
* &quot;The Times That Are (Le Règne du jour)&quot; — Pierre Perrault
* &quot;Wake Up, mes bons amis (Un Pays sans bon sens!)&quot; — Pierre Perrault
* &quot;Whalehead (Tête-à-la-Baleine)&quot; — René Bonnière
* &quot;Winter Crossing at l&#x27;Isle-aux-Coudres (La Traversée d&#x27;hiver à l&#x27;Île aux Coudres)&quot; — Réne Bonnière

=== Contemporary World Cinema ===
* &quot;3-Iron&quot; (Kim Ki-duk)
* &quot;After the Day Before&quot; (Attila Janisch)
* &quot;Almost Brothers&quot; (Lúcia Murat)
* &quot;The Alzheimer Case&quot; (Erik Van Looy)
* &quot;Antares&quot; (Götz Spielmann)
* &quot;As Follows&quot; (Federico Veiroj)
* &quot;BOMBÓN – El Perro&quot; (Carlos Sorín)
* &quot;Breaking News&quot; (Johnnie To)
* &quot;Brodeuses&quot; (Eléonore Faucher)
* &quot;Brothers&quot; (Susanne Bier)
* &quot;Cool&quot; (Theo van Gogh)
* &quot;Crónicas&quot; (Sebastián Cordero)
* &quot;Days and Hours&quot; (Pjer Žalica)
* &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Shoes&quot; (Shane Meadows)
* &quot;Dear Frankie&quot; (Shona Auerbach)
* &quot;Duck Season&quot; (Fernando Eimbcke)
* &quot;Earth and Ashes&quot; (Atiq Rahimi)
* &quot;L&#x27;Équipier&quot; (Philippe Lioret)
* &quot;La Femme de Gilles&quot; (Frédéric Fonteyne)
* &quot;Ferpect Crime&quot; (Álex de la Iglesia)
* &quot;Hidden Flaws&quot; (Paula van der Oest)
* &quot;The Holy Girl&quot; (Lucrecia Martel)
* &quot;Hotel&quot; (Jessica Hausner)
* &quot;The Keys to the House&quot; (Gianni Amelio)
* &quot;Ils se marièrent et eurent beaucoup d&#x27;enfants&quot; (Yvan Attal)
* &quot;Inconscientes&quot; (Joaquín Oristrell)
* &quot;Innocent Voices&quot; (Luis Mandoki)
* &quot;Lila dit ça&quot; (Ziad Doueiri)
* &quot;The Limb Salesman&quot; (Anais Granofsky)
* &quot;Little Sky&quot; (María Victoria Menis)
* &quot;Ma Mère&quot; (Christophe Honoré)
* &quot;Male Fantasy&quot; (Blaine Thurier)
* &quot;Mon père est ingénieur&quot; (Robert Guédiguian)
* &quot;My Summer of Love&quot; (Paweł Pawlikowski)
* &quot;Mysterious Skin&quot; (Gregg Araki)
* &quot;Niceland&quot; (Fridrik Thor Fridriksson)
* &quot;Nobody Knows&quot; (Hirokazu Koreeda)
* &quot;Oldboy&quot; (Park Chan-wook)
* &quot;Our Own&quot; (Dmitry Meskhiyev)
* &quot;Plastic Flowers&quot; (Liu Bingjian)
* &quot;Quill&quot; (Yoichi Sai)
* &quot;Real Life&quot; (Panos Koutras)
* &quot;Rois et reine&quot; (Arnaud Desplechin)
* &quot;Rolling Family&quot; (Pablo Trapero)
* &quot;Shiza&quot; (Gulshat Omarova)
* &quot;Siblings&quot; (David Weaver)
* &quot;Somersault&quot; (Cate Shortland)
* &quot;Spider Forest&quot; (Song Il-gon)
* &quot;Stray Dogs&quot; (Marzieh Meshkini)
* &quot;The Tuner&quot; (Kira Muratova)
* &quot;Turtles Can Fly&quot; (Bahman Ghobadi)
* &quot;Two Great Sheep&quot; (Liu Hao)
* &quot;Up and Down&quot; (Jan Hřebejk)
* &quot;Walk on Water&quot; (Eytan Fox)
* &quot;Whisky&quot; (Juan Pablo Rebella, Pablo Stoll)
* &quot;Wilby Wonderful&quot; (Daniel MacIvor)
* &quot;The Woodsman&quot; (Nicole Kassell)
* &quot;The World&quot; (Jia Zhangke)

===Dialogues: Talking with Pictures===
* &quot;The Brood&quot; (David Cronenberg)
* &quot;Diary of a Country Priest&quot; (Robert Bresson)
* &quot;Heaven&#x27;s Gate&quot; (Michael Cimino)
* &quot;La Noire De...&quot; (Ousmane Sembène)
* &quot;Sweet Smell of Success&quot; (Alexander Mackendrick)
* &quot;This Sporting Life&quot; (Lindsay Anderson)
* &quot;Withnail and I&quot; (Bruce Robinson)

=== Discovery ===
* &quot;Astronauts&quot; (Santi Amodeo)
* &quot;Automne&quot; (Ra&#x27;up McGee)
* &quot;Boats out of Watermelon Rinds&quot; (Ahmet Uluçay)
* &quot;The Buffalo Boy&quot; (Minh Nguyen-Vô)
* &quot;Le Cou de la girafe&quot; (Safy Nebbou)
* &quot;Crying?&quot; (Alexander Voulgaris)
* &quot;Electric Shadows&quot; (Xiao Jiang)
* &quot;The Forest for the Trees&quot; (Maren Ade)
* &quot;Hari Om&quot; (Bharatbala)
* &quot;Harvest Time&quot; (Marina Razbezhkina)
* &quot;In My Father&#x27;s Den&quot; (Brad McGann)
* &quot;Innocence&quot; (Lucile Hadžihalilović)
* &quot;Mirage&quot; (Svetozar Ristovski)
* &quot;Off Beat&quot; (Hendrik Hölzemann)
* &quot;Omagh&quot; (Pete Travis)
* &quot;On the Outs&quot; (Lori Silverbush, Michael Skolnik)
* &quot;The Overture&quot; (Itthi-sunthorn Wichailak)
* &quot;Oyster Farmer&quot; (Anna Reeves)
* &quot;Private&quot; (Saverio Costanzo)
* &quot;Producing Adults&quot; (Aleksi Salmenperä)
* &quot;Les Revenants&quot; (Robin Campillo)
* &quot;Saving Face&quot; (Alice Wu)
* &quot;Summer Storm&quot; (Marco Kreuzpaintner)
* &quot;Symmetry&quot; (Konrad Niewolski)
* &quot;Uno&quot; (Aksel Hennie)
* &quot;Vento di Terra&quot; (Vincenzo Marra)
* &quot;A Way of Life&quot; (Amma Asante)
* &quot;Whisky Romeo Zulu&quot; (Enrique Piñeyro)

=== Masters ===
* &quot;10 on Ten&quot; (Abbas Kiarostami)
* &quot;10e Chambre, instants d&#x27;audiences&quot; (Raymond Depardon)
* &quot;À tout de suite&quot; (Benoît Jacquot)
* &quot;Bad Education&quot; (Pedro Almodóvar)
* &quot;Brides&quot; (Pantelis Voulgaris)
* &quot;Café Lumière&quot; (Hou Hsiao-hsien)
* &quot;Chased by Dreams&quot; (Buddhadeb Dasgupta)
* &quot;Cinévardaphoto&quot; (Agnès Varda)
* &quot;Demain on déménage&quot; (Chantal Akerman)
* &quot;Eros&quot; (Wong Kar-wai, Steven Soderbergh, Michelangelo Antonioni)
* &quot;Five&quot; (Abbas Kiarostami)
* &quot;Human Touch&quot; (Paul Cox)
* &quot;Land of Plenty&quot; (Wim Wenders)
* &quot;Low Life&quot; (Im Kwon-taek)
* &quot;Midwinter Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; (Goran Paskaljević)
* &quot;Moolaadé&quot; (Ousmane Sembène)
* &quot;The Ninth Day&quot; (Volker Schlöndorff)
* &quot;Notre Musique&quot; (Jean-Luc Godard)
* &quot;Salvador Allende&quot; (Patricio Guzmán)
* &quot;Sucker Free City&quot; (Spike Lee)
* &quot;&quot; (Theodoros Angelopoulos)

=== Midnight Madness ===
* &quot;Calvaire&quot; (Fabrice du Welz)
* &quot;Creep&quot; (Christopher Smith)
* &quot;Dead Birds&quot; (Alex Turner)
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence&quot; (Mamoru Oshii)
* &quot;Kontroll&quot; (Nimród Antal)
* &quot;The Machinist&quot; (Brad Anderson)
* &quot;Rahtree: Flower of the Night&quot; (Yuthlert Sippapak)
* &quot;The Raspberry Reich&quot; (Bruce LaBruce)
* &quot;Saw&quot; (James Wan)
* &quot;Zebraman&quot; (Takashi Miike)
=== National Cinema Program ===
* &quot;Cape of Good Hope&quot; (Mark Bamford)
* &quot;Drum&quot; (Zola Maseko)
* &quot;Forgiveness&quot; (Ian Gabriel)
* &quot;Max and Mona&quot; (Teddy Mattera)
* &quot;Mozart - The Music of the Violin&quot; (Mickey Madoda Dube)
* &quot;A South African Love Story - Walter and Albertina Sisulu&quot; (Toni Strasburg)
* &quot;Zulu Love Letter&quot; (Ramadan Suleman)

=== Planet Africa ===
* &quot;Aïcha&quot; (Newton I. Aduaka)
* &quot;above &amp; beneath&quot; (René Alberta)
* &quot;Bullet Boy&quot; (Saul Dibb)
* &quot;Gardiens de la Mémoire&quot; (Eric Kabera)
* &quot;Le Grand Voyage&quot; (Ismaël Ferroukhi)
* &quot;The Hero&quot; (Zézé Gamboa)
* &quot;Kounandi&quot; (Apolline Traoré)
* &quot;La Nuit de la vérité&quot; (Fanta Régina Nacro)
* &quot;Off Duty&quot; (Buboo Kakati)
* &quot;On the Verge of a Fever (Le Goût des jeunes filles)&quot; (John L&#x27;Ecuyer)
* &quot;One Flight Stand&quot; (Saladin Patterson)
* &quot;A Spoonful of Sugar&quot; (Andrea Williams)
* &quot;Time Out&quot; (Xelinda Yancy)

=== Real to Reel ===
* &quot;Andrew and Jeremy Get Married&quot; (Don Boyd)
* &quot;Be Here to Love Me: A Film About Townes Van Zandt&quot; (Margaret Brown)
* &quot;&quot; (Zev Asher)
* &quot;Darwin&#x27;s Nightmare&quot; (Hubert Sauper)
* &quot;Double Dare&quot; (Amanda Micheli)
* &quot;Le Fantôme d&#x27;Henri Langlois&quot; (Jacques Richard)
* &quot;Final Cut: The Making and Unmaking of Heaven&#x27;s Gate&quot; (Michael Epstein)
* &quot;Going Upriver: The Long War of John Kerry&quot; (George T. Butler)
* &quot;Gunner Palace&quot; (Michael Tucker, Petra Epperlein)
* &quot;I Died in Childhood...&quot; (Georgy Paradjanov)
* &quot;Kings of the Sky&quot; (Deborah Stratman)
* &quot;The Last Victory&quot; (John Appel)
* &quot;Letters to Ali&quot; (Clara Law)
* &quot;Lightning in a Bottle&quot; (Antoine Fuqua)
* &quot;Mondovino&quot; (Jonathan Nossiter)
* &quot;Scared Sacred&quot; (Velcrow Ripper)
* &quot;Shake Hands with the Devil: The Journey of Roméo Dallaire&quot; (Peter Raymont)
* &quot;Small Mall&quot; (Róbert Ingi Douglas)
* &quot;Tell Them Who You Are&quot; (Mark S. Wexler)
* &quot;Three of Hearts: A Postmodern Family&quot; (Susan Kaplan)
* &quot;Touch the Sound&quot; (Thomas Riedelsheimer)
* &quot;Unforgivable Blackness: The Rise and Fall of Jack Johnson&quot; (Ken Burns)
* &quot;A Whale of a Tale&quot; (Peter Lynch)
* &quot;White Tower&quot; (Su Qing, Mina)
* &quot;Writer of O&quot; (Pola Rapaport)
* &quot;The Year of the Yao&quot; (James D. Stern, Adam Del Deo)
* &quot;Z Channel: A Magnificent Obsession&quot; (Xan Cassavetes)

=== Short Cuts Canada ===
* &quot;The Accordion (Accordéon)&quot; (Michèle Cournoyer)
* &quot;Almost Forgot My Bones&quot; (Katrin Bowen)
* &quot;Between Science and Garbage&quot; (Pierre Hébert, Bob Ostertag)
* &quot;Birdlings Two&quot; (Davina Pardo)
* &quot;Black Ink on Blue Sky (Encre noire sur fond d&#x27;azur)&quot; (Félix Dufour-Laperrière)
* &quot;Boyclops&quot; (Jay Dahl)
* &quot;The Bridge (Le Pont)&quot; (Guy Édoin)
* &quot;Build&quot; (Greg Atkins)
* &quot;choke.&quot; (David Hyde)
* &quot;Corps étrangers&quot; (Simon Lavoie)
* &quot;Desastre&quot; (Jay Field)
* &quot;Deux Enfants qui fument&quot; (Sarah Fortin)
* &quot;Elephant Shoe&quot; (Christopher Behnisch)
* &quot;Elliot Smelliot&quot; (Anita Doron)
* &quot;Filth&quot; (Wrik Mead)
* &quot;The Finite&quot; (Alexi Manis)
* &quot;Girl Cleans Sink&quot; (Sook-Yin Lee)
* &quot;Groomed&quot; (Joseph Raso)
* &quot;The Hill&quot; (Deborah Chow)
* &quot;Hogtown Blues&quot; (Hugh Gibson)
* &quot;Hotel Saudade&quot; (Cameron Bailey)
* &quot;The Human Kazoo&quot; (Fabrizio Filippo)
* &quot;Man. Feel. Pain.&quot; (Dylan Akio Smith)
* &quot;mary/me&quot; (Kelly Egan)
* &quot;Milo 55160&quot; (David Ostry)
* &quot;More Sensitive&quot; (Gail Noonan)
* &quot;Mothers, Fathers and Other Strangers&quot; (Carl Knutson)
* &quot;My Old Man&quot; (Alex Levine)
* &quot;Pigeon&quot; (Anthony Green)
* &quot;Rodéo&quot; (Mélanie Dion)
* &quot;Ryan&quot; (Chris Landreth)
* &quot;The Sadness of Johnson Joe Jangles&quot; (Jeffrey St. Jules)
* &quot;Sissy Boy Slap Party&quot; (Guy Maddin)
* &quot;Sombra Dolorosa&quot; (Guy Maddin)
* &quot;Stronger&quot; (Debra Felstead)
* &quot;Superhero Wannabe&quot; (Patricia Harris Seeley)
* &quot;A Tale of Bad Luck&quot; (Brad Peyton)
* &quot;Trouser Accidents&quot; (Semi Chellas)
* &quot;white out&quot; (Matt Sinclair-Foreman)

=== Special Presentations ===
* &quot;5x2&quot; (&quot;Cinq fois deux&quot;) (François Ozon)
* &quot;The Assassination of Richard Nixon&quot; (Niels Mueller)
* &quot;Bluebird&quot; (Mijke de Jong)
* &quot;Childstar&quot; (Don McKellar)
* &quot;Les Choristes&quot; (Christophe Barratier)
* &quot;Crash&quot; (Paul Haggis)
* &quot;A Dirty Shame&quot; (John Waters)
* &quot;Enduring Love&quot; (Roger Michell)
* &quot;The General&quot; (Buster Keaton, Clyde Bruckman)
* &quot;Haven&quot; (Frank E. Flowers)
* &quot;Head in the Clouds&quot; (John Duigan)
* &quot;Hotel Rwanda&quot; (Terry George)
* &quot;Isn&#x27;t This a Time! A Tribute Concert for Harold Leventhal&quot; (Jim Brown)
* &quot;Keane&quot; (Lodge Kerrigan)
* &quot;Kung Fu Hustle&quot; (Stephen Chow)
* &quot;Ladies in Lavender&quot; (Charles Dance)
* &quot;The Libertine&quot; (Laurence Dunmore)
* &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot; (Michael Radford)
* &quot;Millions&quot; (Danny Boyle)
* &quot;Noel&quot; (Chazz Palminteri)
* &quot;P.S.&quot; (Dylan Kidd)
* &quot;Palindromes&quot; (Todd Solondz)
* &quot;Promised Land&quot; (Amos Gitaï)
* &quot;The Sea Inside&quot; (Alejandro Amenábar)
* &quot;Shadows of Time&quot; (Florian Gallenberger)
* &quot;Sideways&quot; (Alexander Payne)
* &quot;Silver City&quot; (John Sayles)
* &quot;Steamboy&quot; (Katsuhiro Otomo)
* &quot;Throw Down&quot; (Johnnie To)
* &quot;When Will I Be Loved&quot; (James Toback)
* &quot;Yes&quot; (Sally Potter)
* &quot;Yesterday&quot; (Darrell James Roodt)

===Special events===
* &quot;Celebrating Brian Linehan&quot; — Live tribute event at the Winter Garden Theatre to Canadian entertainment journalist and interviewer Brian Linehan, following his death earlier in 2004. Hosted by Roger Ebert, with celebrity guests including Martin Short.

=== Viacom Galas ===
* &quot;Arsène Lupin&quot; (Jean-Paul Salomé)
* &quot;Being Julia&quot; (István Szabó)
* &quot;Beyond the Sea&quot; (Kevin Spacey)
* &quot;Clean&quot; (Olivier Assayas)
* &quot;Der Untergang&quot; (&quot;Downfall&quot;) (Oliver Hirschbiegel)
* &quot;Five Children and It&quot; (John Stephenson)
* &quot;A Good Woman&quot; (Mike Barker)
* &quot;House of Flying Daggers&quot; (Zhang Yimou)
* &quot;I Heart Huckabees&quot; (David O. Russell)
* &quot;Imaginary Heroes&quot; (Dan Harris)
* &quot;An Italian Romance&quot; (Carlo Mazzacurati)
* &quot;Jiminy Glick in Lalawood&quot; (Vadim Jean)
* &quot;Kinsey&quot; (Bill Condon)
* &quot;Modigliani&quot; (Mick Davis)
* &quot;The Motorcycle Diaries&quot; (Walter Salles)
* &quot;Ray&quot; (Taylor Hackford)
* &quot;Red Dust&quot; (Tom Hooper)
* &quot;Return to Sender&quot; (Bille August)
* &quot;Shark Tale&quot; (Vicky Jenson, Bibo Bergeron, Rob Letterman)
* &quot;Stage Beauty&quot; (Richard Eyre)

=== Visions ===
* &quot;9 Songs&quot; (Michael Winterbottom)
* &quot;A Hole in My Heart&quot; (Lukas Moodysson)
* &quot;Acapulco Gold&quot; (André Forcier)
* &quot;Anatomie de l&#x27;enfer&quot; (Catherine Breillat)
* &quot;Art Project: Role Play&quot;
* &quot;Blood&quot; (Jerry Ciccoritti)
* &quot;Días de Santiago&quot; (Josué Méndez)
* &quot;Evolution of a Filipino Family&quot; (Lav Diaz)
* &quot;The Heart Is Deceitful Above All Things&quot; (Asia Argento)
* &quot;I Like It a Lot&quot; (Jay Rosenblatt)
* &quot;L&#x27;Intrus&quot; (Claire Denis)
* &quot;A Letter to True&quot; (Bruce Weber)
* &quot;The Love Crimes of Gillian Guess&quot; (Bruce McDonald)
* &quot;Los Muertos&quot; (Lisandro Alonso)
* &quot;Primer&quot; (Shane Carruth)
* &quot;Tarnation&quot; (Jonathan Caouette)
* &quot;Thème&quot; (Je Françoise Romand)
* &quot;Trauma&quot; (Marc Evans)
* &quot;Tropical Malady&quot; (Apichatpong Weerasethakul)
* &quot;Undertow&quot; (David Gordon Green)
* &quot;Vital&quot; (Shinya Tsukamoto)
* &quot;ZERO the inside story&quot; (Elida Schogt)
* &quot;SMARTERCHILD&quot; (SPLEAK)

=== Wavelengths ===
* &quot;( )&quot; (Morgan Fisher)
* &quot;--- ------ (a.k.a. Short Line Long Line)&quot; (Thom Andersen, Malcolm Brodwick)
* &quot;Anaconda Targets&quot; (Dominic Angerame)
* &quot;Ber-Lin 99/00&quot; (André Lehmann)
* &quot;Bouquets 26-27&quot; (Rose Lowder)
* &quot;Chateau/Poyet&quot; (Lawrence Jordan)
* &quot;Concerning Flight: Five Illuminations in Miniature&quot; (Charlotte Pryce)
* &quot;Daylight Moon (A Quartet)&quot; (Lewis Klahr)
* &quot;Enid&#x27;s Idyll&quot; (Lawrence Jordan)
* &quot;Le Fantôme de l&#x27;opératrice&quot; (Caroline Martel)
* &quot;Flushing Meadows&quot; (Joseph Cornell)
* &quot;Free To Go (Interlude)&quot; (Andrew Noren)
* &quot;Golden Gate Bridge Exposure: Poised for Parabolas&quot; (Lynn Marie Kirby)
* &quot;It&#x27;s Not My Memory of It - Three Recollected Documents&quot; (Julia Meltzer, David Thorne)
* &quot;Line Describing a Cone&quot; (Anthony McCall)
* &quot;Mirror&quot; (Matthias Müller, Christoph Girardet)
* &quot;Mouths of Ash&quot; (Juan Manuel Echavarría)
* &quot;The Observatory&quot; (Alexi Manis)
* &quot;Phantom&quot; (Matthias Müller)
* &quot;Play&quot; (Matthias Müller, Christoph Girardet)
* &quot;Rose Hobart&quot; (Joseph Cornell)
* &quot;Skagafjördur&quot; (Peter Hutton)
* &quot;St. Ignatius Church Exposure: Lenten Light Conversions&quot; (Lynn Marie Kirby)
* &quot;Terrace 49&quot; (Janie Geiser)
* &quot;Williamsburg, Brooklyn&quot; (Jonas Mekas)

==Canada&#x27;s Top Ten==
The festival&#x27;s year-end Canada&#x27;s Top Ten list was announced in December.

*&quot;Childstar&quot; — Don McKellar
*&quot;The Five of Us (Elles étaient cinq)&quot; — Ghyslaine Côté
*&quot;I, Claudia&quot; — Chris Abraham
*&quot;It&#x27;s All Gone Pete Tong&quot; — Michael Dowse
*&quot;Ryan&quot; — Chris Landreth
*&quot;Saint Ralph&quot; — Michael McGowan
*&quot;Scared Sacred&quot; — Velcrow Ripper
*&quot;Shake Hands with the Devil: The Journey of Roméo Dallaire&quot; — Peter Raymont
*&quot;What Remains of Us (Ce qu&#x27;il reste de nous)&quot; — François Prévost, Hugo Latulippe
*&quot;White Skin (La Peau blanche)&quot; — Daniel Roby

==Top 10 Canadian Films of All Time==
In 2004 a new Top 10 Canadian Films of All Time list was made, an exercise previously carried out in 1984 and 1993.
==References==
==External links==
* Official site
* 2004 Toronto International Film Festival at IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4603363" start="9" end="48" title="2004 Toronto International Film Festival" label="[[Toronto International Film Festival]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q56690530" start="364" end="378" title="Piers Handling" label="Piers Handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188000" start="483" end="488" title="Crash (2004 film)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619208" start="502" end="515" title="Gunner Palace" label="Gunner Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967396" start="529" end="539" title="I, Claudia" label="I, Claudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503884" start="553" end="564" title="Up and Down (2004 film)" label="Up and Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q489818" start="578" end="584" title="3-Iron" label="3-Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918038" start="598" end="605" title="Ma Mère" label="Ma Mère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405016" start="619" end="632" title="The Holy Girl" label="The Holy Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q688848" start="646" end="654" title="Red Dust (2004 film)" label="Red Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068933" start="668" end="674" title="Brides (2004 film)" label="Brides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470314" start="688" end="699" title="Saving Face (2004 film)" label="Saving Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q675937" start="716" end="724" title="Sideways" label="Sideways"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="776" end="794" title="CQ2 (Seek You Too)" label="CQ2 (Seek You Too)"/>
<link wikidata="Q461399" start="802" end="814" title="Carole Laure" label="Carole Laure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967396" start="824" end="834" title="I, Claudia" label="I, Claudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101533798" start="842" end="855" title="Chris Abraham" label="Chris Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="865" end="874" title="Ill Fated" label="Ill Fated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16218259" start="882" end="895" title="Mark A. Lewis" label="Mark A. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128503" start="905" end="933" title="It&amp;#x27;s All Gone Pete Tong" label="It&amp;#x27;s All Gone Pete Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308160" start="941" end="954" title="Michael Dowse" label="Michael Dowse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201673" start="964" end="973" title="Jimmywork" label="Jimmywork"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="981" end="992" title="Simon Sauvé" label="Simon Sauvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126903" start="1002" end="1016" title="Phil the Alien" label="Phil the Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156090" start="1024" end="1037" title="Rob Stefaniuk" label="Rob Stefaniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q835723" start="1047" end="1058" title="Saint Ralph" label="Saint Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275601" start="1066" end="1081" title="Michael McGowan (director)" label="Michael McGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161517" start="1091" end="1108" title="Seven Times Lucky" label="Seven Times Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q251094" start="1116" end="1126" title="Gary Yates (director)" label="Gary Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256740" start="1136" end="1144" title="Tideline (film)" label="Tideline"/>
<link wikidata="Q733091" start="1163" end="1176" title="Wajdi Mouawad" label="Wajdi Mouawad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967395" start="1186" end="1196" title="White Skin (film)" label="White Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218596" start="1204" end="1215" title="Daniel Roby" label="Daniel Roby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761648" start="1254" end="1266" title="The Rowdyman" label="The Rowdyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16028321" start="1274" end="1286" title="Peter Carter (director)" label="Peter Carter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1328" end="1334" title="Attiuk" label="Attiuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449299" start="1343" end="1356" title="René Bonnière" label="René Bonnière"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1365" end="1404" title="Land Without Trees, or the Mouchouânipi" label="Land Without Trees, or the Mouchouânipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386563" start="1465" end="1480" title="Pierre Perrault" label="Pierre Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400458" start="1489" end="1511" title="Pour la suite du monde" label="Pour la suite du monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030862" start="1537" end="1550" title="Michel Brault" label="Michel Brault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236135" start="1559" end="1578" title="The River Schooners" label="The River Schooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q683506" start="1637" end="1657" title="The Shimmering Beast" label="The Shimmering Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226720" start="1710" end="1728" title="The Times That Are" label="The Times That Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q489818" start="2081" end="2087" title="3-Iron" label="3-Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q212990" start="2095" end="2105" title="Kim Ki-duk" label="Kim Ki-duk"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970994" start="2115" end="2135" title="After the Day Before" label="After the Day Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733939" start="2167" end="2182" title="Almost Brothers" label="Almost Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322238" start="2190" end="2201" title="Lúcia Murat" label="Lúcia Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q611378" start="2211" end="2229" title="The Alzheimer Case" label="The Alzheimer Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321218" start="2237" end="2250" title="Erik Van Looy" label="Erik Van Looy"/>
<link wikidata="Q571200" start="2260" end="2267" title="Antares (film)" label="Antares"/>
<link wikidata="Q84582" start="2275" end="2289" title="Götz Spielmann" label="Götz Spielmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2299" end="2309" title="As Follows" label="As Follows"/>
<link wikidata="Q19960535" start="2317" end="2332" title="Federico Veiroj" label="Federico Veiroj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593280" start="2342" end="2359" title="El perro" label="BOMBÓN – El Perro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314462" start="2367" end="2379" title="Carlos Sorín" label="Carlos Sorín"/>
<link wikidata="Q903842" start="2389" end="2402" title="Breaking News (2004 film)" label="Breaking News"/>
<link wikidata="Q470104" start="2410" end="2420" title="Johnnie To" label="Johnnie To"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399393" start="2430" end="2439" title="A Common Thread" label="Brodeuses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2447" end="2463" title="Eléonore Faucher" label="Eléonore Faucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q990857" start="2473" end="2481" title="Brothers (2004 film)" label="Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q236148" start="2489" end="2501" title="Susanne Bier" label="Susanne Bier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2511" end="2515" title="Cool (film)" label="Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q205456" start="2523" end="2536" title="Theo van Gogh (film director)" label="Theo van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886375" start="2546" end="2554" title="Cronicas (film)" label="Crónicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377059" start="2562" end="2579" title="Sebastián Cordero" label="Sebastián Cordero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243351" start="2589" end="2603" title="Days and Hours" label="Days and Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443607" start="2611" end="2622" title="Pjer Žalica" label="Pjer Žalica"/>
<link wikidata="Q886739" start="2632" end="2653" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Shoes (2004 film)" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372134" start="2661" end="2674" title="Shane Meadows" label="Shane Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823840" start="2684" end="2696" title="Dear Frankie" label="Dear Frankie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500332" start="2704" end="2718" title="Shona Auerbach" label="Shona Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551169" start="2728" end="2739" title="Temporada de patos" label="Duck Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q710314" start="2747" end="2763" title="Fernando Eimbcke" label="Fernando Eimbcke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072309" start="2773" end="2788" title="Earth and Ashes" label="Earth and Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179801" start="2796" end="2807" title="Atiq Rahimi" label="Atiq Rahimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212598" start="2817" end="2832" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipier" label="L&amp;#x27;Équipier"/>
<link wikidata="Q742799" start="2840" end="2855" title="Philippe Lioret" label="Philippe Lioret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208697" start="2865" end="2883" title="La Femme de Gilles" label="La Femme de Gilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265192" start="2891" end="2908" title="Frédéric Fonteyne" label="Frédéric Fonteyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566971" start="2918" end="2931" title="Crimen Ferpecto" label="Ferpect Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q250627" start="2939" end="2957" title="Álex de la Iglesia" label="Álex de la Iglesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2967" end="2979" title="Hidden Flaws (2004 film)" label="Hidden Flaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q458058" start="2987" end="3005" title="Paula van der Oest" label="Paula van der Oest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405016" start="3015" end="3028" title="The Holy Girl" label="The Holy Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q254152" start="3036" end="3051" title="Lucrecia Martel" label="Lucrecia Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630801" start="3061" end="3066" title="Hotel (2004 film)" label="Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79003" start="3074" end="3089" title="Jessica Hausner" label="Jessica Hausner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052682" start="3099" end="3120" title="The Keys to the House" label="The Keys to the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q558109" start="3128" end="3141" title="Gianni Amelio" label="Gianni Amelio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584281" start="3151" end="3201" title="Happily Ever After (2004 film)" label="Ils se marièrent et eurent beaucoup d&amp;#x27;enfants"/>
<link wikidata="Q724208" start="3209" end="3219" title="Yvan Attal" label="Yvan Attal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973007" start="3229" end="3242" title="Inconscientes" label="Inconscientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357790" start="3250" end="3267" title="Joaquín Oristrell" label="Joaquín Oristrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630598" start="3277" end="3292" title="Voces inocentes" label="Innocent Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q939894" start="3300" end="3312" title="Luis Mandoki" label="Luis Mandoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096637" start="3322" end="3333" title="Lila Says" label="Lila dit ça"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071326" start="3341" end="3353" title="Ziad Doueiri" label="Ziad Doueiri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3363" end="3380" title="The Limb Salesman" label="The Limb Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q274548" start="3388" end="3403" title="Anais Granofsky" label="Anais Granofsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3413" end="3423" title="Little Sky" label="Little Sky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3431" end="3451" title="María Victoria Menis" label="María Victoria Menis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918038" start="3461" end="3468" title="Ma Mère" label="Ma Mère"/>
<link wikidata="Q551772" start="3476" end="3493" title="Christophe Honoré" label="Christophe Honoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q109943579" start="3503" end="3515" title="Male Fantasy" label="Male Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923985" start="3523" end="3537" title="Blaine Thurier" label="Blaine Thurier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3547" end="3569" title="Mon père est ingénieur" label="Mon père est ingénieur"/>
<link wikidata="Q718596" start="3577" end="3594" title="Robert Guédiguian" label="Robert Guédiguian"/>
<link wikidata="Q692821" start="3604" end="3621" title="My Summer of Love" label="My Summer of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377022" start="3629" end="3646" title="Paweł Pawlikowski" label="Paweł Pawlikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421068" start="3656" end="3671" title="Mysterious Skin" label="Mysterious Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q708899" start="3679" end="3690" title="Gregg Araki" label="Gregg Araki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328286" start="3700" end="3708" title="Niceland (2004 film)" label="Niceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q463540" start="3716" end="3740" title="Friðrik Þór Friðriksson" label="Fridrik Thor Fridriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q612298" start="3750" end="3762" title="Nobody Knows (2004 film)" label="Nobody Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q740758" start="3770" end="3786" title="Hirokazu Koreeda" label="Hirokazu Koreeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q475693" start="3796" end="3802" title="Oldboy (2003 film)" label="Oldboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q315484" start="3810" end="3824" title="Park Chan-wook" label="Park Chan-wook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378539" start="3834" end="3841" title="Our Own (2004 film)" label="Our Own"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3849" end="3865" title="Dmitry Meskhiyev" label="Dmitry Meskhiyev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3875" end="3890" title="Plastic Flowers (film)" label="Plastic Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653437" start="3898" end="3910" title="Liu Bingjian" label="Liu Bingjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271982" start="3920" end="3925" title="Quill (film)" label="Quill"/>
<link wikidata="Q906332" start="3933" end="3943" title="Yoichi Sai" label="Yoichi Sai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213725" start="3953" end="3962" title="Real Life (2004 film)" label="Real Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411474" start="3970" end="3983" title="Panos Koutras" label="Panos Koutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169568" start="3993" end="4006" title="Kings and Queen" label="Rois et reine"/>
<link wikidata="Q691335" start="4014" end="4031" title="Arnaud Desplechin" label="Arnaud Desplechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432921" start="4041" end="4055" title="Familia rodante" label="Rolling Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562608" start="4063" end="4076" title="Pablo Trapero" label="Pablo Trapero"/>
<link wikidata="Q941532" start="4086" end="4091" title="Shiza" label="Shiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334547" start="4099" end="4114" title="Gulshat Omarova" label="Gulshat Omarova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4124" end="4132" title="Siblings (2004 film)" label="Siblings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4140" end="4152" title="David Weaver (director)" label="David Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513503" start="4162" end="4172" title="Somersault (film)" label="Somersault"/>
<link wikidata="Q441510" start="4180" end="4194" title="Cate Shortland" label="Cate Shortland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577021" start="4204" end="4217" title="Spider Forest" label="Spider Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561001" start="4225" end="4236" title="Song Il-gon" label="Song Il-gon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902616" start="4246" end="4256" title="Stray Dogs (2004 film)" label="Stray Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296384" start="4264" end="4280" title="Marzieh Meshkini" label="Marzieh Meshkini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314058" start="4290" end="4299" title="The Tuner" label="The Tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q435805" start="4307" end="4320" title="Kira Muratova" label="Kira Muratova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278929" start="4330" end="4345" title="Turtles Can Fly" label="Turtles Can Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q31923" start="4353" end="4367" title="Bahman Ghobadi" label="Bahman Ghobadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770018" start="4377" end="4392" title="Two Great Sheep" label="Two Great Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866044" start="4400" end="4407" title="Liu Hao (director)" label="Liu Hao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503884" start="4417" end="4428" title="Up and Down (2004 film)" label="Up and Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681872" start="4436" end="4447" title="Jan Hřebejk" label="Jan Hřebejk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759682" start="4457" end="4470" title="Walk on Water (film)" label="Walk on Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q450309" start="4478" end="4487" title="Eytan Fox" label="Eytan Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633011" start="4497" end="4503" title="Whisky (film)" label="Whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423428" start="4511" end="4529" title="Juan Pablo Rebella" label="Juan Pablo Rebella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302146" start="4531" end="4542" title="Pablo Stoll" label="Pablo Stoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050405" start="4552" end="4567" title="Wilby Wonderful" label="Wilby Wonderful"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218013" start="4575" end="4589" title="Daniel MacIvor" label="Daniel MacIvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q120105" start="4599" end="4611" title="The Woodsman (2004 film)" label="The Woodsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341067" start="4619" end="4633" title="Nicole Kassell" label="Nicole Kassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085736" start="4643" end="4652" title="The World (film)" label="The World"/>
<link wikidata="Q461079" start="4660" end="4671" title="Jia Zhangke" label="Jia Zhangke"/>
<link wikidata="Q389911" start="4721" end="4730" title="The Brood" label="The Brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55422" start="4738" end="4754" title="David Cronenberg" label="David Cronenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159262" start="4764" end="4789" title="Diary of a Country Priest" label="Diary of a Country Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391" start="4797" end="4811" title="Robert Bresson" label="Robert Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q148204" start="4821" end="4839" title="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate (film)" label="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q59129" start="4847" end="4861" title="Michael Cimino" label="Michael Cimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211102" start="4871" end="4885" title="Black Girl (1966 film)" label="La Noire De..."/>
<link wikidata="Q314966" start="4893" end="4908" title="Ousmane Sembène" label="Ousmane Sembène"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183253" start="4918" end="4940" title="Sweet Smell of Success" label="Sweet Smell of Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q716310" start="4948" end="4969" title="Alexander Mackendrick" label="Alexander Mackendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q971412" start="4979" end="4997" title="This Sporting Life" label="This Sporting Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q298352" start="5005" end="5021" title="Lindsay Anderson" label="Lindsay Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756560" start="5031" end="5045" title="Withnail and I" label="Withnail and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q991798" start="5053" end="5067" title="Bruce Robinson" label="Bruce Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5096" end="5106" title="Astronauts (2004 film)" label="Astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420212" start="5114" end="5126" title="Santi Amodeo" label="Santi Amodeo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5136" end="5143" title="Automne" label="Automne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5151" end="5167" title="Ra&amp;#x27;up McGee" label="Ra&amp;#x27;up McGee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5177" end="5206" title="Boats out of Watermelon Rinds" label="Boats out of Watermelon Rinds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5214" end="5226" title="Ahmet Uluçay" label="Ahmet Uluçay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720507" start="5236" end="5251" title="The Buffalo Boy" label="The Buffalo Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864881" start="5259" end="5273" title="Nguyễn Võ Nghiêm Minh" label="Minh Nguyen-Vô"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221830" start="5283" end="5302" title="Le Cou de la girafe" label="Le Cou de la girafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461305" start="5310" end="5321" title="Safy Nebbou" label="Safy Nebbou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5331" end="5338" title="Crying?" label="Crying?"/>
<link wikidata="Q55760020" start="5346" end="5365" title="Alexander Voulgaris" label="Alexander Voulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357489" start="5375" end="5391" title="Electric Shadows" label="Electric Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044213" start="5399" end="5409" title="Xiao Jiang" label="Xiao Jiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197889" start="5419" end="5443" title="The Forest for the Trees" label="The Forest for the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q91508" start="5451" end="5460" title="Maren Ade" label="Maren Ade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901096" start="5485" end="5495" title="Bharatbala" label="Bharatbala"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710747" start="5505" end="5517" title="Harvest Time (film)" label="Harvest Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388203" start="5525" end="5543" title="Marina Razbezhkina" label="Marina Razbezhkina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809132" start="5553" end="5576" title="In My Father&amp;#x27;s Den (film)" label="In My Father&amp;#x27;s Den"/>
<link wikidata="Q303695" start="5584" end="5595" title="Brad McGann" label="Brad McGann"/>
<link wikidata="Q168823" start="5605" end="5614" title="Innocence (2004 film)" label="Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q45306" start="5622" end="5643" title="Lucile Hadžihalilović" label="Lucile Hadžihalilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502328" start="5653" end="5659" title="Mirage (2004 film)" label="Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652627" start="5667" end="5685" title="Svetozar Ristovski" label="Svetozar Ristovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110550" start="5695" end="5703" title="Off Beat (2004 film)" label="Off Beat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5711" end="5728" title="Hendrik Hölzemann" label="Hendrik Hölzemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351804" start="5738" end="5743" title="Omagh (film)" label="Omagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527684" start="5751" end="5762" title="Pete Travis" label="Pete Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091452" start="5772" end="5783" title="On the Outs" label="On the Outs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5791" end="5806" title="Lori Silverbush" label="Lori Silverbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674009" start="5833" end="5845" title="The Overture" label="The Overture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5853" end="5877" title="Itthi-sunthorn Wichailak" label="Itthi-sunthorn Wichailak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359190" start="5887" end="5900" title="Oyster Farmer" label="Oyster Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5908" end="5919" title="Anna Reeves" label="Anna Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101982" start="5929" end="5936" title="Private (film)" label="Private"/>
<link wikidata="Q453075" start="5944" end="5960" title="Saverio Costanzo" label="Saverio Costanzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082786" start="5970" end="5986" title="Producing Adults" label="Producing Adults"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735074" start="5994" end="6011" title="Aleksi Salmenperä" label="Aleksi Salmenperä"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783672" start="6021" end="6034" title="They Came Back" label="Les Revenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437047" start="6042" end="6056" title="Robin Campillo" label="Robin Campillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470314" start="6066" end="6077" title="Saving Face (2004 film)" label="Saving Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836688" start="6085" end="6093" title="Alice Wu" label="Alice Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q702374" start="6103" end="6115" title="Summer Storm (2004 film)" label="Summer Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q68855" start="6123" end="6142" title="Marco Kreuzpaintner" label="Marco Kreuzpaintner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9348902" start="6152" end="6160" title="Symmetry (film)" label="Symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6168" end="6184" title="Konrad Niewolski" label="Konrad Niewolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757814" start="6194" end="6197" title="Uno (2004 film)" label="Uno"/>
<link wikidata="Q421471" start="6205" end="6217" title="Aksel Hennie" label="Aksel Hennie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6227" end="6241" title="Vento di Terra" label="Vento di Terra"/>
<link wikidata="Q548917" start="6249" end="6263" title="Vincenzo Marra" label="Vincenzo Marra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660584" start="6273" end="6286" title="A Way of Life (2004 film)" label="A Way of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747087" start="6294" end="6305" title="Amma Asante" label="Amma Asante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993913" start="6315" end="6332" title="Whisky Romeo Zulu" label="Whisky Romeo Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379791" start="6340" end="6355" title="Enrique Piñeyro (actor)" label="Enrique Piñeyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740695" start="6382" end="6391" title="10 on Ten" label="10 on Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q55210" start="6399" end="6415" title="Abbas Kiarostami" label="Abbas Kiarostami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6425" end="6463" title="10e Chambre, instants d&amp;#x27;audiences" label="10e Chambre, instants d&amp;#x27;audiences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033788" start="6471" end="6487" title="Raymond Depardon" label="Raymond Depardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576910" start="6497" end="6512" title="A Tout de Suite" label="À tout de suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q818119" start="6520" end="6534" title="Benoît Jacquot" label="Benoît Jacquot"/>
<link wikidata="Q844819" start="6544" end="6557" title="Bad Education (2004 film)" label="Bad Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q55171" start="6565" end="6580" title="Pedro Almodóvar" label="Pedro Almodóvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068933" start="6590" end="6596" title="Brides (2004 film)" label="Brides"/>
<link wikidata="Q729423" start="6604" end="6622" title="Pantelis Voulgaris" label="Pantelis Voulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q708210" start="6632" end="6644" title="Café Lumière" label="Café Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q435626" start="6652" end="6667" title="Hou Hsiao-hsien" label="Hou Hsiao-hsien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653821" start="6677" end="6693" title="Swapner Din" label="Chased by Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744009" start="6701" end="6719" title="Buddhadeb Dasgupta" label="Buddhadeb Dasgupta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6729" end="6743" title="Cinévardaphoto" label="Cinévardaphoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q229990" start="6751" end="6762" title="Agnès Varda" label="Agnès Varda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022007" start="6772" end="6790" title="Demain on déménage" label="Demain on déménage"/>
<link wikidata="Q239823" start="6798" end="6813" title="Chantal Akerman" label="Chantal Akerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742092" start="6823" end="6827" title="Eros (film)" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q55431" start="6835" end="6847" title="Wong Kar-wai" label="Wong Kar-wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="6849" end="6866" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q55433" start="6868" end="6890" title="Michelangelo Antonioni" label="Michelangelo Antonioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q769217" start="6900" end="6904" title="Five (2003 film)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q55210" start="6912" end="6928" title="Abbas Kiarostami" label="Abbas Kiarostami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937650" start="6938" end="6949" title="Human Touch (film)" label="Human Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q237268" start="6957" end="6965" title="Paul Cox (director)" label="Paul Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q654916" start="6975" end="6989" title="Land of Plenty (2004 film)" label="Land of Plenty"/>
<link wikidata="Q55411" start="6997" end="7008" title="Wim Wenders" label="Wim Wenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q626236" start="7018" end="7026" title="Low Life (2004 film)" label="Low Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q488312" start="7034" end="7046" title="Im Kwon-taek" label="Im Kwon-taek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490361" start="7056" end="7084" title="Midwinter Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="Midwinter Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284560" start="7092" end="7109" title="Goran Paskaljević" label="Goran Paskaljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131452" start="7119" end="7127" title="Moolaadé" label="Moolaadé"/>
<link wikidata="Q314966" start="7135" end="7150" title="Ousmane Sembène" label="Ousmane Sembène"/>
<link wikidata="Q697688" start="7160" end="7173" title="The Ninth Day" label="The Ninth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q57316" start="7181" end="7199" title="Volker Schlöndorff" label="Volker Schlöndorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141131" start="7209" end="7222" title="Notre musique" label="Notre Musique"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="7230" end="7245" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470322" start="7255" end="7271" title="Salvador Allende (film)" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057315" start="7279" end="7294" title="Patricio Guzmán" label="Patricio Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q246339" start="7304" end="7320" title="Sucker Free City" label="Sucker Free City"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="7328" end="7337" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q55168" start="7355" end="7377" title="Theodoros Angelopoulos" label="Theodoros Angelopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333043" start="7413" end="7421" title="Calvaire (film)" label="Calvaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063860" start="7429" end="7444" title="Fabrice du Welz" label="Fabrice du Welz"/>
<link wikidata="Q696611" start="7454" end="7459" title="Creep (2004 film)" label="Creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q966124" start="7467" end="7484" title="Christopher Smith (director)" label="Christopher Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549501" start="7494" end="7504" title="Dead Birds (2004 film)" label="Dead Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717916" start="7512" end="7523" title="Alex Turner (director)" label="Alex Turner"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7533" end="7564" title="Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence" label="Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q285084" start="7572" end="7584" title="Mamoru Oshii" label="Mamoru Oshii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073297" start="7594" end="7602" title="Kontroll" label="Kontroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q771774" start="7610" end="7622" title="Antal Nimród" label="Nimród Antal"/>
<link wikidata="Q845252" start="7632" end="7645" title="The Machinist" label="The Machinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q598238" start="7653" end="7666" title="Brad Anderson (director)" label="Brad Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998030" start="7676" end="7704" title="Buppah Rahtree" label="Rahtree: Flower of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584421" start="7712" end="7729" title="Yuthlert Sippapak" label="Yuthlert Sippapak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613800" start="7739" end="7758" title="The Raspberry Reich" label="The Raspberry Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q958916" start="7766" end="7779" title="Bruce LaBruce" label="Bruce LaBruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q486239" start="7789" end="7792" title="Saw (2003 film)" label="Saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q108047434" start="7800" end="7809" title="James Wan" label="James Wan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169477" start="7819" end="7827" title="Zebraman" label="Zebraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185421" start="7835" end="7848" title="Takashi Miike" label="Takashi Miike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035192" start="7890" end="7907" title="Cape of Good Hope (film)" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197778" start="7915" end="7927" title="Mark Bamford (film director)" label="Mark Bamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q821290" start="7937" end="7941" title="Drum (2004 film)" label="Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q218483" start="7949" end="7960" title="Zola Maseko" label="Zola Maseko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077295" start="7970" end="7981" title="Forgiveness (2004 film)" label="Forgiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981599" start="7989" end="8000" title="Ian Gabriel" label="Ian Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302380" start="8010" end="8022" title="Max and Mona" label="Max and Mona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8030" end="8043" title="Teddy Mattera" label="Teddy Mattera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8053" end="8085" title="Mozart - The Music of the Violin" label="Mozart - The Music of the Violin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8093" end="8111" title="Mickey Madoda Dube" label="Mickey Madoda Dube"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8121" end="8177" title="A South African Love Story - Walter and Albertina Sisulu" label="A South African Love Story - Walter and Albertina Sisulu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8185" end="8199" title="Toni Strasburg" label="Toni Strasburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831185" start="8209" end="8225" title="Zulu Love Letter" label="Zulu Love Letter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8233" end="8248" title="Ramadan Suleman" label="Ramadan Suleman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8281" end="8286" title="Aïcha (2004 film)" label="Aïcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422311" start="8294" end="8310" title="Newton I. Aduaka" label="Newton I. Aduaka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8320" end="8339" title="above &amp;amp; beneath" label="above &amp;amp; beneath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8347" end="8359" title="René Alberta" label="René Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996798" start="8369" end="8379" title="Bullet Boy" label="Bullet Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427291" start="8387" end="8396" title="Saul Dibb" label="Saul Dibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q92806262" start="8406" end="8428" title="Keepers of Memory" label="Gardiens de la Mémoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386861" start="8436" end="8447" title="Eric Kabera" label="Eric Kabera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218525" start="8457" end="8472" title="Le Grand Voyage" label="Le Grand Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q628872" start="8480" end="8496" title="Ismaël Ferroukhi" label="Ismaël Ferroukhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636549" start="8506" end="8514" title="The Hero (2004 film)" label="The Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q21281810" start="8522" end="8533" title="Zézé Gamboa" label="Zézé Gamboa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8543" end="8551" title="Kounandi" label="Kounandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998060" start="8559" end="8574" title="Apolline Traoré" label="Apolline Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211212" start="8584" end="8604" title="Night of Truth" label="La Nuit de la vérité"/>
<link wikidata="Q433636" start="8612" end="8630" title="Fanta Régina Nacro" label="Fanta Régina Nacro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8640" end="8648" title="Off Duty (film)" label="Off Duty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8656" end="8668" title="Buboo Kakati" label="Buboo Kakati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223155" start="8678" end="8701" title="On the Verge of a Fever" label="On the Verge of a Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181889" start="8737" end="8755" title="John L&amp;#x27;Ecuyer" label="John L&amp;#x27;Ecuyer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8765" end="8781" title="One Flight Stand" label="One Flight Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q108659277" start="8789" end="8806" title="Saladin Patterson" label="Saladin Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8816" end="8835" title="A Spoonful of Sugar (2004 film)" label="A Spoonful of Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8843" end="8858" title="Andrea Williams (director)" label="Andrea Williams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8868" end="8876" title="Time Out (2004 film)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8884" end="8897" title="Xelinda Yancy" label="Xelinda Yancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759022" start="8929" end="8958" title="Andrew and Jeremy Get Married" label="Andrew and Jeremy Get Married"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292304" start="8966" end="8974" title="Don Boyd" label="Don Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875510" start="8984" end="9033" title="Be Here to Love Me" label="Be Here to Love Me: A Film About Townes Van Zandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759214" start="9041" end="9055" title="Margaret Brown (film director)" label="Margaret Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429549" start="9073" end="9082" title="Zev Asher" label="Zev Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q695908" start="9092" end="9115" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s Nightmare" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q78952" start="9123" end="9136" title="Hubert Sauper" label="Hubert Sauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037446" start="9146" end="9157" title="Double Dare (film)" label="Double Dare"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115181" start="9165" end="9179" title="Amanda Micheli" label="Amanda Micheli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9189" end="9221" title="Le Fantôme d&amp;#x27;Henri Langlois" label="Le Fantôme d&amp;#x27;Henri Langlois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9229" end="9244" title="Jacques Richard (director)" label="Jacques Richard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9254" end="9310" title="Final Cut: The Making and Unmaking of Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate" label="Final Cut: The Making and Unmaking of Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9318" end="9333" title="Michael Epstein (film director)" label="Michael Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534422" start="9343" end="9384" title="Going Upriver" label="Going Upriver: The Long War of John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101452" start="9392" end="9408" title="George Butler (filmmaker)" label="George T. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619208" start="9418" end="9431" title="Gunner Palace" label="Gunner Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16886213" start="9439" end="9453" title="Michael Tucker (director)" label="Michael Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9455" end="9470" title="Petra Epperlein" label="Petra Epperlein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9480" end="9502" title="I Died in Childhood..." label="I Died in Childhood..."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9510" end="9527" title="Georgy Paradjanov" label="Georgy Paradjanov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9537" end="9553" title="Kings of the Sky" label="Kings of the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868218" start="9561" end="9577" title="Deborah Stratman" label="Deborah Stratman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9587" end="9603" title="The Last Victory" label="The Last Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251143" start="9611" end="9621" title="John Appel (filmmaker)" label="John Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210602" start="9631" end="9645" title="Letters to Ali" label="Letters to Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q435577" start="9653" end="9662" title="Clara Law" label="Clara Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9672" end="9693" title="Lightning in a Bottle (film)" label="Lightning in a Bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q465139" start="9701" end="9714" title="Antoine Fuqua" label="Antoine Fuqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q289459" start="9724" end="9733" title="Mondovino" label="Mondovino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183432" start="9741" end="9758" title="Jonathan Nossiter" label="Jonathan Nossiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430362" start="9768" end="9781" title="Scared Sacred" label="Scared Sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918855" start="9789" end="9803" title="Velcrow Ripper" label="Velcrow Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9813" end="9870" title="Shake Hands with the Devil: The Journey of Roméo Dallaire" label="Shake Hands with the Devil: The Journey of Roméo Dallaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376835" start="9878" end="9891" title="Peter Raymont" label="Peter Raymont"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9901" end="9911" title="Small Mall" label="Small Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386482" start="9919" end="9938" title="Róbert Ingi Douglas" label="Róbert Ingi Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9948" end="9969" title="Tell Them Who You Are" label="Tell Them Who You Are"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9977" end="9991" title="Mark S. Wexler" label="Mark S. Wexler"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10001" end="10037" title="Three of Hearts: A Postmodern Family" label="Three of Hearts: A Postmodern Family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10045" end="10057" title="Susan Kaplan" label="Susan Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828664" start="10067" end="10082" title="Touch the Sound" label="Touch the Sound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10090" end="10110" title="Thomas Riedelsheimer" label="Thomas Riedelsheimer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10120" end="10177" title="Unforgivable Blackness: The Rise and Fall of Jack Johnson" label="Unforgivable Blackness: The Rise and Fall of Jack Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="10185" end="10194" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10204" end="10221" title="A Whale of a Tale (film)" label="A Whale of a Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392018" start="10229" end="10240" title="Peter Lynch (director)" label="Peter Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10250" end="10261" title="White Tower (2004 film)" label="White Tower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10269" end="10276" title="Su Qing (filmmaker)" label="Su Qing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10278" end="10282" title="Mina (film director)" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10292" end="10303" title="Writer of O" label="Writer of O"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10311" end="10324" title="Pola Rapaport" label="Pola Rapaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776617" start="10334" end="10353" title="The Year of the Yao" label="The Year of the Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132212" start="10361" end="10375" title="James D. Stern" label="James D. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10377" end="10389" title="Adam Del Deo" label="Adam Del Deo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10399" end="10433" title="Z Channel: A Magnificent Obsession" label="Z Channel: A Magnificent Obsession"/>
<link wikidata="Q511864" start="10441" end="10455" title="Alexandra Cassavetes" label="Xan Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311606" start="10525" end="10542" title="Michèle Cournoyer" label="Michèle Cournoyer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10552" end="10574" title="Almost Forgot My Bones" label="Almost Forgot My Bones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10582" end="10594" title="Katrin Bowen" label="Katrin Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10604" end="10631" title="Between Science and Garbage" label="Between Science and Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385477" start="10639" end="10652" title="Pierre Hébert (animator)" label="Pierre Hébert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688717" start="10654" end="10666" title="Bob Ostertag" label="Bob Ostertag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10676" end="10689" title="Birdlings Two" label="Birdlings Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="10697" end="10709" title="Davina Pardo" label="Davina Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123653008" start="10719" end="10740" title="Black Ink on Blue Sky" label="Black Ink on Blue Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q29899891" start="10783" end="10806" title="Félix Dufour-Laperrière" label="Félix Dufour-Laperrière"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10816" end="10824" title="Boyclops" label="Boyclops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10832" end="10840" title="Jay Dahl (film director)" label="Jay Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q125790352" start="10850" end="10860" title="The Bridge (2004 film)" label="The Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q777584" start="10878" end="10887" title="Guy Édoin" label="Guy Édoin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10897" end="10902" title="Build (film)" label="Build"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10910" end="10921" title="Greg Atkins" label="Greg Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q124098408" start="10931" end="10937" title="choke." label="choke."/>
<link wikidata="Q2538991" start="10945" end="10955" title="David Hyde" label="David Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10965" end="10980" title="Corps étrangers" label="Corps étrangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484342" start="10988" end="11000" title="Simon Lavoie" label="Simon Lavoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q124093326" start="11010" end="11018" title="Desastre" label="Desastre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11026" end="11035" title="Jay Field" label="Jay Field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11045" end="11068" title="Deux Enfants qui fument" label="Deux Enfants qui fument"/>
<link wikidata="Q27051132" start="11076" end="11088" title="Sarah Fortin" label="Sarah Fortin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11098" end="11111" title="Elephant Shoe (2004 film)" label="Elephant Shoe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11119" end="11139" title="Christopher Behnisch" label="Christopher Behnisch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11149" end="11164" title="Elliot Smelliot" label="Elliot Smelliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202453" start="11172" end="11183" title="Anita Doron" label="Anita Doron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11193" end="11198" title="Filth (2004 film)" label="Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q26923715" start="11206" end="11215" title="Wrik Mead" label="Wrik Mead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11225" end="11235" title="The Finite" label="The Finite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11243" end="11254" title="Alexi Manis" label="Alexi Manis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11264" end="11280" title="Girl Cleans Sink" label="Girl Cleans Sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q462176" start="11288" end="11300" title="Sook-Yin Lee" label="Sook-Yin Lee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11310" end="11317" title="Groomed (2004 film)" label="Groomed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477656" start="11325" end="11336" title="Joseph Raso" label="Joseph Raso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11346" end="11354" title="The Hill (2004 film)" label="The Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763959" start="11362" end="11374" title="Deborah Chow" label="Deborah Chow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11384" end="11397" title="Hogtown Blues" label="Hogtown Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831195" start="11405" end="11416" title="Hugh Gibson (director)" label="Hugh Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11426" end="11439" title="Hotel Saudade" label="Hotel Saudade"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921372" start="11447" end="11461" title="Cameron Bailey" label="Cameron Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11471" end="11486" title="The Human Kazoo" label="The Human Kazoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q378538" start="11494" end="11510" title="Fab Filippo" label="Fabrizio Filippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q96391721" start="11520" end="11536" title="Man. Feel. Pain." label="Man. Feel. Pain."/>
<link wikidata="Q90299042" start="11544" end="11560" title="Dylan Akio Smith" label="Dylan Akio Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11570" end="11577" title="mary/me" label="mary/me"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11585" end="11595" title="Kelly Egan" label="Kelly Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30321620" start="11605" end="11615" title="Milo 55160" label="Milo 55160"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11623" end="11634" title="David Ostry (film director)" label="David Ostry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11644" end="11658" title="More Sensitive" label="More Sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11666" end="11677" title="Gail Noonan" label="Gail Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11687" end="11723" title="Mothers, Fathers and Other Strangers" label="Mothers, Fathers and Other Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11731" end="11743" title="Carl Knutson" label="Carl Knutson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11753" end="11763" title="My Old Man (2004 film)" label="My Old Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11771" end="11782" title="Alex Levine" label="Alex Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217813" start="11792" end="11798" title="Pigeon (movie)" label="Pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11806" end="11819" title="Anthony Green (film director)" label="Anthony Green"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11829" end="11834" title="Rodéo (2004 film)" label="Rodéo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11842" end="11854" title="Mélanie Dion" label="Mélanie Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q623507" start="11864" end="11868" title="Ryan (film)" label="Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q329073" start="11876" end="11890" title="Chris Landreth" label="Chris Landreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q116978482" start="11900" end="11934" title="The Sadness of Johnson Joe Jangles" label="The Sadness of Johnson Joe Jangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665832" start="11942" end="11959" title="Jeffrey St. Jules" label="Jeffrey St. Jules"/>
<link wikidata="Q59617591" start="11969" end="11989" title="Sissy Boy Slap Party" label="Sissy Boy Slap Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q598995" start="11997" end="12007" title="Guy Maddin" label="Guy Maddin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12017" end="12032" title="Sombra Dolorosa" label="Sombra Dolorosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q598995" start="12040" end="12050" title="Guy Maddin" label="Guy Maddin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12076" end="12090" title="Debra Felstead" label="Debra Felstead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12100" end="12117" title="Superhero Wannabe" label="Superhero Wannabe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12157" end="12175" title="A Tale of Bad Luck" label="A Tale of Bad Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114465" start="12183" end="12194" title="Brad Peyton" label="Brad Peyton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12204" end="12221" title="Trouser Accidents" label="Trouser Accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449334" start="12229" end="12241" title="Semi Chellas" label="Semi Chellas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12251" end="12260" title="White Out (2004 film)" label="white out"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12268" end="12289" title="Matt Sinclair-Foreman" label="Matt Sinclair-Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q245465" start="12330" end="12333" title="5x2" label="5x2"/>
<link wikidata="Q266535" start="12370" end="12383" title="François Ozon" label="François Ozon"/>
<link wikidata="Q757976" start="12393" end="12427" title="The Assassination of Richard Nixon" label="The Assassination of Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341288" start="12435" end="12448" title="Niels Mueller" label="Niels Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583769" start="12458" end="12466" title="Bluebird (2004 film)" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403260" start="12474" end="12487" title="Mijke de Jong" label="Mijke de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098623" start="12497" end="12506" title="Childstar" label="Childstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q372256" start="12514" end="12526" title="Don McKellar" label="Don McKellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q721158" start="12536" end="12549" title="The Chorus (2004 film)" label="Les Choristes"/>
<link wikidata="Q642942" start="12557" end="12577" title="Christophe Barratier" label="Christophe Barratier"/>
<link wikidata="Q188000" start="12587" end="12592" title="Crash (2004 film)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q314935" start="12600" end="12611" title="Paul Haggis" label="Paul Haggis"/>
<link wikidata="Q300393" start="12621" end="12634" title="A Dirty Shame" label="A Dirty Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q314926" start="12642" end="12653" title="John Waters (filmmaker)" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q129813" start="12663" end="12676" title="Enduring Love (film)" label="Enduring Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354716" start="12684" end="12697" title="Roger Michell" label="Roger Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q850159" start="12707" end="12718" title="The General (1927 film)" label="The General"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="12726" end="12739" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q726107" start="12741" end="12755" title="Clyde Bruckman" label="Clyde Bruckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q94284" start="12765" end="12770" title="Haven (film)" label="Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486369" start="12778" end="12794" title="Frank E. Flowers" label="Frank E. Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q653336" start="12804" end="12822" title="Head in the Clouds (film)" label="Head in the Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q358804" start="12830" end="12841" title="John Duigan" label="John Duigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223884" start="12851" end="12863" title="Hotel Rwanda" label="Hotel Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392079" start="12871" end="12883" title="Terry George" label="Terry George"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12893" end="12955" title="Isn&amp;#x27;t This a Time! A Tribute Concert for Harold Leventhal" label="Isn&amp;#x27;t This a Time! A Tribute Concert for Harold Leventhal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12963" end="12972" title="Jim Brown (film director)" label="Jim Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070919" start="12982" end="12987" title="Keane (film)" label="Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257792" start="12995" end="13009" title="Lodge Kerrigan" label="Lodge Kerrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q470759" start="13019" end="13033" title="Kung Fu Hustle" label="Kung Fu Hustle"/>
<link wikidata="Q311179" start="13041" end="13053" title="Stephen Chow" label="Stephen Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q611068" start="13063" end="13081" title="Ladies in Lavender" label="Ladies in Lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q309690" start="13089" end="13102" title="Charles Dance" label="Charles Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q633307" start="13112" end="13125" title="The Libertine (2005 film)" label="The Libertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q282127" start="13133" end="13149" title="Laurence Dunmore" label="Laurence Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q673821" start="13159" end="13181" title="The Merchant of Venice (2004 film)" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q470601" start="13189" end="13204" title="Michael Radford" label="Michael Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854561" start="13214" end="13222" title="Millions (2004 film)" label="Millions"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="13230" end="13241" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277366" start="13251" end="13255" title="Noel (film)" label="Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q338812" start="13263" end="13279" title="Chazz Palminteri" label="Chazz Palminteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550266" start="13289" end="13293" title="P.S. (film)" label="P.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q3041933" start="13301" end="13311" title="Dylan Kidd" label="Dylan Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537305" start="13321" end="13332" title="Palindromes (film)" label="Palindromes"/>
<link wikidata="Q504656" start="13340" end="13352" title="Todd Solondz" label="Todd Solondz"/>
<link wikidata="Q763156" start="13362" end="13375" title="Promised Land (2004 film)" label="Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q474262" start="13383" end="13393" title="Amos Gitai" label="Amos Gitaï"/>
<link wikidata="Q593615" start="13403" end="13417" title="The Sea Inside" label="The Sea Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q274070" start="13425" end="13443" title="Alejandro Amenábar" label="Alejandro Amenábar"/>
<link wikidata="Q963574" start="13453" end="13468" title="Shadows of Time" label="Shadows of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q66637" start="13476" end="13496" title="Florian Gallenberger" label="Florian Gallenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q675937" start="13506" end="13514" title="Sideways" label="Sideways"/>
<link wikidata="Q313566" start="13522" end="13537" title="Alexander Payne" label="Alexander Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q742593" start="13547" end="13558" title="Silver City (2004 film)" label="Silver City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141212" start="13566" end="13577" title="John Sayles" label="John Sayles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315185" start="13587" end="13595" title="Steamboy" label="Steamboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q378710" start="13603" end="13618" title="Katsuhiro Otomo" label="Katsuhiro Otomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q767037" start="13628" end="13638" title="Throw Down (film)" label="Throw Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q470104" start="13646" end="13656" title="Johnnie To" label="Johnnie To"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283691" start="13666" end="13686" title="When Will I Be Loved (film)" label="When Will I Be Loved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387412" start="13694" end="13706" title="James Toback" label="James Toback"/>
<link wikidata="Q742391" start="13716" end="13719" title="Yes (film)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q268840" start="13727" end="13739" title="Sally Potter" label="Sally Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679545" start="13749" end="13758" title="Yesterday (2004 film)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016485" start="13766" end="13785" title="Darrell Roodt" label="Darrell James Roodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360073" start="13877" end="13898" title="Elgin and Winter Garden Theatres" label="Winter Garden Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524929" start="13952" end="13965" title="Brian Linehan" label="Brian Linehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="14014" end="14025" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q329744" start="14059" end="14071" title="Martin Short" label="Martin Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q705232" start="14103" end="14115" title="Arsène Lupin (2004 film)" label="Arsène Lupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q345755" start="14123" end="14139" title="Jean-Paul Salomé" label="Jean-Paul Salomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q814790" start="14149" end="14160" title="Being Julia" label="Being Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55218" start="14168" end="14180" title="István Szabó" label="István Szabó"/>
<link wikidata="Q162458" start="14190" end="14204" title="Beyond the Sea (2004 film)" label="Beyond the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="14212" end="14224" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099384" start="14234" end="14239" title="Clean (2004 film)" label="Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q550717" start="14247" end="14262" title="Olivier Assayas" label="Olivier Assayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q152857" start="14272" end="14285" title="Downfall (2004 film)" label="Der Untergang"/>
<link wikidata="Q60634" start="14316" end="14335" title="Oliver Hirschbiegel" label="Oliver Hirschbiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604842" start="14345" end="14365" title="Five Children and It (film)" label="Five Children and It"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14373" end="14388" title="John Stephenson (film director)" label="John Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537544" start="14398" end="14410" title="A Good Woman (film)" label="A Good Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424777" start="14418" end="14429" title="Mike Barker (film director)" label="Mike Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q369388" start="14439" end="14462" title="House of Flying Daggers" label="House of Flying Daggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55430" start="14470" end="14481" title="Zhang Yimou" label="Zhang Yimou"/>
<link wikidata="Q695389" start="14491" end="14508" title="I Heart Huckabees" label="I Heart Huckabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q314342" start="14516" end="14532" title="David O. Russell" label="David O. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659640" start="14542" end="14558" title="Imaginary Heroes" label="Imaginary Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556156" start="14566" end="14576" title="Dan Harris (screenwriter)" label="Dan Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549737" start="14586" end="14604" title="An Italian Romance" label="An Italian Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008322" start="14612" end="14629" title="Carlo Mazzacurati" label="Carlo Mazzacurati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178984" start="14639" end="14663" title="Jiminy Glick in Lalawood" label="Jiminy Glick in Lalawood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339179" start="14671" end="14681" title="Vadim Jean" label="Vadim Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q83656" start="14691" end="14697" title="Kinsey (film)" label="Kinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q361336" start="14705" end="14716" title="Bill Condon" label="Bill Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337365" start="14726" end="14736" title="Modigliani (film)" label="Modigliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311721" start="14744" end="14754" title="Mick Davis (director)" label="Mick Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309246" start="14764" end="14786" title="The Motorcycle Diaries (film)" label="The Motorcycle Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q458696" start="14794" end="14807" title="Walter Salles" label="Walter Salles"/>
<link wikidata="Q797242" start="14817" end="14820" title="Ray (film)" label="Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q545573" start="14828" end="14843" title="Taylor Hackford" label="Taylor Hackford"/>
<link wikidata="Q688848" start="14853" end="14861" title="Red Dust (2004 film)" label="Red Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q295912" start="14869" end="14879" title="Tom Hooper (director)" label="Tom Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146491" start="14889" end="14905" title="Return to Sender (2004 film)" label="Return to Sender"/>
<link wikidata="Q315062" start="14913" end="14925" title="Bille August" label="Bille August"/>
<link wikidata="Q120367" start="14935" end="14945" title="Shark Tale" label="Shark Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011210" start="14953" end="14965" title="Vicky Jenson" label="Vicky Jenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590985" start="14967" end="14980" title="Bibo Bergeron" label="Bibo Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q428815" start="14982" end="14995" title="Rob Letterman" label="Rob Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q256037" start="15005" end="15017" title="Stage Beauty" label="Stage Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q657354" start="15025" end="15037" title="Richard Eyre" label="Richard Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q277457" start="15064" end="15071" title="9 Songs" label="9 Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q380237" start="15079" end="15099" title="Michael Winterbottom" label="Michael Winterbottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q300442" start="15109" end="15127" title="A Hole in My Heart" label="A Hole in My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q319849" start="15135" end="15150" title="Lukas Moodysson" label="Lukas Moodysson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56073167" start="15160" end="15173" title="Acapulco Gold (2004 film)" label="Acapulco Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847761" start="15181" end="15194" title="André Forcier" label="André Forcier"/>
<link wikidata="Q59531" start="15204" end="15228" title="Anatomy of Hell" label="Anatomie de l&amp;#x27;enfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q289054" start="15236" end="15254" title="Catherine Breillat" label="Catherine Breillat"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15264" end="15286" title="Art Project: Role Play" label="Art Project: Role Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605613" start="15301" end="15306" title="Blood (2004 film)" label="Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q180247" start="15314" end="15330" title="Jerry Ciccoritti" label="Jerry Ciccoritti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270772" start="15340" end="15356" title="Días de Santiago" label="Días de Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291199" start="15364" end="15376" title="Josué Méndez (director)" label="Josué Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418636" start="15386" end="15416" title="Evolution of a Filipino Family" label="Evolution of a Filipino Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q129619" start="15424" end="15432" title="Lav Diaz" label="Lav Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319963" start="15442" end="15481" title="The Heart Is Deceitful Above All Things" label="The Heart Is Deceitful Above All Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q232052" start="15489" end="15501" title="Asia Argento" label="Asia Argento"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15511" end="15526" title="I Like It a Lot" label="I Like It a Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q27043433" start="15534" end="15548" title="Jay Rosenblatt (filmmaker)" label="Jay Rosenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204273" start="15558" end="15571" title="The Intruder (2004 film)" label="L&amp;#x27;Intrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q238315" start="15579" end="15591" title="Claire Denis" label="Claire Denis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15601" end="15617" title="A Letter to True" label="A Letter to True"/>
<link wikidata="Q991871" start="15625" end="15636" title="Bruce Weber (photographer)" label="Bruce Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314170" start="15646" end="15678" title="The Love Crimes of Gillian Guess" label="The Love Crimes of Gillian Guess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249881" start="15686" end="15700" title="Bruce McDonald (director)" label="Bruce McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012251" start="15710" end="15721" title="Los muertos (film)" label="Los Muertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568123" start="15729" end="15744" title="Lisandro Alonso" label="Lisandro Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434995" start="15754" end="15760" title="Primer (film)" label="Primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481357" start="15768" end="15781" title="Shane Carruth" label="Shane Carruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373080" start="15791" end="15800" title="Tarnation (2003 film)" label="Tarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382876" start="15808" end="15825" title="Jonathan Caouette" label="Jonathan Caouette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15835" end="15840" title="Thème" label="Thème"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15848" end="15867" title="Je Françoise Romand" label="Je Françoise Romand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163389" start="15877" end="15883" title="Trauma (2004 film)" label="Trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892607" start="15891" end="15901" title="Marc Evans" label="Marc Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q594131" start="15911" end="15926" title="Tropical Malady" label="Tropical Malady"/>
<link wikidata="Q445198" start="15934" end="15959" title="Apichatpong Weerasethakul" label="Apichatpong Weerasethakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q571309" start="15969" end="15977" title="Undertow (2004 film)" label="Undertow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296698" start="15985" end="16003" title="David Gordon Green" label="David Gordon Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278961" start="16013" end="16018" title="Vital (film)" label="Vital"/>
<link wikidata="Q738544" start="16026" end="16042" title="Shinya Tsukamoto" label="Shinya Tsukamoto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16052" end="16073" title="ZERO the inside story" label="ZERO the inside story"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16081" end="16093" title="Elida Schogt" label="Elida Schogt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16103" end="16115" title="SMARTERCHILD" label="SMARTERCHILD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16123" end="16129" title="SPLEAK" label="SPLEAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544935" start="16160" end="16163" title="( ) (film)" label="( )"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947617" start="16171" end="16184" title="Morgan Fisher (filmmaker)" label="Morgan Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16194" end="16234" title="--- ------ (a.k.a. Short Line Long Line)" label="--- ------ (a.k.a. Short Line Long Line)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786709" start="16242" end="16255" title="Thom Andersen" label="Thom Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16257" end="16273" title="Malcolm Brodwick" label="Malcolm Brodwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16283" end="16299" title="Anaconda Targets" label="Anaconda Targets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16307" end="16323" title="Dominic Angerame" label="Dominic Angerame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16333" end="16346" title="Ber-Lin 99/00" label="Ber-Lin 99/00"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16354" end="16367" title="André Lehmann" label="André Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16377" end="16391" title="Bouquets 26-27" label="Bouquets 26-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501490" start="16399" end="16410" title="Rose Lowder" label="Rose Lowder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16420" end="16433" title="Chateau/Poyet" label="Chateau/Poyet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490593" start="16441" end="16456" title="Lawrence Jordan" label="Lawrence Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16466" end="16516" title="Concerning Flight: Five Illuminations in Miniature" label="Concerning Flight: Five Illuminations in Miniature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16524" end="16539" title="Charlotte Pryce" label="Charlotte Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16549" end="16574" title="Daylight Moon (A Quartet)" label="Daylight Moon (A Quartet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967846" start="16582" end="16593" title="Lewis Klahr" label="Lewis Klahr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16603" end="16620" title="Enid&amp;#x27;s Idyll" label="Enid&amp;#x27;s Idyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490593" start="16628" end="16643" title="Lawrence Jordan" label="Lawrence Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16653" end="16684" title="Le Fantôme de l&amp;#x27;opératrice" label="Le Fantôme de l&amp;#x27;opératrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q59691174" start="16692" end="16707" title="Caroline Martel" label="Caroline Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462915" start="16717" end="16733" title="Flushing Meadows (film)" label="Flushing Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q694774" start="16741" end="16755" title="Joseph Cornell" label="Joseph Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16765" end="16787" title="Free To Go (Interlude)" label="Free To Go (Interlude)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506585" start="16795" end="16807" title="Andrew Noren" label="Andrew Noren"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16817" end="16866" title="Golden Gate Bridge Exposure: Poised for Parabolas" label="Golden Gate Bridge Exposure: Poised for Parabolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845240" start="16874" end="16890" title="Lynn Marie Kirby" label="Lynn Marie Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16900" end="16959" title="It&amp;#x27;s Not My Memory of It - Three Recollected Documents" label="It&amp;#x27;s Not My Memory of It - Three Recollected Documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204831" start="16967" end="16980" title="Julia Meltzer" label="Julia Meltzer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16982" end="16994" title="David Thorne (artist)" label="David Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11931961" start="17004" end="17026" title="Line Describing a Cone" label="Line Describing a Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q324807" start="17034" end="17048" title="Anthony McCall" label="Anthony McCall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17058" end="17064" title="Mirror (2003 film)" label="Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791584" start="17072" end="17087" title="Matthias Müller (filmmaker)" label="Matthias Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q64995811" start="17089" end="17107" title="Christoph Girardet" label="Christoph Girardet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17117" end="17130" title="Mouths of Ash" label="Mouths of Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6300330" start="17138" end="17160" title="Juan Manuel Echavarría" label="Juan Manuel Echavarría"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17170" end="17185" title="The Observatory (film)" label="The Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17193" end="17204" title="Alexi Manis" label="Alexi Manis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17214" end="17221" title="Phantom (2001 film)" label="Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791584" start="17229" end="17244" title="Matthias Müller (filmmaker)" label="Matthias Müller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17254" end="17258" title="Play 2011 (film)" label="Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791584" start="17266" end="17281" title="Matthias Müller (filmmaker)" label="Matthias Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q64995811" start="17283" end="17301" title="Christoph Girardet" label="Christoph Girardet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563239" start="17311" end="17322" title="Rose Hobart (film)" label="Rose Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q694774" start="17330" end="17344" title="Joseph Cornell" label="Joseph Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17354" end="17366" title="Skagafjördur" label="Skagafjördur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174804" start="17374" end="17386" title="Peter Hutton (filmmaker)" label="Peter Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17396" end="17450" title="St. Ignatius Church Exposure: Lenten Light Conversions" label="St. Ignatius Church Exposure: Lenten Light Conversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845240" start="17458" end="17474" title="Lynn Marie Kirby" label="Lynn Marie Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17484" end="17494" title="Terrace 49" label="Terrace 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q18043933" start="17502" end="17514" title="Janie Geiser" label="Janie Geiser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17524" end="17546" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn (film)" label="Williamsburg, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q699702" start="17554" end="17565" title="Jonas Mekas" label="Jonas Mekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60789026" start="17623" end="17644" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Top Ten" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Top Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098623" start="17685" end="17694" title="Childstar" label="Childstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q372256" start="17703" end="17715" title="Don McKellar" label="Don McKellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051460" start="17723" end="17737" title="The Five of Us" label="The Five of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104997" start="17767" end="17781" title="Ghyslaine Côté" label="Ghyslaine Côté"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967396" start="17789" end="17799" title="I, Claudia" label="I, Claudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101533798" start="17808" end="17821" title="Chris Abraham" label="Chris Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q128503" start="17829" end="17857" title="It&amp;#x27;s All Gone Pete Tong" label="It&amp;#x27;s All Gone Pete Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308160" start="17866" end="17879" title="Michael Dowse" label="Michael Dowse"/>
<link wikidata="Q623507" start="17887" end="17891" title="Ryan (film)" label="Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q329073" start="17900" end="17914" title="Chris Landreth" label="Chris Landreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q835723" start="17922" end="17933" title="Saint Ralph" label="Saint Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275601" start="17942" end="17957" title="Michael McGowan (director)" label="Michael McGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430362" start="17965" end="17978" title="Scared Sacred" label="Scared Sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918855" start="17987" end="18001" title="Velcrow Ripper" label="Velcrow Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18009" end="18066" title="Shake Hands with the Devil: The Journey of Roméo Dallaire" label="Shake Hands with the Devil: The Journey of Roméo Dallaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376835" start="18075" end="18088" title="Peter Raymont" label="Peter Raymont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002495" start="18096" end="18114" title="What Remains of Us" label="What Remains of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297794" start="18153" end="18169" title="François Prévost" label="François Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142408" start="18171" end="18185" title="Hugo Latulippe" label="Hugo Latulippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967395" start="18193" end="18203" title="White Skin (film)" label="White Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218596" start="18230" end="18241" title="Daniel Roby" label="Daniel Roby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103590" start="18295" end="18328" title="Top 10 Canadian Films of All Time" label="Top 10 Canadian Films of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="18493" end="18497" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969630" wikidata="Q2566939" url="?curid=969630" title="White Mountain National Forest">
<text>The White Mountain National Forest (WMNF) is a federally managed forest contained within the White Mountains in the northeastern United States. It was established in 1918 as a result of the Weeks Act of 1911; federal acquisition of land had already begun in 1914. It has a total area of (1,225 sq mi). Most of the WMNF is in New Hampshire; a small part (about 5.65% of the forest) is in the neighboring state of Maine. Conservationist and community activist Katherine Sleeper Walden was instrumental in securing at-risk land for the forest, including thousands of acres in the region surrounding the locally famous Bowl near Wonalancet.

While sometimes called a park, it is a national forest, used for logging and other limited commercial purposes in addition to recreational activities. The WMNF is the only national forest located in either New Hampshire or Maine, and is the most eastern national forest in the United States. Most of the major peaks over 4,000 feet high in New Hampshire are located in the national forest. Over of the Appalachian Trail traverses the White Mountain National Forest. In descending order of land area the forest lies in parts of Grafton, Coos, and Carroll counties in New Hampshire, and Oxford County in Maine.

The Forest Supervisor&#x27;s office is located in Campton and there are three ranger districts: the Pemigewasset District, with offices in Campton; the Androscoggin District, based in Gorham; and the Saco District, based in Conway. Furthermore, there are , including those located at Lincoln, Campton (off Interstate 93), and Lincoln Woods (on the Kancamagus Highway).

The White Mountain National Forest consists of three discontinuous areas, separated by two highways: I-93 and US 2. I-93 travels along Franconia Notch (a narrow north–south valley primarily within a state park), and west of the freeway includes Cannon Mountain, Kinsman Mountain and Mount Moosilauke (though the majority of Moosilauke is privately owned). East of I-93 is the largest section of the Forest, including the Presidential Range and many other ranges - most notably, the Franconia, Twin, Bond, Sandwich, Willey, and Carter-Moriah ranges. North of U.S. Route 2 is the smallest section of the National Forest, covering the Pilot Range and Mount Cabot. Additionally, several other U.S. and NH State highways cross the forest, including US 3, US 302, NH 16 (White Mountain Highway), NH 112 (Kancamagus Highway), and NH 118 (Sawyer Highway).

It is home to wildlife species including bald eagle, raccoon, beaver, white-tailed deer, moose, black bear, coyote, peregrine falcon, Canadian lynx, river otter, bobcat, gray and red foxes, fisher, mink and porcupine.

Six designated Federal Wilderness Areas exist within the Forest: the Presidential Range/Dry River Wilderness, the Great Gulf Wilderness, the Pemigewasset Wilderness, the Sandwich Range Wilderness, the Caribou/Speckled Mountain Wilderness, and the Wild River Wilderness. These areas are protected from logging and commercial industries and are used solely for recreational and scientific purposes. They were formed under the Federal Wilderness Protection Act of 1984, and its amendments. The New England Wilderness Protection Act of 2006 increased the Sandwich Range Wilderness to its present size and created the Wild River Wilderness area.

Because of its beauty, its proximity to major metropolitan areas, its of hiking trails, 23 campgrounds, and the presence of many ski areas within or near its boundaries, the WMNF is one of the most visited outdoor recreation sites east of the Mississippi. Winter season lengths are projected to decline across the WMNF due to the effects of global warming, however, which is likely to continue the historic contraction and consolidation of the ski industry and threaten individual ski businesses and communities that rely on ski tourism.

==Weather==
US Forest Service signs on hiking trails at tree line state that the mountain summit areas have &quot;the worst weather in America&quot;. The claim is also used by the observatory near the summit of Mount Washington which once recorded a surface wind speed of . Since 1849 at least 169 people have died on Mount Washington and the Presidential Range.

==Image gallery==
==See also==

* List of national forests of the United States
* New England–Acadian forests
* John W. Weeks, sponsor of the Weeks Act

==References==
==External links==
*Official website
*SectionHiker&#x27;s Backpacking Blog, detailed personal website
*NE Wilderness Act press release</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2566939" start="4" end="34" title="White Mountain National Forest" label="White Mountain National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566939" start="36" end="40" title="White Mountain National Forest" label="WMNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556007" start="93" end="108" title="White Mountains (New Hampshire)" label="White Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979527" start="190" end="199" title="Weeks Act" label="Weeks Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="325" end="338" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="412" end="417" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124215163" start="458" end="482" title="Katherine Sleeper Walden" label="Katherine Sleeper Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031702" start="625" end="635" title="Wonalancet, New Hampshire" label="Wonalancet"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="677" end="692" title="United States National Forest" label="national forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="703" end="710" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567041" start="942" end="974" title="four-thousand footers" label="major peaks over 4,000 feet high"/>
<link wikidata="Q620648" start="1040" end="1057" title="Appalachian Trail" label="Appalachian Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q54445" start="1165" end="1172" title="Grafton County, New Hampshire" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54447" start="1174" end="1178" title="Coos County, New Hampshire" label="Coos"/>
<link wikidata="Q54446" start="1184" end="1191" title="Carroll County, New Hampshire" label="Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q502592" start="1223" end="1236" title="Oxford County, Maine" label="Oxford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418170" start="1298" end="1305" title="Campton, New Hampshire" label="Campton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748474" start="1348" end="1360" title="Pemigewasset River" label="Pemigewasset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418170" start="1387" end="1394" title="Campton, New Hampshire" label="Campton"/>
<link wikidata="Q514154" start="1400" end="1412" title="Androscoggin River" label="Androscoggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q966159" start="1432" end="1438" title="Gorham, New Hampshire" label="Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210898" start="1448" end="1452" title="Saco River" label="Saco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076159" start="1472" end="1478" title="Conway, New Hampshire" label="Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q922740" start="1532" end="1539" title="Lincoln, New Hampshire" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418170" start="1541" end="1548" title="Campton, New Hampshire" label="Campton"/>
<link wikidata="Q94963" start="1554" end="1567" title="Interstate 93" label="Interstate 93"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046870" start="1596" end="1614" title="Kancamagus Highway" label="Kancamagus Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q94963" start="1719" end="1723" title="Interstate 93" label="I-93"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473587" start="1728" end="1732" title="US 2 (NH)" label="US 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484708" start="1753" end="1768" title="Franconia Notch" label="Franconia Notch"/>
<link wikidata="Q383400" start="1817" end="1827" title="Franconia Notch State Park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032778" start="1863" end="1878" title="Cannon Mountain (New Hampshire)" label="Cannon Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414295" start="1880" end="1896" title="Kinsman Mountain" label="Kinsman Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321961" start="1901" end="1917" title="Mount Moosilauke" label="Mount Moosilauke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264835" start="2039" end="2057" title="Presidential Range" label="Presidential Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961851" start="2100" end="2109" title="Franconia Range" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858270" start="2111" end="2115" title="Twin Range" label="Twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919778" start="2117" end="2121" title="Mount Bond" label="Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417084" start="2123" end="2131" title="Sandwich Range" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924600" start="2133" end="2139" title="Mount Willey" label="Willey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047102" start="2145" end="2158" title="Carter-Moriah Range" label="Carter-Moriah"/>
<link wikidata="Q406224" start="2176" end="2188" title="U.S. Route 2" label="U.S. Route 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15266363" start="2250" end="2261" title="Pilot Range (New Hampshire)" label="Pilot Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919942" start="2266" end="2277" title="Mount Cabot" label="Mount Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q406241" start="2362" end="2366" title="U.S. Route 3" label="US 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411062" start="2368" end="2374" title="U.S. Route 302" label="US 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000004" start="2376" end="2381" title="New Hampshire Route 16" label="NH 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046870" start="2408" end="2414" title="New Hampshire Route 112" label="NH 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047330" start="2441" end="2447" title="New Hampshire Route 118" label="NH 118"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="2508" end="2518" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="2520" end="2527" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="2529" end="2535" title="North American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="2537" end="2554" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112320" start="2556" end="2561" title="eastern moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="2563" end="2573" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032441" start="2575" end="2581" title="eastern coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="2583" end="2599" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="2601" end="2614" title="Canada lynx" label="Canadian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="2616" end="2627" title="North American river otter" label="river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="2629" end="2635" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q215250" start="2637" end="2641" title="gray fox" label="gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="2646" end="2653" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q584064" start="2657" end="2663" title="fisher (animal)" label="fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="2665" end="2669" title="American mink" label="mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q10758828" start="2674" end="2683" title="North American porcupine" label="porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="2701" end="2725" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="Federal Wilderness Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264835" start="2755" end="2773" title="Presidential Range" label="Presidential Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309546" start="2774" end="2783" title="Dry River (New Hampshire)" label="Dry River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599279" start="2800" end="2810" title="Great Gulf" label="Great Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374600" start="2827" end="2850" title="Pemigewasset Wilderness" label="Pemigewasset Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417084" start="2856" end="2870" title="Sandwich Range" label="Sandwich Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2887" end="2923" title="Caribou/Speckled Mountain Wilderness" label="Caribou/Speckled Mountain Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000772" start="2933" end="2943" title="Wild River (Androscoggin River tributary)" label="Wild River"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="3457" end="3466" title="Ski resort" label="ski areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="3658" end="3683" title="effects of global warming" label="effects of global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="3879" end="3896" title="US Forest Service" label="US Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="3923" end="3932" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q572801" start="4078" end="4094" title="Mount Washington" label="Mount Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688322" start="4177" end="4228" title="List of people who died on the Presidential Range" label="died on Mount Washington and the Presidential Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249745" start="4265" end="4310" title="List of national forests of the United States" label="List of national forests of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052106" start="4313" end="4340" title="New England–Acadian forests" label="New England–Acadian forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371272" start="4343" end="4356" title="John W. Weeks" label="John W. Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979527" start="4373" end="4382" title="Weeks Act" label="Weeks Act"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969634" wikidata="Q4705185" url="?curid=969634" title="Alabama Air National Guard">
<text>The Alabama Air National Guard (AL ANG) is the aerial militia of the State of Alabama, United States of America. It is, along with the Alabama Army National Guard, an element of the Alabama National Guard.

As state militia units, the units in the Alabama Air National Guard are not in the normal United States Air Force chain of command unless federalized. They are under the jurisdiction of the Governor of Alabama through the office of the Alabama Adjutant General unless they are federalized by order of the President of the United States. The Alabama Air National Guard is headquartered in Montgomery, and its commander is Major General Sheryl E. Gordon.

==Overview==
Under the &quot;Total Force&quot; concept, Alabama Air National Guard units are considered to be Air Reserve Components (ARC) of the United States Air Force (USAF). Alabama ANG units are trained and equipped by the Air Force and are operationally gained by a Major Command of the USAF if federalized. In addition, the Alabama Air National Guard forces are assigned to Air Expeditionary Forces and are subject to deployment tasking orders along with their active duty and Air Force Reserve counterparts in their assigned cycle deployment window.

Along with their federal reserve obligations, the elements of the Alabama ANG are subject to being activated by order of the governor as state militia units to provide protection of life and property, and preserve peace, order and public safety. State missions include disaster relief in times of earthquakes, hurricanes, floods and forest fires, search and rescue, protection of vital public services, and support to civil defense.

==Components==
The Alabama Air National Guard consists of the following major units:
* 117th Air Refueling Wing
: Established 21 January 1922 (as: 106th Observation Squadron); operates: KC-135R Stratotanker
: Stationed at: Sumpter Smith Air National Guard Base, Birmingham
: Gained by: Air Mobility Command
: The 117th Air Refueling Wing flies the Boeing KC-135R Stratotanker. Its mission is to train and equip combat ready aircrews and support personnel to perform worldwide aerial refueling and airlift missions.

* 187th Fighter Wing
: Established 1 October 1947 (as: 160th Fighter Squadron); operates: F-35A Lightning II
: Stationed at: Dannelly Field Air National Guard Base (aka Montgomery Regional Airport), Montgomery
: Gained by: Air Combat Command
: Flies F-35A Lightning II fighter for air defense, air superiority, and air sovereignty.

* 226th Combat Communications Group
: Established 18 June 1954 (as: 225th Radio Relay Squadron)
: Stationed at Abston Air National Guard Station; Montgomery
: Gained by: Air Combat Command
: The Group commands, organizes, trains, equips, and administers expeditionary communications squadrons.

==History==
=== Origins ===
The Alabama Air National Guard origins date to 27 August 1917 with the establishment of the 106th Aero Squadron as part of the World War I American Expeditionary Force. The 106th served in France on the Western Front, then after the 1918 Armistice with Germany was demobilized in 1919.

The Militia Act of 1903 established the present National Guard system, units raised by the states but paid for by the Federal Government, liable for immediate state service. If federalized by presidential order, they fall under the regular military chain of command. On 1 June 1920, the Militia Bureau issued Circular No.1 on organization of National Guard air units.

The squadron was reformed on 21 January 1922 as the 125th Squadron, Alabama National Guard, received federal recognition as a Corps Aviation unit. (It was re-designated the 135th Observation Squadron on 25 January 1923 and then it was re-designated the 114th Observation Squadron as an aviation unit the 39th Division on 1 May 1923. On 16 January 1924, it was re-designated the 106th Observation Squadron as an aviation unit in the 31st Division.) Maj. James A. Meissner, a World War I ace who had flown with Capt. Eddie Rickenbacker, led the effort to form the unit and served as its first commander. It is one of the 29 original National Guard Observation Squadrons of the United States Army National Guard formed before World War II.

The 106th Observation Squadron was ordered into active service on 125 November 1940 as part of the buildup of the Army Air Corps prior to the United States entry into World War II.

===Alabama Air National Guard===
On 24 May 1946, the United States Army Air Forces, in response to dramatic postwar military budget cuts imposed by President Harry S. Truman, allocated inactive unit designations to the National Guard Bureau for the formation of an Air Force National Guard. These unit designations were allotted and transferred to various State National Guard bureaus to provide them unit designations to re-establish them as Air National Guard units.

The modern Alabama ANG received federal recognition on 25 November 1946 as the 106th Bombardment Squadron (Light) at Birmingham MAP (Sumpter Smith Field). It was equipped with B-26B/C Invaders and was assigned to Tactical Air Command. 18 September 1947, however, is considered the Alabama Air National Guard&#x27;s official birth concurrent with the establishment of the United States Air Force as a separate branch of the United States military under the National Security Act.

On 1 October 1947 the 117th Fighter Group allotted by the National Guard Bureau, extended federal recognition and activated at Birmingham, with the 106th Bomb Squadron being assigned to the unit. The 160th Fighter Squadron at Montgomery was authorized by the National Guard Bureau and recognized also on 1 October 1947. The 160th was equipped with the F-51D Mustang and its mission was the air defense of the state. On 15 October 1962, the 160th Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron was authorized to expand to a group level, and the 187th Tactical Reconnaissance Group was established by the National Guard Bureau. The 160th TRS becoming the group&#x27;s flying squadron.

In 2007, the Alabama legislature requested the National Guard Bureau to allow the Alabama Air National Guard 160th Fighter Squadron to be re-designated as the 100th Fighter Squadron so the state could honor the legacy of the World War II Tuskegee Airmen. This was obtained from the Air Force and on 12 September 2009, the 100th Flying Training Squadron was inactivated. The designation was transferred to the National Guard Bureau by the Air Force and it was allotted to the Alabama ANG. As a result, the 160th Fighter Squadron was inactivated, and the new 100th Fighter Squadron assumed its personnel, equipment and aircraft.

Today, the 117th Air Refueling Wing (117 ARW) provides aerial refueling support to Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps and allied nation aircraft. The 187th Fighter Wing (187 FW) operated the F-16 Fighting Falcon and deploys around the world as part of Air Expeditionary Forces. On April 21, 2023, the 187th Fighter Wing retired its inventory of F-16s after 35 years of service. Preparations began to take delivery of new production F-35A Lightning II aircraft, with initial delivery scheduled for December 2023.

After the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States, elements of every Air National Guard unit in Alabama has been activated in support of the Global War on Terrorism. Flight crews, aircraft maintenance personnel, communications technicians, air controllers and air security personnel were engaged in Operation Noble Eagle air defense overflights of major United States cities. Also, Alabama ANG units have been deployed overseas as part of Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq as well as other locations as directed.

===Role in the Bay of Pigs Invasion===
According to information from Seymour M. Hersh, author of &quot;The Dark Side of Camelot&quot; during early preparations to the Bay of Pigs Invasion, President Dwight D. Eisenhower personally asked then-Governor of Alabama John Malcolm Patterson (who served as a lieutenant in Eisenhower&#x27;s staff during the World War II) to use the aircraft of Air National Guard of Alabama (Patterson, as governor, was commander-in-chief of the guard) by Cuban émigrés to attack and pilots to train them in deep secret in Nicaragua. Patterson agreed and then-commander, Major General George R. Doster was ordered to oversee all operation.

==Notable personnel==
* George W. Bush
: In late 1972 and early 1973, he drilled with the 187th Fighter Wing.
* Mal Moore, University of Alabama Athletic Director

==See also==

* Alabama State Defense Force
* Alabama Wing Civil Air Patrol

==References==

* Gross, Charles J (1996), The Air National Guard and the American Military Tradition, United States Dept. of Defense, 
* Alabama Air National Guard website
==External links==

* Alabama National Guard
* 117th Air Refueling Wing
* 187th Fighter Wing
* Alabama National Guard article, Encyclopedia of Alabama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4705185" start="4" end="39" title="Alabama Air National Guard" label="Alabama Air National Guard (AL ANG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="69" end="85" title="Alabama" label="State of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="87" end="111" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705187" start="135" end="162" title="Alabama Army National Guard" label="Alabama Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705294" start="182" end="204" title="Alabama National Guard" label="Alabama National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="297" end="320" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="321" end="337" title="command hierarchy" label="chain of command"/>
<link wikidata="Q558677" start="397" end="416" title="Governor of Alabama" label="Governor of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069986" start="443" end="467" title="state adjutant general" label="Alabama Adjutant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="512" end="542" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="807" end="830" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808947" start="933" end="958" title="Major Command of the USAF" label="Major Command of the USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q407191" start="1145" end="1162" title="Air Force Reserve" label="Air Force Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547619" start="1741" end="1765" title="117th Air Refueling Wing" label="117th Air Refueling Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546665" start="1801" end="1827" title="106th Observation Squadron" label="106th Observation Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q829092" start="1840" end="1860" title="KC-135R Stratotanker" label="KC-135R Stratotanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q597803" start="1877" end="1914" title="Sumpter Smith Air National Guard Base" label="Sumpter Smith Air National Guard Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q407588" start="1940" end="1960" title="Air Mobility Command" label="Air Mobility Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555744" start="2172" end="2190" title="187th Fighter Wing" label="187th Fighter Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551162" start="2225" end="2247" title="160th Fighter Squadron" label="160th Fighter Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="2260" end="2278" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="F-35A Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612693" start="2295" end="2309" title="Dannelly Field" label="Dannelly Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612935" start="2339" end="2366" title="Montgomery Regional Airport" label="Montgomery Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q407015" start="2393" end="2411" title="Air Combat Command" label="Air Combat Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="2420" end="2438" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="F-35A Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="2451" end="2462" title="air defense" label="air defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="2464" end="2479" title="air superiority" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q964477" start="2485" end="2500" title="air sovereignty" label="air sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631276" start="2505" end="2538" title="226th Combat Communications Group" label="226th Combat Communications Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2571" end="2597" title="225th Radio Relay Squadron" label="225th Radio Relay Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631276" start="2614" end="2647" title="Abston Air National Guard Station" label="Abston Air National Guard Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="2649" end="2659" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q407015" start="2673" end="2691" title="Air Combat Command" label="Air Combat Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2953" end="2964" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q464176" start="2965" end="2993" title="American Expeditionary Force" label="American Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="3029" end="3042" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="3059" end="3086" title="1918 Armistice with Germany" label="1918 Armistice with Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933820" start="3117" end="3136" title="Militia Act of 1903" label="Militia Act of 1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="3290" end="3301" title="Federalization of the National Guard" label="federalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934823" start="3400" end="3414" title="Militia Bureau" label="Militia Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139612" start="3935" end="3952" title="James A. Meissner" label="James A. Meissner"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3956" end="3967" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q550707" start="3997" end="4015" title="Eddie Rickenbacker" label="Eddie Rickenbacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191791" start="4101" end="4149" title="List of United States Army National Guard Observation Squadrons" label="29 original National Guard Observation Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q689764" start="4157" end="4190" title="United States Army National Guard" label="United States Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4205" end="4217" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="4334" end="4348" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="4455" end="4484" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="4560" end="4575" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934823" start="4621" end="4642" title="National Guard Bureau" label="National Guard Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q865724" start="4989" end="5025" title="Birmingham Air National Guard Base" label="Birmingham MAP (Sumpter Smith Field)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39372" start="6260" end="6275" title="Tuskegee Airmen" label="Tuskegee Airmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="7171" end="7227" title="September 11 attacks" label="11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="7319" end="7342" title="Global War on Terrorism" label="Global War on Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354782" start="7477" end="7498" title="Operation Noble Eagle" label="Operation Noble Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="7617" end="7643" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="7663" end="7686" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q435792" start="7805" end="7821" title="Seymour M. Hersh" label="Seymour M. Hersh"/>
<link wikidata="Q129811646" start="7839" end="7863" title="The Dark Side of Camelot" label="The Dark Side of Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="7903" end="7923" title="Bay of Pigs Invasion" label="Bay of Pigs Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="7935" end="7955" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q558677" start="7978" end="7997" title="Governor of Alabama" label="Governor of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q880154" start="7998" end="8020" title="John Malcolm Patterson" label="John Malcolm Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8087" end="8099" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="8219" end="8223" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="8286" end="8295" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="8334" end="8347" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8348" end="8364" title="George R. Doster" label="George R. Doster"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8428" end="8442" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740628" start="8516" end="8525" title="Mal Moore" label="Mal Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705331" start="8584" end="8611" title="Alabama State Defense Force" label="Alabama State Defense Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028355" start="8614" end="8643" title="Alabama Wing Civil Air Patrol" label="Alabama Wing Civil Air Patrol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969641" wikidata="Q3783913" url="?curid=969641" title="Heardred">
<text>Heardred (Proto-Norse *&quot;Harðurāðaz&quot;), died c. 530, is the son of Hygelac, king of the Geats, and his queen Hygd, in &quot;Beowulf&quot;. After Hygelac&#x27;s death, in Frisia, Hygd wants to make Hygelac&#x27;s nephew Beowulf, king of Geatland, as she fears that the young Heardred won&#x27;t be able to defend his people. Beowulf, however, declares his trust in the young man and Heardred is proclaimed king.

However, further north in Sweden (then restricted to Svealand), the Swedish king Ohthere dies and is succeeded by his younger brother Onela. Ohthere&#x27;s sons Eadgils and Eanmund flee to the Geats and are received by Heardred. This makes Onela attack the Geats to neutralize his nephews, and to avenge his father Ongentheow, who had been killed by the Geats. During the battle Heardred is killed. Eanmund is slain by his kinsman Weohstan.

Heardred is succeeded by his cousin Beowulf, who avenges Eanmund by helping Eadgils kill Onela, an event which also appears in Scandinavian sources.




== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3783913" start="0" end="8" title="Heardred" label="Heardred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671294" start="10" end="21" title="Proto-Norse" label="Proto-Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q889694" start="75" end="82" title="Hygelac" label="Hygelac"/>
<link wikidata="Q511123" start="84" end="101" title="king of the Geats" label="king of the Geats"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845969" start="117" end="121" title="Hygd" label="Hygd"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="132" end="139" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281177" start="227" end="234" title="Beowulf (character)" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q201694" start="244" end="252" title="Götaland" label="Geatland"/>
<link wikidata="Q203835" start="473" end="481" title="Svealand" label="Svealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q956420" start="488" end="495" title="Suiones" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402591" start="501" end="508" title="Ohthere" label="Ohthere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293179" start="554" end="559" title="Onela" label="Onela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608009" start="581" end="588" title="Eadgils" label="Eadgils"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325613" start="593" end="600" title="Eanmund" label="Eanmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496339" start="613" end="618" title="Geats" label="Geats"/>
<link wikidata="Q940593" start="735" end="745" title="Ongentheow" label="Ongentheow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016725" start="851" end="859" title="Weohstan" label="Weohstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="898" end="905" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608009" start="938" end="945" title="Eadgils" label="Eadgils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293179" start="951" end="956" title="Onela" label="Onela"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969644" wikidata="Q2001893" url="?curid=969644" title="Rolls-Royce Vulture">
<text>The Rolls-Royce Vulture was a British aero engine developed shortly before World War II that was designed and built by Rolls-Royce Limited. The Vulture used the unusual &quot;X-24&quot; configuration, whereby four cylinder blocks derived from the Rolls-Royce Peregrine were joined by a common crankshaft supported by a single crankcase. The engine was originally designed to produce around but problems with the Vulture design meant that the engines were derated to around 1,450 to 1,550 hp in service by limiting the maximum rpm.

Although several new aircraft designs had been planned to use the Vulture, work on the engine&#x27;s design ended in 1941 as Rolls-Royce concentrated on their more successful Merlin design. Another 24-cylinder engine, the Napier Sabre, proved more successful after a lengthy development period.

==Design and development==
The supercharged Rolls-Royce Kestrel and its derivative, the Rolls-Royce Peregrine, were fairly standard designs, with two cylinder banks arranged in a V form and with a displacement of . The Vulture was, in effect, two Peregrines joined by a new crankcase turning a new crankshaft, producing an X engine configuration with a displacement of . The Vulture used cylinders of the same bore and stroke as the Peregrine, but the cylinder spacing was increased to accommodate a longer crankshaft, necessary for extra main bearings and wider crankpins.

The engine suffered from an abbreviated development period because Rolls-Royce suspended Vulture development in 1940 during the Battle of Britain to concentrate on the Merlin, which powered the RAF&#x27;s two main fighters, the Hawker Hurricane and Supermarine Spitfire, and as a consequence the reliability of the Vulture when it entered service was very poor. Apart from delivering significantly less than the designed power, the Vulture suffered from frequent failures of the connecting rod big end bearings, which was found to be caused by a breakdown in lubrication, and also from heat dissipation problems. Rolls-Royce were initially confident that they could solve the problems, but the company&#x27;s much smaller Merlin was already nearing the same power level as the Vulture&#x27;s original specification, in part because of its accelerated development in 1940, and so production of the Vulture was discontinued after only 538 had been built.

==Applications==

The Vulture had been intended to power the Hawker Tornado interceptor but with the cancellation of Vulture development, Hawker abandoned the Tornado and concentrated on the Hawker Typhoon, which was powered by the Napier Sabre. The cancellation caused the abandonment of the Vulture-engined version of the Vickers Warwick bomber. The only aircraft type designed for the Vulture to go into production was the twin-engined Avro Manchester. When the engine reliability problems became clear, the Avro team persuaded the Air Ministry that switching to a four-Merlin version of the Manchester, which had been in development as a contingency, was preferable to retooling Avro factories to make the Handley Page Halifax. The resulting aircraft was initially called the Manchester Mark III and then subsequently renamed Avro Lancaster, going on to great success as the RAF&#x27;s leading heavy bomber.

===Application list===

* Avro Manchester
* Blackburn B-20
* Hawker Henley
* Hawker Tornado
* Vickers Warwick

==Specifications (Vulture V)==
==See also==
==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* Gunston, Bill. &quot;Rolls-Royce Aero Engines&quot;. Cambridge, England. Patrick Stephens, 1989. 
* Gunston, Bill. &quot;World Encyclopedia of Aero Engines: From the Pioneers to the Present Day&quot;. 5th edition, Stroud, UK: Sutton, 2006.
* Kirby, Robert. &quot;Avro Manchester: The Legend Behind the Lancaster&quot;. Earl Shilton, Leicester, UK: Midland publishing Limited, 1995. 
* Lumsden, Alec. &quot;British Piston Aero-Engines and their Aircraft&quot;. Marlborough, Wiltshire: Airlife Publishing, 2003. .
* Rubbra, A.A. &quot;Rolls-Royce Piston Aero Engines - a Designer Remembers: Historical Series no 16&quot;: Rolls-Royce Heritage Trust, 1990. .
* White, Graham. &quot;Allied Aircraft Piston Engines of World War II: History and Development of Frontline Aircraft Piston Engines Produced by Great Britain and the United States During World War II&quot;. Warrendale, Pennsylvania: SAE International, 1995. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2001893" start="4" end="23" title="Rolls-Royce Vulture" label="Rolls-Royce Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="38" end="49" title="Aircraft engine" label="aero engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="75" end="87" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="119" end="138" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041411" start="175" end="179" title="X-24 engine" label="X-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q953477" start="214" end="228" title="cylinder block" label="cylinder block"/>
<link wikidata="Q427574" start="247" end="268" title="Rolls-Royce Peregrine" label="Rolls-Royce Peregrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49718" start="293" end="303" title="crankshaft" label="crankshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144090" start="326" end="335" title="crankcase" label="crankcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="526" end="529" title="Revolutions per minute" label="rpm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412885" start="707" end="713" title="Rolls-Royce Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964929" start="754" end="766" title="Napier Sabre" label="Napier Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="859" end="871" title="supercharged" label="supercharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164346" start="872" end="891" title="Rolls-Royce Kestrel" label="Rolls-Royce Kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q427574" start="916" end="937" title="Rolls-Royce Peregrine" label="Rolls-Royce Peregrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q466511" start="1025" end="1037" title="Engine displacement" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15079098" start="1151" end="1159" title="X engine" label="X engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736207" start="1367" end="1379" title="main bearing" label="main bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285651" start="1391" end="1399" title="crankpin" label="crankpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="1531" end="1548" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="1631" end="1647" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="1652" end="1672" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q221539" start="1882" end="1896" title="connecting rod" label="connecting rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285651" start="1897" end="1904" title="big end" label="big end"/>
<link wikidata="Q550327" start="2418" end="2432" title="Hawker Tornado" label="Hawker Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q662123" start="2548" end="2562" title="Hawker Typhoon" label="Hawker Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964929" start="2589" end="2601" title="Napier Sabre" label="Napier Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754283" start="2681" end="2696" title="Vickers Warwick" label="Vickers Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q672994" start="2796" end="2811" title="Avro Manchester" label="Avro Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="2892" end="2904" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="3067" end="3087" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Handley Page Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="3187" end="3201" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q672994" start="3296" end="3311" title="Avro Manchester" label="Avro Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q471210" start="3314" end="3328" title="Blackburn B-20" label="Blackburn B-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591676" start="3331" end="3344" title="Hawker Henley" label="Hawker Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q550327" start="3347" end="3361" title="Hawker Tornado" label="Hawker Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754283" start="3364" end="3379" title="Vickers Warwick" label="Vickers Warwick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969645" wikidata="Q6984172" url="?curid=969645" title="Neal Pollack">
<text>Neal Pollack (born March 1, 1970) is an American satirist, novelist, short story writer, and journalist. He lives in Austin, Texas. Pollack has written 10 books: &quot;The Neal Pollack Anthology of American Literature&quot;, &quot;Never Mind the Pollacks&quot;, &quot;Beneath the Axis of Evil&quot;, &quot;Alternadad,&quot; &quot;Stretch,&quot; &quot;Jewball&quot;, &quot;Downward-Facing Death&quot;, &quot;Open Your Heart,&quot; &quot;Repeat,&quot; and &quot;Keep Mars Weird&quot;. He is also a three-time &quot;Jeopardy!&quot; champion.

==Career==
After graduating from Northwestern University&#x27;s Medill School of Journalism, Pollack worked as a staff reporter for the &quot;Chicago Reader&quot; from 1993 to 2000, covering Chicago city politics and writing profiles of urban eccentrics. Meanwhile, he performed with various improv comedy troupes around Chicago, including ImprovOlympic (where he studied with Del Close) and the Free Associates. After Dave Eggers&#x27;s magazine &quot;McSweeney&#x27;s&quot; began publishing his work, Pollack began appearing in shows with Eggers, John Hodgman, Sarah Vowell, Zadie Smith, David Byrne, Arthur Bradford, James Flint, They Might Be Giants, M. Doughty, and many others before parting ways with &quot;McSweeney&#x27;s&quot; in 2003.

Pollack wrote a political satire column for &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, and the &quot;Bad Sex With Neal Pollack&quot; column for Nerve.com. His freelance journalism has appeared in &quot;The New York Times Magazine&quot;, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;Esquire&quot;, &quot;Men&#x27;s Journal&quot;, &quot;GQ&quot;, Slate, Salon, and many other publications. One of his Slate.com articles was featured in the Best American Sportswriting collection of 2006. His satirical online takedown of James Frey was named one of the &quot;Top 26 Cultural Moments of the Decade&quot; by Slate cultural critic Troy Patterson.

In 2007, Pollack started Offsprung.com, a humor magazine and web community for parents. He writes features about technology for the American and British editions of &quot;Wired&quot; as well as &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot;, and contributes frequent car reviews and auto-culture features to the Autos page of Yahoo.com. He also writes features about marijuana culture for The Cannabist, published by &quot;The Denver Post&quot;, and regularly writes articles about yoga.

In June 2010, Pollack completed a 200-hour yoga teacher&#x27;s certification course at Richard Freeman&#x27;s Yoga Workshop in Boulder, Colorado, and he teaches yoga at conferences and studios around the country.

In September 2013, Pollack appeared on the quiz show &quot;Jeopardy!,&quot; winning more than $62,000 in his four-game run.

==Books and other media==
&quot;The Neal Pollack Anthology of American Literature&quot;, a collection of short satires of literary pomposity, was originally published by McSweeney&#x27;s in 2000. It won the 2001 Firecracker Alternative Book Award for best independently published fiction and led to Pollack being named a &quot;Hot Writer&quot; by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;. HarperCollins later published an expanded edition.

In 2001, to coincide with the publication of the paperback edition of his &quot;Anthology&quot;, Pollack recorded a spoken-word album on Bloodshot Records, produced by Jon Langford and featuring Sally Timms and Kelly Hogan. Designed to look like Harry Smith&#x27;s &quot;Anthology of American Folk Music&quot;, the album is a bizarre if entertaining mishmash of styles. HarperCollins put the album out in 2002 as part of a boxed set of Pollack&#x27;s &quot;collected recordings,&quot; including an hour-long disc of Def Poetry Jam parodies and a fake interview with John Hodgman.

&quot;Beneath the Axis of Evil&quot;, a parody of post-9-11 war punditry, was published in a limited edition by So New Media in 2002. &quot;Never Mind The Pollacks&quot;, a satirical novel about dueling rock critics, came out from HarperCollins in 2003.

&quot;Alternadad&quot;, published by Pantheon in January 2007, first exposed Pollack&#x27;s work to a wider public. Unlike his previous arch satires, &quot;Alternadad&quot; is a straightforward, if humorous memoir of his early days as a &quot;cool&quot; parent in Austin, Texas. Upon publication, &quot;Alternadad&quot; received a flurry of press, largely in the form of trend stories about &quot;hipster parents.&quot; It was featured in &quot;Time&quot; and &quot;The New York Times&quot;, earned Pollack a cover profile in &quot;Poets &amp; Writers&quot;, and led to a filmed feature about Pollack&#x27;s family on &quot;Nightline&quot;. Critics were sharply divided, calling it everything from &quot;the most offbeat parenting memoir ever written&quot; to &quot;indescribably dull.&quot;

&quot;Stretch: The Unlikely Making of a Yoga Dude&quot;, a chronicle of Pollack&#x27;s adventures in American yoga culture, appeared in August 2010 to largely positive reviews. Wrote Ann Pizer in About.com: &quot;Those yogis who are not naturally athletic, were never a member of a professional dance troupe, and were not raised in a yurt, in other words, ordinary yogis, have found our spokesmodel.&quot; Pollack continues to practice and write about yoga, and occasionally teaches yoga classes and workshops around the U.S.

Pollack then made a surprising pivot to self-publishing, releasing his novel &quot;Jewball&quot;, in October 2011. A marked departure from his previous work, Pollack wrote &quot;Jewball,&quot; a serio-comic noir set in the world of 1930s Jewish basketball players, as a tribute to the days of classic American crime fiction. &quot;Forbes&quot; said of &quot;Jewball&quot;, &quot;Pollack&#x27;s book reflects the acumen of an accomplished storyteller.&quot; Thomas &amp; Mercer released a new edition of &quot;Jewball &quot;in March 2012, and it quickly climbed the Amazon bestseller list.

In September 2012, Amazon&#x27;s Thomas &amp; Mercer mystery and thriller imprint published Pollack&#x27;s novel, &quot;Downward-Facing Death&quot; as part of its new Kindle Serials program. This &quot;yoga mystery&quot; features a former LAPD detective-turned yoga teacher named Matt Bolster, who solves crimes on the side to pay the rent. &quot;Downward-Facing Death&quot; was published as a full book in January 2013. Amazon published a second serialized Matt Bolster mystery, &quot;Open Your Heart&quot;, in the summer of 2013.

Pollack&#x27;s novel, &quot;Repeat,&quot; a romantic comedy with a time-travel element, was published by Amazon&#x27;s Lake Union Press in March 2015.

Pollack is also the editor of &quot;Chicago Noir&quot;, a collection of original crime stories from Akashic Books. His crime fiction has appeared in numerous magazines and short-story collections.

He formed a punk-rock band in 2003 to publicize &quot;Never Mind the Pollacks&quot;. The original Neal Pollack Invasion included folk-rock musician Jim Roll, veteran touring musicians Neil Cleary and Jon Williams, and Dakota Smith, a young Austin musician who later became the lead guitarist for Peel. They recorded an album of original songs. Pollack wrote the lyrics and Smith and Roll wrote the music.

Telegraph Records released the album in the fall of 2003, and the band went on a 20-city tour, including shows at the South by Southwest and CMJ. They played their last show in New York City, at the Virgin Megastore in Union Square. Three weeks later, Telegraph Records went bankrupt. In 2013, Chicken Ranch Records, an independent punk label, re-released the album, including a new &quot;bonus track&quot; called &quot;Beer and Weed,&quot; as a digital album and limited-edition vinyl.

==Bibliography==
===Nonfiction===
* &quot;Stretch&quot; (2010) 

===Fiction===
* &quot;The Neal Pollack Anthology of American Literature&quot; (2002) 
* &quot;Beneath the Axis of Evil, One Man&#x27;s Journey Into the Horrors of War&quot; (2003) 
* &quot;Never Mind the Pollacks: A Rock and Roll Novel&quot; (2003) 
* &quot;Jewball&quot; (2011) 
* &quot;Downward-Facing Death&quot; (2013) 
* &quot;Open Your Heart&quot; (2013) 
* &quot;Repeat&quot; (2015) 
* &quot;Keep Mars Weird&quot; (2015) 
* &quot;Pothead: My Life as a Marijuana Addict in the Age of Legal Weed&quot; (2020)

==References==
==External links==
*Nealpollack.com - Official Site
*Interview with Pollack in &quot;The Onion&quot; about the financial ups and downs of a writer&#x27;s life.
*Profile of Pollack and &quot;Jewball&quot; in &quot;The Jewish Daily Forward&quot;.
*Interview on Yoga Dork
*Radio Interview with The Sound of Young America
*Interview with &quot;Flak Magazine&quot;
*Interview with The Coming
*Interview with 3:AM Magazine
*Interview with Gelf Magazine
*Interview with Identity Theory
*Pollack&#x27;s one and only appearance on &quot;The Daily Show with Jon Stewart.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6984172" start="0" end="12" title="Neal Pollack" label="Neal Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="49" end="57" title="satire" label="satirist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="59" end="67" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="69" end="80" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="93" end="103" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="117" end="130" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="513" end="522" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="573" end="596" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806876" start="604" end="631" title="Medill School of Journalism" label="Medill School of Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076422" start="682" end="696" title="Chicago Reader" label="Chicago Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="731" end="738" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883424" start="917" end="926" title="Del Close" label="Del Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q589497" start="959" end="970" title="Dave Eggers" label="Dave Eggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807398" start="993" end="1009" title="Timothy McSweeney&amp;#x27;s Quarterly Concern" label="McSweeney&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q329372" start="1089" end="1101" title="John Hodgman" label="John Hodgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q452147" start="1103" end="1115" title="Sarah Vowell" label="Sarah Vowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q140052" start="1117" end="1128" title="Zadie Smith" label="Zadie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="1130" end="1141" title="David Byrne (musician)" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798067" start="1143" end="1158" title="Arthur Bradford" label="Arthur Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161080" start="1160" end="1171" title="James Flint (novelist)" label="James Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q420880" start="1173" end="1193" title="They Might Be Giants" label="They Might Be Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q359457" start="1195" end="1205" title="M. Doughty" label="M. Doughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="1337" end="1348" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="2655" end="2664" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853389" start="2891" end="2907" title="McSweeney&amp;#x27;s" label="McSweeney&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q126264992" start="2933" end="2967" title="Firecracker Alternative Book Award" label="Firecracker Alternative Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3074" end="3087" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q567152" start="3393" end="3404" title="Harry Everett Smith" label="Harry Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771901" start="3418" end="3450" title="Anthology of American Folk Music" label="Anthology of American Folk Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q329372" start="3713" end="3725" title="John Hodgman" label="John Hodgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="3783" end="3787" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="9-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="4247" end="4260" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="4428" end="4432" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4449" end="4467" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207541" start="4515" end="4534" title="Poets &amp;amp; Writers" label="Poets &amp;amp; Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768706" start="4607" end="4616" title="Nightline (US news program)" label="Nightline"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7359" end="7372" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457075" start="8605" end="8618" title="Flak Magazine" label="Flak Magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969647" wikidata="Q58994" url="?curid=969647" title="Woodhaven, Queens">
<text>Woodhaven is a neighborhood in the southwestern section of the New York City borough of Queens. It is bordered on the north by Park Lane South and Forest Park, on the east by Richmond Hill, on the south by Ozone Park and Atlantic Avenue, and the west by the Cypress Hills neighborhood of Brooklyn.

Woodhaven, once known as Woodyville, has one of the greatest tree populations in the borough and is known for its proximity to the hiking trails of Forest Park. Woodhaven contains a mixture of urban and suburban land uses, with both low-density residential and commercial sections. It retains the small-town feel of bygone days and is home to people of many different ethnicities.

Woodhaven is located in Queens Community District 9 and its ZIP Code is 11421. It is patrolled by the New York City Police Department&#x27;s 102nd Precinct. Politically, Woodhaven is represented by the New York City Council&#x27;s 28th, 30th, and 32nd Districts.

==History==
Jamaica Avenue, the neighborhood&#x27;s main thoroughfare, has its beginnings in an ancient Native American trail, the Old Rockaway Trail. The northern boundary of the Rockaway territory was the terminal moraine of the Wisconsin glacier, which formed the ridges of Forest Park. According to the New York City Parks Department, Forest Park was inhabited by the Rockaway and Lenape Native Americans &quot;until the Dutch West India Company settled the area in 1635.&quot; Native Americans in the area used the arrowwood stems prevalent in Forest Park for arrow shafts.

European settlement in Woodhaven began in the mid-18th century as a small town that revolved around farming, with the Ditmar, Lott, Wyckoff, Suydam and Snediker families. British troops successfully flanked General George Washington&#x27;s Continental Army by a silent night-march from Gravesend, Brooklyn through the lightly defended &quot;Jamaica Pass&quot; actually located in Brooklyn, to win the Battle of Long Island, Queens—the largest battle of the American Revolutionary War, and the first battle after the Declaration of Independence.

Later, Woodhaven became the site of two racetracks: the Union Course (1821) and the Centerville (1825). Union Course was a nationally famous racetrack situated in the area now bounded by 78th Street, 82nd Street, Jamaica Avenue and Atlantic Avenue. The Union Course was the site of the first &quot;skinned&quot;—or dirt—racing surface, a novelty at the time. These courses were originally without grandstands. The custom of conducting a single, four-mile (6 km) race consisting of as many heats as were necessary to determine a winner, gave way to programs consisting of several races. Match races between horses from the South against those from the North drew crowds as high as 70,000. Several hotels (including the Snedeker Hotel and the Forschback Inn) were built in the area to accommodate the racing crowds.

A Connecticut Yankee, John R. Pitkin, developed the eastern area as a workers&#x27; village and named it Woodville (1835). In 1853, he launched a newspaper. That same year, the residents petitioned for a local post office. To avoid confusion with a Woodville located upstate, the residents agreed to change the name to Woodhaven. The original boundaries extended as far south as Liberty Avenue.

Two Frenchmen named Charles Lalance and Florian Grosjean launched the village as a manufacturing community in 1863, by opening a tin factory and improving the process of tin stamping. As late as 1900, the surrounding area, however, was still primarily farmland, and from Atlantic Avenue one could see as far south as Jamaica Bay, site of present-day John F. Kennedy International Airport. Since 1894, Woodhaven&#x27;s local newspaper has been the &quot;Leader-Observer&quot;.

==Demographics==
Based on data from the 2010 United States Census, the population of Woodhaven was 56,674, an increase of 2,525 (4.7%) from the 54,149 counted in 2000. Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of .

The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 17.3% (9,798) White, 6.1% (3,458) African American, 0.4% (250) Native American, 17.4% (9,856) Asian, 0.0% (23) Pacific Islander, 2.4% (1,371) from other races, and 2.8% (1,612) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 53.5% (30,306) of the population.

The entirety of Community Board 9, which comprises Kew Gardens, Richmond Hill, and Woodhaven, had 148,465 inhabitants as of NYC Health&#x27;s 2018 Community Health Profile, with an average life expectancy of 84.3 years. This is higher than the median life expectancy of 81.2 for all New York City neighborhoods. Most inhabitants are youth and middle-aged adults: 22% are between the ages of between 0–17, 30% between 25 and 44, and 27% between 45 and 64. The ratio of college-aged and elderly residents was lower, at 17% and 7% respectively.

As of 2017, the median household income in Community Board 9 was $69,916. In 2018, an estimated 22% of Woodhaven and Kew Gardens residents lived in poverty, compared to 19% in all of Queens and 20% in all of New York City. One in twelve residents (8%) were unemployed, compared to 8% in Queens and 9% in New York City. Rent burden, or the percentage of residents who have difficulty paying their rent, is 55% in Woodhaven and Kew Gardens, higher than the boroughwide and citywide rates of 53% and 51% respectively. Based on this calculation, , Woodhaven and Kew Gardens are considered to be high-income relative to the rest of the city and not gentrifying.

Woodhaven is ethnically diverse but is majority Hispanic/Latino. It also consists of small number of African Americans, and a growing number of Asian Americans.

==Land use==
Woodhaven is a mostly residential semi-suburban neighborhood. Commercial zones are restricted to Jamaica Avenue, a west–east artery which effectively bisects Woodhaven, as well as Atlantic Avenue on the southern border of Woodhaven.

Geographically, southern Woodhaven is mostly flat (the lowest elevation is just under ), while northern Woodhaven gradually rises to about as it approaches Forest Park. There are numerous hills within Forest Park.

===Residential===

Homes in the northern section of the neighborhood are mainly Victorian and Colonial and many are over 120 years old. In the southern section many houses are also Victorian. The area is considered more affordable than many in the city.

===Commercial===
On Jamaica Avenue, there are a large number of stores and restaurants, most being small and locally owned. One of the oldest was Lewis of Woodhaven, which had two locations and closed its doors in 2004. Many longtime businesses remain.

Neir&#x27;s Tavern first opened in 1829, and some historians argue that it is the city&#x27;s oldest bar. The establishment was owned by the Neir family from 1898 to 1967, after which it went into decline and closed in 2009. New owners bought the bar and the establishment re-opened in 2010. Woodhaven residents and other preservationists have unsuccessfully petitioned the City of New York to grant the tavern official status as a New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.

Longtime establishments on the neighborhood&#x27;s main thoroughfare, Jamaica Avenue, include Popp&#x27;s Restaurant, which opened in 1907; Manor Delicatessen, which opened in 1914; and Schmidt&#x27;s Candy, which opened in 1925 and is run by the granddaughter of its founder.

==Culture==
An annual motorcycle parade on Woodhaven Boulevard commemorates the bravery of war veterans and collects donations for the Salvation Army and holiday toys for needy children. An annual street fair also takes place on Jamaica Avenue with live music, and other festivities for children; this event enables residents to appreciate diversity from the many different backgrounds the residents of Woodhaven originate.

Writers, artists, musicians, actors, and filmmakers have been drawn to and emerged from the area. Woodhaven has been called &quot;one of the epicenters of NYC&#x27;s metal landscape&quot; (with Greenpoint as the other epicenter) due to a recording studio located in the neighborhood. The area has a tattoo and piercing parlor run by women that was featured in the documentary Feminine Ink.

==Points of interest==
The former St. Matthew&#x27;s Episcopal Church, a church at 85-45 96th Street now known as All Saints Episcopal Church, has a parish hall dating to 1907. The church was built between 1926 and 1927 in the Late Gothic Revival style, designed by the architect Robert F. Schirmer. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2001. Located behind the church is the separately listed Wyckoff-Snediker Family Cemetery.

The distinctive St. Anthony&#x27;s Mansion (which later became St. Anthony&#x27;s Hospital) stood on a seven-acre tract of land on Woodhaven Boulevard between 89th and 91st Avenues. The hospital significantly helped the scientific community in the creation of breakthroughs in Pulmonary and Heart treatments. The hospital was demolished in the late 1990s. A historical marker has been placed on the site, which is now a residential area known as Woodhaven Park Estates.

The Beaux-Arts Fire Command Telegraph Station at the intersection of Woodhaven Boulevard and Park Lane South, sits in the midst of Forest Park and has an octagon crowned with a cupola at its center. The fire department commenced operations there in 1928.

One of the oldest homes in Woodhaven is located on 87-20 88th Street. It was first located on Jamaica Avenue. In 1920, the entire house was forced to move to its current location on 88th Street due to the construction of the BMT Jamaica Line. The house was built about or prior to 1910. The first house number in Queens (from the borough&#x27;s renumbering under the Philadelphia Plan), was also in Woodhaven and the house was owned by a German immigrant named Albert Voigt.
Neir&#x27;s Tavern, founded in Woodhaven in 1829 and in nearly continuous operation since then (except during Prohibition) is one of the older bars in the United States. The bar is sometimes rumored to be haunted.

The Crystal Manor Hotel building, once considered a refined hotel for businessmen, survives at Woodhaven Boulevard and Jamaica Avenue and the brick exterior has remained largely the same for more than 100 years.

Betty Smith, author of &quot;A Tree Grows in Brooklyn&quot;, wrote most of the book in Woodhaven, at Forest Parkway near 85th Drive (though the story is set in nearby Cypress Hills). The Woodhaven Post Office has a New Deal mural by Ben Shahn. The Brooklyn Royal Giants, a professional Negro Baseball League team, played in Dexter Park, which was torn down in 1955 and today is marked with a plaque. The Lalance &amp; Grosjean Tin Manufacturing Factory of Woodhaven produced many kitchen and household objects, some of which were featured in MOMA exhibitions on 20th Century design. 

==Police and crime==
Kew Gardens, Richmond Hill, and Woodhaven are patrolled by the 102nd Precinct of the NYPD, located at 87-34 118th Street. The 102nd Precinct ranked 22nd safest out of 69 patrol areas for per-capita crime in 2010. , with a non-fatal assault rate of 43 per 100,000 people, Woodhaven and Kew Gardens&#x27;s rate of violent crimes per capita is less than that of the city as a whole. The incarceration rate of 345 per 100,000 people is lower than that of the city as a whole.

The 102nd Precinct has a lower crime rate than in the 1990s, with crimes across all categories having decreased by 90.2% between 1990 and 2018. The precinct reported 2 murders, 24 rapes, 101 robberies, 184 felony assaults, 104 burglaries, 285 grand larcenies, and 99 grand larcenies auto in 2018.

==Fire safety==
Woodhaven is served by three New York City Fire Department (FDNY) fire stations:
* Engine Co. 285/Ladder Co. 142 – 103-17 98th Street (Ozone Park)
* Engine Co. 294/Ladder Co. 143 – 101-02 Jamaica Avenue (Richmond Hill)
* Engine Co. 293 – 89-40 87th Street

==Health==
, preterm births are more common in Woodhaven and Kew Gardens than in other places citywide, though births to teenage mothers are less common. In Woodhaven and Kew Gardens, there were 92 preterm births per 1,000 live births (compared to 87 per 1,000 citywide), and 15.7 births to teenage mothers per 1,000 live births (compared to 19.3 per 1,000 citywide). Woodhaven and Kew Gardens have a higher than average population of residents who are uninsured. In 2018, this population of uninsured residents was estimated to be 14%, slightly higher than the citywide rate of 12%.

The concentration of fine particulate matter, the deadliest type of air pollutant, in Woodhaven and Kew Gardens is , less than the city average. Eleven percent of Woodhaven and Kew Gardens residents are smokers, which is lower than the city average of 14% of residents being smokers. In Woodhaven and Kew Gardens, 23% of residents are obese, 14% are diabetic, and 22% have high blood pressure—compared to the citywide averages of 22%, 8%, and 23% respectively. In addition, 22% of children are obese, compared to the citywide average of 20%.

Eighty-six percent of residents eat some fruits and vegetables every day, which is about the same as the city&#x27;s average of 87%. In 2018, 78% of residents described their health as &quot;good&quot;, &quot;very good&quot;, or &quot;excellent&quot;, equal to the city&#x27;s average of 78%. For every supermarket in Woodhaven and Kew Gardens, there are 11 bodegas.

The nearest major hospitals are Long Island Jewish Forest Hills and Jamaica Hospital.

==Post office and ZIP Codes==
Woodhaven is covered by the ZIP Code 11421. The United States Post Office operates the Woodhaven Station at 86-42 Forest Parkway.

==Parks==

Forest Park is the third largest park in Queens. The Wisconsin Glacier retreated from Long Island some 20,000 years ago, leaving behind the hills to the north of Woodhaven that now are part of Forest Park. The park was home to the Rockaway, Delaware and Lenape Native Americans until Dutch West India Company settlers arrived in 1634 and began establishing towns and pushing the tribes out. The park contains the largest continuous oak forest in Queens. Inside the park, the Forest Park Carousel was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2004. The park also contains playgrounds, Strack Pond, a barbecue area, a bandshell, a nature center, a dog run, and hiking trails. Therapeutic horseback riding for people with special needs is also available in the park.

Dexter Park, a baseball field which once occupied in Woodhaven just east of Franklin K. Lane High School, contained the first engineered lighting system for night games, which was installed in 1930.

== Education ==
Woodhaven and Kew Gardens generally have a lower rate of college-educated residents than the rest of the city . While 34% of residents age 25 and older have a college education or higher, 22% have less than a high school education and 43% are high school graduates or have some college education. By contrast, 39% of Queens residents and 43% of city residents have a college education or higher. The percentage of Woodhaven and Kew Gardens students excelling in math rose from 34% in 2000 to 61% in 2011, and reading achievement rose from 39% to 48% during the same time period.

Woodhaven and Kew Gardens&#x27;s rate of elementary school student absenteeism is less than the rest of New York City. In Woodhaven and Kew Gardens, 17% of elementary school students missed twenty or more days per school year, lower than the citywide average of 20%. Additionally, 79% of high school students in Woodhaven and Kew Gardens graduate on time, more than the citywide average of 75%.

===Schools===
Public schools include:
* PS 60 Woodhaven
* PS 97 Forest Park
* PS 254 Rosa Parks
* New York City Academy for Discovery

Private schools include:
*St Thomas the Apostle Catholic Academy

===Library===
The Queens Public Library operates the Woodhaven branch at 85-41 Forest Parkway.

==Transportation==
In 1836, Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) cars were pulled by horses along Atlantic Avenue. The cars traveled with other traffic at street level and stopped at all major intersections, much as a bus does, except that people would often hop on and hop off while the car was moving. The 1848 LIRR schedule shows an intersection called Union Course (serving that racetrack) and another called Woodville (farther east). With electrification, the LIRR constructed permanent tracks. The Union Course station was opened April 28, 1905. In 1911, the platform was widened to four tracks, and Atlantic Avenue was mostly closed to other traffic. The four tracks split the community and become the border between Woodhaven and Ozone Park.

Elevated transit service to Williamsburg and Lower Manhattan began in 1918 with the operation of the BMT Jamaica Line above Jamaica Avenue. Meanwhile, service on Atlantic Avenue&#x27;s surface tracks and seven stations between Jamaica and Brooklyn ended on November 1, 1939, and was subsequently replaced in 1942 by underground tracks and a single underground station between Jamaica and Brooklyn. With the removal of surface rail tracks, Atlantic Avenue was again a continuous roadway. The single station in this long tunnel was the Woodhaven Junction station (at 100th Street) on the LIRR&#x27;s Atlantic Avenue Branch, providing rail service to Jamaica station and Brooklyn (Atlantic Terminal) until it too was closed in 1977. The Woodhaven Junction station was also highly used among beachgoers and commuters, who would transfer to the aboveground LIRR station for trains to Rockaway Beach and Far Rockaway. The Woodhaven Junction station was taken out of service when this section of the Rockaway Beach Branch was abandoned in 1962. Today, MTA Regional Bus Operations bus routes serve Woodhaven. The New York City Subway&#x27;s serve the Jamaica Line.

Some Queens transit advocates are pushing to reopen the Rockaway Beach Branch of the LIRR, including the Brooklyn Manor station in Woodhaven, at Jamaica Avenue and 100th Street. An alternate proposal has been to leave the naturally reforested tracks untouched or to convert them into a rail trail similar to Manhattan&#x27;s High Line.

==In popular culture==
The scene in the 1990 Martin Scorsese film &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, where members of the Mafia showed up after robbing the airport showing off mink coats and pink Cadillacs, took place at Neir&#x27;s Tavern located on 78th Street. There is an historical marker placed outside the establishment. Justin Timberlake and Juno Temple filmed a scene filmed in 2017 for the Woody Allen movie Wonder Wheel at Jamaica Avenue and 80th Street. The opening scenes of the 1984 film The Flamingo Kid were filmed at 96th Street and Jamaica Avenue. Tom Holland filmed the school scene of &quot;Spider-Man: Homecoming&quot; at Franklin K. Lane High School in Woodhaven.

TV shows that have filmed in Woodhaven include The Americans (Forest Park Bandshell) and Person of Interest (Forest Park Carousel).

Mae West is said to have performed at Neir&#x27;s Tavern, in an entertainment hall that was upstairs. 

==Notable residents==

Notable current and former residents of Woodhaven include:

* Adrien Brody (born 1973), Oscar-winning actor, grew up in Woodhaven.
* William F. Brunner (1887–1965), United States Representative from New York.
* Jason Cipolla (born 1974), former basketball player for the Syracuse Orange men&#x27;s basketball team.
* George Gershwin (1898–1937), composer, was born at 242 Snedeker Avenue (now 78th Street).
* Charles V. Glasco, New York City police sergeant, known for his efforts to rescue John William Warde in 1938
* Brian Hyland (born 1943), known for his recording of the song &quot;Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow Polka Dot Bikini&quot;.
* Eddie Money (1949-2019), singer/songwriter of &quot;Take Me Home Tonight&quot;, lived on 88th Street during his teens.
* Danny Kaye (1911–1987), actor, singer and comedian who grew up on Bradford Street.
* Dick Van Patten (1928–2015), noted actor, lived in Woodhaven during his childhood 
* Qi Shu Fang (born 1943), Beijing opera performer
* Lynn Pressman Raymond ( – 2009), toy and game innovator who was president of the Pressman Toy Corporation
* Betty Smith (1896–1972), author. A historical marker is outside the house on Forest Parkway (across the street from the Woodhaven Library) in which she wrote &quot;A Tree Grows in Brooklyn&quot; in 1943. In this best-selling novel, the widow Nolan marries a policeman with a civil service job and moves to Cypress Hills where it is quiet and there are trees.
* Barry Sullivan (1912–1994), film and TV star.
* Fred Trump (1905–1999), real estate developer.
* Mae West (1893–1980), lived on 88th Street in Woodhaven, and according to some sources made her professional debut performance in a local bar. A historical marker is outside the venue.

==See also==

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Woodhaven&quot; entry in &quot;Encyclopedia of New York City&quot; by Vincent Seyfried, Edited by Kenneth T. Jackson. New Haven, Yale University Press. 1995 as presented on site of Congressman Anthony D. Weiner
* Woodhaven and Union Course entries in &quot;Old Queens, N.Y. in Early Photographs&quot; by Vincent F. Seyfried, William Asadorian
* 1870 maps of Woodhaven (west) and (east)

==External links==

*Woodhaven Residents&#x27; Block Association —The &quot;Guardian of Woodhaven&quot; and the Borough&#x27;s oldest Civic Organization
*Sperling&#x27;s Best Places
*Project Woodhaven</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58994" start="0" end="9" title="Woodhaven, Queens" label="Woodhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="63" end="76" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="77" end="84" title="Borough (New York City)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="88" end="94" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469053" start="147" end="158" title="Forest Park (Queens)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q59006" start="175" end="188" title="Richmond Hill, Queens" label="Richmond Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q59030" start="206" end="216" title="Ozone Park, Queens" label="Ozone Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891409" start="221" end="236" title="Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn" label="Atlantic Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294366" start="258" end="271" title="Cypress Hills, Brooklyn" label="Cypress Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="288" end="296" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270753" start="705" end="732" title="Queens Community Board 9" label="Queens Community District 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="783" end="814" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="883" end="904" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469053" start="1222" end="1233" title="Forest Park (Queens)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1330" end="1336" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="1696" end="1703" title="Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427134" start="1724" end="1731" title="Flanking maneuver" label="flanked"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1740" end="1757" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="1765" end="1781" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238884" start="1811" end="1830" title="Gravesend, Brooklyn" label="Gravesend, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1866" end="1878" title="East New York#Early history" label="Jamaica Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q862751" start="1926" end="1947" title="Battle of Long Island" label="Battle of Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1982" end="2008" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="2041" end="2068" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885631" start="2127" end="2139" title="Union Course" label="Union Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="2888" end="2899" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q692062" start="2900" end="2906" title="Yankee" label="Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977611" start="3265" end="3279" title="Liberty Avenue (New York City)" label="Liberty Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679819" start="3599" end="3610" title="Jamaica Bay" label="Jamaica Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="3632" end="3669" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3799" end="3824" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3921" end="3925" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4053" end="4058" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4073" end="4089" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4102" end="4117" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4133" end="4138" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4150" end="4166" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4186" end="4197" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4240" end="4248" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4252" end="4258" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995038" start="4435" end="4445" title="New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene" label="NYC Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591167" start="4877" end="4893" title="household income" label="household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="5498" end="5509" title="gentrification" label="gentrifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="5721" end="5734" title="suburbs" label="semi-suburban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127266" start="5784" end="5798" title="Jamaica Avenue" label="Jamaica Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891409" start="5867" end="5882" title="Atlantic Avenue (New York City)" label="Atlantic Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q18749113" start="6645" end="6663" title="Neir&amp;#x27;s Tavern" label="Neir&amp;#x27;s Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q967276" start="7077" end="7124" title="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission" label="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120683" start="7313" end="7333" title="Schmidt&amp;#x27;s Candy" label="Schmidt&amp;#x27;s Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="7540" end="7554" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623004" start="7602" end="7613" title="street fair" label="street fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544785" start="8024" end="8034" title="Greenpoint, Brooklyn" label="Greenpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590603" start="8255" end="8290" title="St. Matthew&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church (Woodhaven, New York)" label="St. Matthew&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="8448" end="8467" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Late Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="8542" end="8578" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039595" start="8639" end="8671" title="Wyckoff-Snediker Family Cemetery" label="Wyckoff-Snediker Family Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355775" start="9626" end="9642" title="BMT Jamaica Line" label="BMT Jamaica Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18749113" start="9876" end="9894" title="Neir&amp;#x27;s Tavern" label="Neir&amp;#x27;s Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="9986" end="9997" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q273730" start="10304" end="10315" title="Betty Smith" label="Betty Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q13931921" start="10333" end="10357" title="A Tree Grows in Brooklyn (novel)" label="A Tree Grows in Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233689" start="10519" end="10533" title="United States post office murals" label="New Deal mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q695239" start="10537" end="10546" title="Ben Shahn" label="Ben Shahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974889" start="10552" end="10573" title="Brooklyn Royal Giants" label="Brooklyn Royal Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="10590" end="10611" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268428" start="10628" end="10639" title="Dexter Park (Queens)" label="Dexter Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="10995" end="10999" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520311" start="11222" end="11235" title="violent crime" label="violent crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="11726" end="11755" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="11967" end="11980" title="preterm birth" label="preterm birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691094" start="12407" end="12416" title="Health insurance coverage in the United States" label="uninsured"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="12560" end="12583" title="particulates" label="fine particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="12607" end="12620" title="air pollution" label="air pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="12742" end="12749" title="Smoking" label="smokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="12874" end="12879" title="Obesity" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="12889" end="12897" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="12912" end="12931" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="13440" end="13447" title="convenience store" label="bodegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953965" start="13482" end="13513" title="Long Island Jewish Forest Hills" label="Long Island Jewish Forest Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354861" start="13518" end="13534" title="Jamaica Hospital" label="Jamaica Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="13595" end="13603" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="13615" end="13640" title="United States Post Office" label="United States Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469053" start="13709" end="13720" title="Forest Park (Queens)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="13762" end="13779" title="Wisconsinan glaciation" label="Wisconsin Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469051" start="14184" end="14204" title="Forest Park Carousel" label="Forest Park Carousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858390" start="14305" end="14316" title="Strack Pond" label="Strack Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268428" start="14486" end="14497" title="Dexter Park (Queens)" label="Dexter Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491621" start="14562" end="14590" title="Franklin K. Lane High School" label="Franklin K. Lane High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q915466" start="15496" end="15507" title="school year" label="school year"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="15839" end="15860" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="St Thomas the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337750" start="15897" end="15918" title="Queens Public Library" label="Queens Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="16003" end="16024" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891409" start="16065" end="16080" title="Atlantic Avenue (New York City)" label="Atlantic Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355775" start="16819" end="16835" title="BMT Jamaica Line" label="BMT Jamaica Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032715" start="17252" end="17278" title="Woodhaven Junction station" label="Woodhaven Junction station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816315" start="17316" end="17338" title="Atlantic Avenue Branch" label="Atlantic Avenue Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310077" start="17366" end="17381" title="Jamaica station" label="Jamaica station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816574" start="17396" end="17413" title="Atlantic Terminal" label="Atlantic Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354947" start="17711" end="17732" title="Rockaway Beach Branch" label="Rockaway Beach Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="17763" end="17790" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="MTA Regional Bus Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="17823" end="17843" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354947" start="17932" end="17953" title="Rockaway Beach Branch" label="Rockaway Beach Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706201" start="17981" end="18003" title="Brooklyn Manor station" label="Brooklyn Manor station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116321" start="18162" end="18172" title="rail trail" label="rail trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q843869" start="18201" end="18210" title="High Line" label="High Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="18285" end="18295" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18749113" start="18423" end="18441" title="Neir&amp;#x27;s Tavern" label="Neir&amp;#x27;s Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="18602" end="18613" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27703144" start="18620" end="18632" title="Wonder Wheel (film)" label="Wonder Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426946" start="18704" end="18720" title="The Flamingo Kid" label="The Flamingo Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q104514" start="19211" end="19223" title="Adrien Brody" label="Adrien Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="19237" end="19242" title="Academy Award" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q277059" start="19282" end="19300" title="William F. Brunner" label="William F. Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8992287" start="19360" end="19373" title="Jason Cipolla" label="Jason Cipolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q15718182" start="19420" end="19457" title="Syracuse Orange men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Syracuse Orange men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="19466" end="19481" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264283" start="19640" end="19658" title="John William Warde" label="John William Warde"/>
<link wikidata="Q912394" start="19669" end="19681" title="Brian Hyland" label="Brian Hyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q662327" start="19737" end="19785" title="Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow Polka Dot Bikini" label="Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow Polka Dot Bikini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282910" start="19795" end="19806" title="Eddie Money" label="Eddie Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324983" start="19847" end="19867" title="Take Me Home Tonight (song)" label="Take Me Home Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="19916" end="19926" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209826" start="20001" end="20016" title="Dick Van Patten" label="Dick Van Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q108361122" start="20086" end="20097" title="Qi Shu Fang" label="Qi Shu Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709173" start="20137" end="20158" title="Lynn Pressman Raymond" label="Lynn Pressman Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241672" start="20218" end="20242" title="Pressman Toy Corporation" label="Pressman Toy Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273730" start="20245" end="20256" title="Betty Smith" label="Betty Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="20280" end="20297" title="historical marker" label="historical marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q13931921" start="20409" end="20433" title="A Tree Grows in Brooklyn (novel)" label="A Tree Grows in Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q809105" start="20606" end="20620" title="Barry Sullivan (actor)" label="Barry Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752663" start="20654" end="20664" title="Fred Trump" label="Fred Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="20703" end="20711" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="20848" end="20865" title="historical marker" label="historical marker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969655" wikidata="Q1023897" url="?curid=969655" title="CMU Common Lisp">
<text>CMUCL is a free Common Lisp implementation, originally developed at Carnegie Mellon University.

CMUCL runs on most Unix-like platforms, including Linux and BSD; there is an experimental Windows port as well. Steel Bank Common Lisp is derived from CMUCL. The Scieneer Common Lisp was a commercial derivative from CMUCL.

==History==
The earliest implementation predates Common Lisp and was part of Spice Lisp, around 1980. In 1985 Rob MacLachlan started re-writing the compiler to what would become the Python compiler and CMUCL was ported to Unix workstations such as the IBM PC RT, MIPS and SPARC. Early CMUCL releases did not support Intel&#x27;s x86 architecture due to a lack of registers. CMUCL strictly separated type-tagged and immediate data types and the garbage collector would rely on knowing that one half of the CPU registers could only hold tagged types and the other half only untagged types. This did not leave enough registers for a Python backend.

After CMU canceled the project (in favor of a Dylan implementation using some of CMUCL&#x27;s compiler base) maintenance has been taken over by a group of volunteers. By 1996 this group was making regular releases on its own infrastructure.

Around the same time a port to Intel&#x27;s x86 architecture was completed, first running on FreeBSD, later Linux. The problem of lacking registers was solved by a new conservative garbage collector. This new garbage collector accepts any value of any type in the registers, and treats anything that might be a pointer as a pointer for the purpose of not collecting or moving its target.

==Compiler and other code execution units==
* CMUCL features an interpreter that is mainly used for the REPL, but can be used for faster loading of Lisp files that don&#x27;t need compilation.
* A machine to interpret compact bytecode (which can be emitted from the compiler). This is rarely used now, but was popular in early CMUCL releases because image sizes were drastically reduced at a time where download bandwidth on the Internet was low.
* A native code compiler named &quot;Python&quot; (not to be confused with the Python programming language). If Common Lisp source code has been written with appropriate declarations and is organized with speed in mind the Python compiler generates code that is almost free from overhead compared to code compiled from languages like C++. Some inefficiencies such as function call interfaces and lack of pointer-free arrays of user-defined data types are dictated by the Common Lisp standard and still need to be worked around (e.g. by inlining more and using macros to build constructs that look like user-defined structures but are actually accessing fields in preallocated specialized arrays). The Python compiler also features powerful type inferences, helping the programmer in writing overhead-free code by either inferring types automatically or issuing hints about missed optimization opportunities.

==Features==
* Generational garbage collection and multiprocessing capability on the x86 ports.
* A foreign function interface which allows interfacing with C code and system libraries, including shared libraries on most platforms, and direct access to Unix system calls.
* Support for interprocess communication and remote procedure calls.
* An implementation of CLOS, the Common Lisp Object System, which includes multimethods and a metaobject protocol.
* A graphical source-level debugger using a Motif interface, and a code profiler.
* An interface to the X11 Window System (CLX), and a sophisticated graphical widget library (Garnet).
* Programmer-extensible input and output streams.
* Hemlock, an Emacs-like editor implemented in Common Lisp.

==See also==

*Steel Bank Common Lisp

==References==
==External links==
*CMUCL Home Page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1023897" start="0" end="5" title="CMU Common Lisp" label="CMUCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="11" end="15" title="free software" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="16" end="27" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="68" end="94" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="116" end="125" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="147" end="152" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="157" end="160" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="187" end="194" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427296" start="209" end="231" title="Steel Bank Common Lisp" label="Steel Bank Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="259" end="279" title="Scieneer Common Lisp" label="Scieneer Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493421" start="398" end="408" title="Spice Lisp" label="Spice Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268744" start="1014" end="1019" title="Dylan (programming language)" label="Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="1303" end="1310" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1318" end="1323" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032810" start="1703" end="1707" title="REPL" label="REPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="2062" end="2070" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="2121" end="2152" title="Python (programming language)" label="the Python programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q586459" start="2786" end="2800" title="type inference" label="type inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="2983" end="3001" title="garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392311" start="3055" end="3081" title="foreign function interface" label="foreign function interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q8095398" start="3151" end="3167" title="shared libraries" label="shared libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="3208" end="3212" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q722192" start="3213" end="3225" title="system calls" label="system calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="3241" end="3267" title="interprocess communication" label="interprocess communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q62270" start="3272" end="3293" title="remote procedure call" label="remote procedure call"/>
<link wikidata="Q252340" start="3319" end="3323" title="CLOS" label="CLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136830" start="3455" end="3460" title="Motif (software)" label="Motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138496" start="3478" end="3491" title="code profiler" label="code profiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="3515" end="3532" title="X11 Window System" label="X11 Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130207" start="3647" end="3654" title="Hemlock (text editor)" label="Hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189722" start="3659" end="3664" title="Emacs" label="Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427296" start="3721" end="3743" title="Steel Bank Common Lisp" label="Steel Bank Common Lisp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969662" wikidata="Q744831" url="?curid=969662" title="Mridangam">
<text>The mridangam is an ancient percussion instrument originating from the Indian subcontinent. It is the primary rhythmic accompaniment in a Carnatic music ensemble. In Dhrupad, a modified version, the pakhawaj, is the primary percussion instrument. A related instrument is the Kendang, played in Maritime Southeast Asia. Its a complex instrument to tune and involves a lot of mathematics to construct korvais.

During a percussion ensemble, the mridangam is often accompanied by the ghatam, the kanjira, and the morsing.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;Mridangam&quot; is formulated by the union (sandhi) of the two Sanskrit words &quot;mŗd&quot; (clay or earth) and &quot;anga&quot; (limb), as the earliest versions of the instrument were made of hardened clay.

== Legend ==
In ancient Hindu sculpture, painting, and mythology, the mridangam is often depicted as the instrument of choice for a number of deities including Ganesha (the remover of obstacles) and Nandi, who is the vehicle and follower of Shiva. Nandi is said to have played the mridangam during Shiva&#x27;s primordial &quot;tandava&quot; dance, causing a divine rhythm to resound across the heavens. The mridangam is thus also known as &quot;deva vaadyam,&quot; or &quot;Divine Instrument&quot;.

==History==
Over the years, the mridangam evolved and was made from different kinds of wood for increased durability, and today, its body is constructed from the wood of the jackfruit tree. It is widely believed that the tabla, the mridangam&#x27;s Hindustani musical counterpart, was first constructed by splitting a mridangam in half. With the development of the mridangam came the tala (rhythm) system.

The mridangam has a large role in Newa music. One of the earliest Nepal Bhasa manuscripts on music is a treatise on this instrument called Mridanga anukaranam.

The range of its use has changed over the years. In the old days, percussionists were only employed to accompany the lead player, often the vocalist. Now its use is not restricted to accompaniment, and it is used for solo performances.

===Tamil culture===

In Tamil culture, it is called a &quot;tannumai.&quot; The earliest mention of the mridangam in Tamil literature is found perhaps in the Sangam literature where the instrument is known as &#x27;tannumai&#x27;. In later works, like the Silappadikaram, we find detailed references to it as in the Natyasastra. During the Sangam period, it was one of the principal percussion instruments used to sound the beginning of war, along with the murasu, &quot;tudi&quot; and &quot;parai&quot;, because it was believed that its holy sound would deflect enemy arrows and protect the King. During the post-Sangam period, as mentioned in the epic Silappadikaram, it formed a part of the &quot;antarakoṭṭu &quot; - a musical ensemble which performed at the beginning of dramatic performances, and that would later develop into Bharathanatyam. The player of this instrument held the title &quot;tannumai aruntozhil mutalvan&quot;.

==Construction==

The mridangam is a double-sided drum whose body is usually made using a hollowed piece of jackfruit wood about an inch thick. The two mouths or apertures of the drum are covered with a goat, cow or buffalo skin and laced to each other with leather straps along the length of the drum. These straps are put into a state of high tension to stretch out the circular membranes on either side of the hull, allowing them to resonate when struck. These two membranes are dissimilar in diameter to allow for the production of both bass and treble sounds from the same drum.

The bass aperture is known as the &quot;thoppi&quot; or &quot;eda bhaaga&quot; and the smaller aperture is known as the &quot;valanthalai&quot; or &quot;bala bhaaga&quot;. The smaller membrane, when struck, produces higher pitched sounds with a metallic timbre. The wider aperture produces lower pitched sounds. The goat skin covering the smaller aperture is anointed in the center with a black disk made of rice flour, ferric oxide powder and starch. This black tuning paste is known as the &quot;satham&quot; or &quot;karanai&quot; and gives the mridangam its distinct metallic timbre.

The combination of two inhomogeneous circular membranes allows for the production of unique and distinct harmonics. Pioneering work on the mathematics of these harmonics was done by Nobel Prize-winning physicist C. V. Raman.

==Methods of use==
Immediately prior to use in a performance, the leather covering the wider aperture is made moist and a spot of paste made from semolina (rawa) and water is applied to the center, which lowers the pitch of the wider membrane and gives it a very powerful resonating bass sound. Nowadays, rubber gum is also used to loosen the membrane helping in creating the bass sound, and its advantage is that unlike semolina, it will not stick on hands. The artist tunes the instrument by varying the tension of the leather straps spanning the hull of the instrument. This is achieved by placing the mridangam upright with its larger side facing down, and then striking the tension-bearing straps located along of circumference of the smaller membrane with a heavy object (such as a stone). A wooden peg is sometimes placed between the stone and the mridangam during the tuning procedure to ensure that the force is exerted at precisely the point where it is needed. Striking the periphery of the smaller membrane in the direction toward the hull raises the pitch, while striking the periphery from the opposite side (away from the hull) lowers the pitch. The pitch must be uniform and balanced at all points along the circumference of the valanthalai for the sound to resonate perfectly. The pitch can be balanced with the aid of a pitch pipe or a tambura. The larger membrane can also be tuned in a similar manner, though it is not done as frequently. Note that since the leather straps are interwoven between both the smaller and larger aperture, adjusting the tension on one side often can affect the tension on the other.

==Posture==

The mridangam is played resting it almost parallel to the floor. A right-handed mridangam artist plays the smaller membrane with their right hand and the larger membrane with the left hand.

The mridangam rests above the right ankle (but not on it), the right leg being slightly extended, while the left leg is bent and rests against the hull of the drum and against the torso of the artist. It is extremely important that the two sides of the hips are level, to prevent a habitual lateral pelvic tilt. For a left-handed percussionist, the legs and hands are switched.

It is not uncommon for artists to use stands for the miruthangam so the body is not loaded in an asymmetrical position.

There have recently been reports of gradually altered gait and balance, varying in severity, in those that play the mridangam for long periods of time in asymmetrical positions, especially with poor attention to body posture. Some schools do not pay attention to posture and health so it is important to find a school that does so, and to ensure that teachers are experienced and licensed to teach. Additionally, the nature of the drum makes it difficult to avoid a symmetrical position for the two sides of the body. Perhaps, new innovations for the miruthangam will adapt it in such a way that circumvents this issue.
Issues caused by asymmetrical body position include functional (not structural) scoliosis, uneven shoulders and hips, and this may cause issues further down limbs, such as the gradual turning in of sole of the right foot to face medially. The asymmetry throughout the body may cause mild balance issues. As well as impairing sporting prowess, it can impair one&#x27;s ability to maintain good cardiovascular health, leading to the development of associated health conditions. If the body becomes uneven to the point of impairing balance, this too can affect one&#x27;s daily life. It can also affect one&#x27;s self image through changing gait and balance – especially in male artists.

It is not known how prevalent the issues are and some artists do not experience any symptoms, although this might be due to an awareness of health and physical appearance not being so significant some countries. Research has yet to be done on the association to physical impairments when the drum is played with a stand.

Musicians should also watch out for uneven shoulder positions when playing the drum, which may be unavoidable. It is recommended that musicians sits completely straight, with hips, spine and shoulders completely even and relaxed. Wooden stands may help alleviate issues with scoliosis, uneven shoulders, hips and its associated issues at the knee and ankles. The impacts can result in difficulty in walking and running efficiently and may cause pain later in life and in old age. Whether strength training and stretching may alleviate these problems is yet to be researched. Therefore, it is strongly advised to notify minors and their parents of issues associated with the drum so that they can make informed decisions on whether to play the drum. When played without adequate care to posture, the miruthangam has the potential to have lifelong effects on one&#x27;s physical health. Regular stretching, weight training, and sports are advisable but may not prevent impairments.

Western physiotherapists may struggle to comprehend the issues faced because they are unfamiliar with the nature of the drum. Even when the issues are well understood, it is not known whether such long-term changes to the body can be reversed.

Such conditions may be avoided through learning from experienced, licensed teachers.

Research on the miruthangam and postural issues are yet to be done.

==Strokes==

Basic strokes on the mridangam:

*Tha: Non-vibrating tone played on the left-hand side with the whole palm / Non-vibrating tone played on the right-hand side with 3 fingers.
*Thee: Non-vibrating tone played on the center black portion of the right-hand side using middle, ring, and small fingers.
*Thom: Vibrating tone played on the outer side of the left-hand side.
*Nam: Vibrating tone played on the outer layer of the right-hand side using the index finger, minimizing the black portion vibration with middle or ring finger- place the third finger in the gap in-ring and the second finger hits the outer layer of the right-hand side of the Mrudangam (called &#x27;Saatham&#x27;).

There is also a parallel set of rhythmic solfa passages (known as &quot;solkattu&quot;) which is sounded by mouth to mimic the sounds of the mridangam. Students of this art are required to learn and vigorously practice both the fingering strokes and solfa passages to achieve proficiency and accuracy in this art.

Advanced strokes:

Many other strokes are also taught as the training becomes more advanced, which are generally used as aesthetic embellishments while playing. These notes include gumki (or gamakam), and chaapu. The combination of these finger strokes produces complex mathematical patterns that have both aesthetic and theoretical appeal. Increasingly complex calculations (kanakku) and metres (nadais) may be employed when the mridangam is played.

*Ta: A sharp flat note played with the index finger in the middle of the black portion on the right side of the mridangam.
*Gumukki: A variating bass tone produced by playing on the inner layer of the lower end of the left-hand side. Sound is produced only when there is a special applied paste.
*Full Chapu: It is a vibrating tone played with the small finger on the right-hand side, between the black patch and the outer layer. The sound is tuned to the tonic of the tambura.
*Ara Chapu: A note similar to Chapu, but is an octave higher, and is played with the side of the hand and less of the pinky.
*Dhin: A vibrational tone version of nam played on the black portion of the mridangam.

Classically, training is by dharmic apprenticeship and includes both the yoga of drum construction and an emphasis on the internal discipline of voicing mridangam tone and rhythm both syllabically and linguistically, in accordance with Rigveda, more than on mere performance.

Types of Talam, each with specific angas and aksharas:
*Dhruva thaalam
*Matya talam
*Rupaka talam
*Jhampa talam
*Ata talam
*Eka talam
*Triputa talam

==Modern usage==

Today the mridangam is most widely used in Carnatic music performances. These performances take place all over Southern India and are now popular all over the world. As the principal rhythmic accompaniment (&quot;pakkavadyam&quot;), the mridangam has a place of utmost importance, ensuring all of the other artists are keeping their timing in check while providing support to the main artist. One of the highlights of a modern Carnatic music concert is the percussion solo (&quot;thani avarthanam&quot;), where the mridangam artist and other percussionists such as kanjira, morsing, and ghatam vidwans exchange various complex rhythmic patterns, culminating in a grand finale where the main artist resumes where he or she left off.

Mridangam is used as an accompanying instrument in Yakshagana Himmela (orchestra) where it is called the maddale. However, the mridangam used in Yakshagana is markedly different in structure and acoustics from the ones used in Carnatic music.

Significant players of the mridangam in modern times are T. K. Murthy, Dandamudi Ram Mohan Rao, T. V. Gopalakrishnan, Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman, Vellore G. Ramabhadran, T S Nandakumar, Karaikudi Mani, Trichy Sankaran, Mannargudi Easwaran, Yella Venkateswara Rao, Srimushnam V. Raja Rao, and Thiruvarur Bakthavathsalam, who have been playing and advancing the technique for decades.

==Mridangamela==

Mridangamela is a synchronized performance of mridangam by a group of artists. The concept of Mridangamela was developed by Korambu Subrahmanian Namboodiri and is currently propagated by Korambu Vikraman Namboodiri.

Mridangamela is designed to be easily performed and managed even when performed by a group of children. It is common that the age of artists can range from 3 years to above. Most Mridangamelas are performed by children soon after their initiation to learning mridangam. A teaching method developed to train for Mridangamela made this easy to be taught and contributed to its popularity.

In Koodalmanikyam Temple, Irinjalakuda, it is a tradition that Mridangamela is held by children of the age group 3 years and above, as soon as the Utsavam is flagged off. This is performed as an offering to Lord Bharata, who is the deity of Koodalmanikyam Temple.

In 2014, Mridangamela by 75 children was performed at Chembai Sangeetholsavam, which is the annual Carnatic music festival held in Guruvayur by the Guruvayur Devaswom. Mridangamela had been performed at Chembai Sangeetholsavam for the past 35 years orchestrated by Korambu Mridanga Kalari.

==Players==
Over the years and especially during the early 20th century, great maestros of mridangam also arose, inevitably defining &quot;schools&quot; of mridangam with distinct playing styles. Examples include the Puddukottai school and the Thanjavur school. The virtuosos Palani Subramaniam Pillai, Palghat Mani Iyer and C.S. Murugabhupathy contributed so much to the art that they are often referred to as the Mridangam Trinity.

===Past players===
===Current players===
* Vishal Narayan
* T. K. Murthy
* Umayalpuram K Sivaraman
* T. V. Gopalakrishnan 
* Trichy Sankaran
* Guruvayur Dorai
* Salem S. Ranganathan
* T S Nandakumar
* Yella Venkateswara Rao
* Mannargudi Easwaran
* Thiruvarur Bakthavathsalam
* A. V. Anand
* Dandamudi Sumathi Ram Mohan Rao
* Srimushnam V. Raja Rao
* Patri Satish Kumar
* Anoor Anantha Krishna Sharma
* Trichur C. Narendran
* K V Prasad
* Anantha R Krishnan 
* Tiruvarur Vaidyanathan
* Neyveli R. Narayanan
* Erickavu N. Sunil
* H. S. Sudhindra
* B C Manjunath
* Paramaswamy Kirupakaran
* Adithya Ramaswamy Krishnan
* D.A.Srinivas
* Sangeetha Kalajothi V. R. Panchalingam

==See also==

*Khol
*Thavil
*Karatalas
*Trống cơm – a similar Vietnamese instrument

==References==
==External links==
* Rhythmic Syllables article by Mannarkoil J Balaji 
* Rhythmic Descent in Karnatic Music by Mannarkoil J Balaji</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="28" end="49" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="71" end="90" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q956883" start="138" end="152" title="Carnatic music" label="Carnatic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q59158" start="166" end="173" title="Dhrupad" label="Dhrupad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046658" start="199" end="207" title="pakhawaj" label="pakhawaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553249" start="275" end="282" title="Kendang" label="Kendang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="294" end="317" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q859091" start="481" end="487" title="ghatam" label="ghatam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997355" start="493" end="500" title="kanjira" label="kanjira"/>
<link wikidata="Q13399266" start="510" end="517" title="morsing" label="morsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q206945" start="593" end="599" title="sandhi" label="sandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="612" end="620" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436500" start="695" end="730" title="Khol" label="earliest versions of the instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="784" end="789" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579" start="920" end="927" title="Ganesha" label="Ganesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q841255" start="959" end="964" title="Nandi (bull)" label="Nandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="1001" end="1006" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093280" start="1088" end="1095" title="tandava" label="tandava"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="1435" end="1444" title="jackfruit" label="jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="1482" end="1487" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="1510" end="1520" title="Hindustani classical music" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896571" start="1645" end="1649" title="Tala (music)" label="tala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016547" start="1702" end="1712" title="Newa music" label="Newa music"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="1734" end="1745" title="Nepal Bhasa" label="Nepal Bhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q550599" start="2382" end="2393" title="Natyasastra" label="Natyasastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="2406" end="2419" title="Sangam period" label="Sangam period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115588" start="2720" end="2734" title="Silappadikaram" label="Silappadikaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q334156" start="2899" end="2913" title="Bharathanatyam" label="Bharathanatyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="3544" end="3548" title="bass (sound)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="3553" end="3559" title="clef" label="treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="4008" end="4020" title="ferric oxide" label="ferric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659439" start="4051" end="4063" title="Syahi" label="tuning paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q60429" start="4389" end="4400" title="Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman" label="C. V. Raman"/>
<link wikidata="Q381350" start="4549" end="4557" title="semolina" label="semolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757934" start="5741" end="5751" title="pitch pipe" label="pitch pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164636" start="5757" end="5764" title="Tanpura" label="tambura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271779" start="6164" end="6172" title="diaphragm (acoustics)" label="membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584013" start="13134" end="13144" title="Yakshagana" label="Yakshagana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557967" start="13188" end="13195" title="maddale" label="maddale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668434" start="13384" end="13396" title="T. K. Murthy" label="T. K. Murthy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13398" end="13421" title="Dandamudi Ram Mohan Rao" label="Dandamudi Ram Mohan Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668777" start="13423" end="13443" title="T. V. Gopalakrishnan" label="T. V. Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108773" start="13445" end="13469" title="Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman" label="Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114795" start="13471" end="13493" title="Vellore G. Ramabhadran" label="Vellore G. Ramabhadran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367993" start="13511" end="13525" title="Karaikudi Mani" label="Karaikudi Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383421" start="13527" end="13542" title="Trichy Sankaran" label="Trichy Sankaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750762" start="13544" end="13563" title="Mannargudi Easwaran" label="Mannargudi Easwaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279923" start="13565" end="13587" title="Yella Venkateswara Rao" label="Yella Venkateswara Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785527" start="13617" end="13643" title="Thiruvarur Bakthavathsalam" label="Thiruvarur Bakthavathsalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430517" start="14335" end="14356" title="Koodalmanikyam Temple" label="Koodalmanikyam Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754141" start="14358" end="14370" title="Irinjalakuda" label="Irinjalakuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090329" start="14800" end="14823" title="Chembai Sangeetholsavam" label="Chembai Sangeetholsavam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126711" start="15164" end="15189" title="Palani Subramaniam Pillai" label="Palani Subramaniam Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361411" start="15191" end="15208" title="Palghat Mani Iyer" label="Palghat Mani Iyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288929" start="15213" end="15232" title="C.S. Murugabhupathy" label="C.S. Murugabhupathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15366" end="15380" title="Vishal Narayan" label="Vishal Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668434" start="15383" end="15395" title="T. K. Murthy" label="T. K. Murthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108773" start="15398" end="15421" title="Umayalpuram K Sivaraman" label="Umayalpuram K Sivaraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668777" start="15424" end="15444" title="T. V. Gopalakrishnan" label="T. V. Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383421" start="15448" end="15463" title="Trichy Sankaran" label="Trichy Sankaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620571" start="15466" end="15481" title="Guruvayur Dorai" label="Guruvayur Dorai"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279923" start="15524" end="15546" title="Yella Venkateswara Rao" label="Yella Venkateswara Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750762" start="15549" end="15568" title="Mannargudi Easwaran" label="Mannargudi Easwaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785527" start="15571" end="15597" title="Thiruvarur Bakthavathsalam" label="Thiruvarur Bakthavathsalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648457" start="15600" end="15611" title="A. V. Anand" label="A. V. Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q105077194" start="15614" end="15645" title="Dandamudi Sumathi Ram Mohan Rao" label="Dandamudi Sumathi Ram Mohan Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586415" start="15648" end="15670" title="Srimushnam V. Raja Rao" label="Srimushnam V. Raja Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145235" start="15673" end="15691" title="Patri Satish Kumar" label="Patri Satish Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770064" start="15694" end="15722" title="Anoor Anantha Krishna Sharma" label="Anoor Anantha Krishna Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841092" start="15725" end="15745" title="Trichur C. Narendran" label="Trichur C. Narendran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15748" end="15758" title="K V Prasad" label="K V Prasad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15761" end="15779" title="Anantha R Krishnan" label="Anantha R Krishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24928103" start="15783" end="15805" title="Tiruvarur Vaidyanathan" label="Tiruvarur Vaidyanathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388199" start="15831" end="15848" title="Erickavu N. Sunil" label="Erickavu N. Sunil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15851" end="15866" title="H. S. Sudhindra" label="H. S. Sudhindra"/>
<link wikidata="Q795192" start="15869" end="15882" title="B C Manjunath" label="B C Manjunath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15885" end="15908" title="Paramaswamy Kirupakaran" label="Paramaswamy Kirupakaran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15911" end="15937" title="Adithya Ramaswamy Krishnan" label="Adithya Ramaswamy Krishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436500" start="16010" end="16014" title="Khol" label="Khol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355394" start="16016" end="16022" title="Thavil" label="Thavil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672803" start="16024" end="16033" title="Karatalas" label="Karatalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849273" start="16035" end="16044" title="Trống cơm" label="Trống cơm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969664" wikidata="Q6632877" url="?curid=969664" title="List of people from Yorkshire">
<text>This is a list of people from Yorkshire. Yorkshire is the largest historic county in both England and the United Kingdom. Some of the most notable figures from the county are:

==Lawyers and Jurists==

Brenda Hale, President of the British Supreme Court, 2017–present

==Inventors, explorers, scientists and pioneers==

==Politicians and activists==


==Writers==


==Saints==

== Entertainers ==

===Actors and actresses===
===Television performers===

===Musicians and bands===

==Sport==
==Artists and sculptors==

==Crime==
==People in fiction==
*&quot;Dracula&quot; by Bram Stoker: A Russian ship, the &quot;Demeter&quot;, having weighed anchor at Varna, runs aground on the shores of Whitby, North Yorkshire, England, during a fierce tempest. Whitby continues to celebrate its link with Dracula, as well as its Victorian gothic past
*Beedle the Bard: In J. K. Rowling&#x27;s &quot;Harry Potter&quot; wizarding world, he is the fictional author of &quot;The Tales of Beedle the Bard&quot;. Beedle was born in Yorkshire in the 15th century.
*Robinson Crusoe: The title character from the novel by Daniel Defoe is from York
* Robin Ellacott, Cormoran Strike&#x27;s detective partner in the Cormoran Strike series by Robert Galbraith, was raised in Masham, North Yorkshire

==Others==
*Thomas Wedders, circus sideshow performer.

==See also==
*List of people from Kingston upon Hull
*List of people from Leeds
*List of people from Sheffield
*List of people from the East Riding of Yorkshire
*List of people from North Yorkshire
*List of people from South Yorkshire
*List of people from West Yorkshire
*List of Yorkshire County Cricket Club players

==References==
==External links==
*Yorkshire-Icons.com – covering the most notable Yorkshire people</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6632877" start="10" end="40" title="List of people from Yorkshire" label="list of people from Yorkshire."/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="41" end="50" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q908568" start="202" end="267" title="Brenda Hale, Baroness Hale of Richmond" label="Brenda Hale, President of the British Supreme Court, 2017–present"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="557" end="564" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="574" end="585" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="653" end="658" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q852778" start="690" end="696" title="Whitby" label="Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="860" end="873" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="887" end="899" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410773" start="906" end="921" title="Harry Potter universe" label="wizarding world"/>
<link wikidata="Q165068" start="959" end="987" title="The Tales of Beedle the Bard" label="The Tales of Beedle the Bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q483034" start="1046" end="1061" title="Robinson Crusoe" label="Robinson Crusoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="1101" end="1113" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417290" start="1145" end="1160" title="Cormoran Strike" label="Cormoran Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="1219" end="1235" title="J. K. Rowling" label="Robert Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330678" start="1251" end="1257" title="Masham" label="Masham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794946" start="1288" end="1302" title="Thomas Wedders" label="Thomas Wedders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632528" start="1346" end="1384" title="List of people from Kingston upon Hull" label="List of people from Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249954" start="1386" end="1411" title="List of people from Leeds" label="List of people from Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q954806" start="1413" end="1442" title="List of people from Sheffield" label="List of people from Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1444" end="1492" title=":Category:People from the East Riding of Yorkshire" label="List of people from the East Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1494" end="1529" title=":Category:People from North Yorkshire" label="List of people from North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632771" start="1531" end="1566" title="List of people from South Yorkshire" label="List of people from South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632855" start="1568" end="1602" title="List of people from West Yorkshire" label="List of people from West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604574" start="1604" end="1649" title="List of Yorkshire CCC players" label="List of Yorkshire County Cricket Club players"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969666" wikidata="Q1896325" url="?curid=969666" title="William Phips">
<text>Sir William Phips (or Phipps; February 2, 1651 – February 18, 1695) was born in Maine in the Massachusetts Bay Colony and was of humble origin, uneducated, and fatherless from a young age but rapidly advanced from shepherd boy to shipwright, ship&#x27;s captain, and treasure hunter, the first New England native to be knighted, and the first royally appointed governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay. Phips was famous in his lifetime for recovering a large treasure from a sunken Spanish galleon but is perhaps best remembered today for establishing the court associated with the infamous Salem Witch Trials, which he grew unhappy with and was forced to prematurely disband after five months.

==Early life==

Phips was born the son of James and Mary Phips in a frontier settlement at Nequasset (present-day Woolwich, Maine), near the mouth of the Kennebec River, on February 2, 1651. His father died when the boy was six years old, and his mother married a neighbor and business partner, John White. Although Cotton Mather in his biography of Phips claimed that he was one of 26 children, this number is likely an exaggeration or includes many who did not survive infancy. His mother is known to have had six children by James Phips and eight by White. His father was poor, but his ancestry may have descended from country gentry in Nottinghamshire, at least technically. Constantine Phipps, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, seems to have been a cousin of Phips, five years his junior.

Phips watched over his family&#x27;s flock of sheep, according to Mather, until the age of 18, after which he began a four-year apprenticeship as a ship&#x27;s carpenter. He received no formal schooling. Despite a keen intelligence, his literacy skills were likely rudimentary. Robert Calef wrote, &quot;It will be generally acknowledged, that not withstanding the meanness of his parentage and education, he attained to be master of a Ship.&quot; Once Phips achieved wealth and fame, he relied on a personal secretary and scribes for assistance, as was common for many figures of the time.

After his apprenticeship ended in 1673, Phips traveled to Boston, where he continued to employ his shipmaking and carpentry skills. About a year later, he married Mary Spencer Hull, widow to John Hull (unrelated to Massachusetts mintmaster John Hull). Mary&#x27;s father, Daniel Spencer, was a merchant and landowner with interests in Maine. Phips may have known Mary from an early age. By all accounts, the couple exhibited &quot;genuine affection&quot; for one another, and there is no evidence Phips was unfaithful during his long absences from home.

Phips established a shipyard on the Sheepscot River at Merrymeeting Bay in Maine in 1675 at the outbreak of King Philips War. The shipyard was successful, turning out a number of small boats and building its first large merchant ship in 1676. As he was preparing for its maiden voyage in August 1676, planning to deliver a load of lumber to Boston, a band of Indians descended on the area during the Northeast Coast Campaign (1676). Rather than take on his cargo, he took on board as many of the local settlers as he could. Although he was financially ruined (the Indians destroyed the shipyard and his intended cargo of masts and lumber), Phips was considered a hero among the colonists in Boston.

In the early 1680s, Phips began to engage in a favorite colonial pastime of treasure hunting in the Bahamas. As captain of the &quot;Resolution&quot;, he was seeking treasure from sunken Spanish ships near New Providence. The expedition is not well documented but seems to have been profitable, returning shares worth £54 to certain low-level participants. New England mintmaster John Hull was one of Phips&#x27;s investors. Phips earned a widespread reputation for &quot;continually finding sunken ships&quot;.

== The strange voyage of HMS &quot;Rose of Algeree&quot; ==

=== Narborough&#x27;s treasure hunt ===
On May 2, 1683, the captain of the frigate HMS &quot;Falcon&quot; was sailing from England to the West Indies and beckoned the other officers to be present as he broke open his secret instructions. He learned that his mission was to aid in the hunt for a large treasure near Hispaniola. A sloop in convoy, HMS &quot;Bonetta&quot; (sometimes &quot;Bonito&quot;), was designated to do most of the searching, but &quot;Falcon&quot; would act as aid and protection. These instructions were from Sir John Narborough, a rear admiral and commissioner of the Royal Navy, who also had the ear of King Charles II.

Around this same time, the thirty-two-year-old Phips had made his way to England, where he gained an audience with Narborough and Charles II. By any measure, this was a remarkable achievement for a poor New Englander like Phips, but it also seems clear that he must have been at the right place at the right time. His reputation for finding sunken ships may have preceded him, and he seems to have had demonstrable gains to show, as one letter writer mentions his &quot;late successful returns.&quot; Perhaps he delivered the King&#x27;s portion of these returns to Whitehall in person. In any case, a reckless plan was concocted, probably by Narborough, whereby this New England native, despite having no background in the English navy, would be assigned as the commander of a 20-gun frigate, HMS &quot;Rose of Algiers,&quot; for a treasure hunt but given no other financial backing. He and his crew would be required to pay for all other expenses of the voyage, including food and diving equipment, and give a deposit of £100. Of the treasure they found, 35% would go to the King, and the rest would be divided among the otherwise unpaid crew.

The plan seemed ill-conceived and suggests that Narborough was obsessed with the possibility of treasure. It is also possible that Phips was being used in a complex way with the sly intention that HMS &quot;Rose&quot; would act as a noisy decoy for his more important treasure hunt. Unlike &quot;Falcon&quot; and &quot;Bonetta&quot;, Phips was not sent directly to search near Hispaniola where Narborough (correctly) believed a great treasure lay buried. Phips&#x27; instructions were not kept secret but were signed by the entire crew, thereby broadcasting their designs through the harbor and shipyards. On July 13, 1683, the articles of agreement (see image) were signed by Phips and seven other crew members, in the presence of Narborough and Haddock.

=== Delivering Randolph, &quot;Evil Genius of New England&quot; ===
Before Phips could set sail, he had another mission added to the manifest. Edward Randolph, &quot;indefatigable foe of Puritans&quot;, was serving Boston with a writ of &quot;quo warranto&quot; against the precious Charter of Massachusetts and searching for a frigate to be the muscle backing him:

It is essential that a frigate should be on the New England coast at such a time to second the &quot;quo warranto&quot; and hasten submission; ... a war vessel be present to awe them.

Randolph hoped such a display would induce New England to submit to revisions of their charter from the Crown, rather than having it fully revoked. On August 3, 1683, Randolph wrote to Sir Leoline Jenkins, &quot;I am now informed that the H.M.S. &quot;Rose&quot; is already fitted out for the Bahamas with orders to call at Boston for 2 or 3 weeks on the way.&quot; Randolph indicates that time is of the essence, and he is willing to travel with Phips or forego the frigate idea and embark on a merchantman. Randolph, along with his brother Bernard, were given passage and cabins on HMS &quot;Rose&quot;.

=== As told by John Knepp ===

Just before the &quot;Rose&quot; set sail, things were complicated again when the Crown decided to place a minder on board named John Knepp &quot;to look after the King&#x27;s interest&quot;. Knepp seems to have been a purser. In the English Navy, the purser acted as a sort of Company Store, tempting sailors far from shore with whiskey, tobacco and other desirables by offering them credit against their wages, (collected through the captain). It was a lucrative post and required an investment to procure, hence it usually went to young Naval clerks and scions who could afford the capital outlay. It seems like a terrible idea to place a purser on a voyage like that of the Rose, on a shoestring budget, with the men receiving no wages and collectively buying and sharing food together. Knepp brought great quantities of fancy cheese and brandy, with predictable results. But either way, the purser was dependent on good relations with the captain, yet Knepp seems to have looked down on Phips and decided to be forward in introducing himself to the crew of HMS Rose while Phips was absent in London. The reception was rather less than friendly:

... then most of them began to curse the ship and wished she had been afire before they saw her and that they had better have hired a ship of merchants ...

The crew were a salty bunch to say the least; a &quot;rum lot&quot; as Peter Earle calls them, and this final last-minute bait-and-switch, after the previous addition of Randolph, seems to have nearly put them over the edge. Everything we know about the crew comes from a detailed journal of the trip to Boston kept by Knepp, and he has rightly been called a &quot;hostile observer&quot;, but he was often ignorant of the complex, dual nature of the voyage, as well as basic colonial politics, if not some important elements of human nature. Distant historians must grope for any available source to shed light on events of the past, and so history tends to be swayed heavily by the writers. Phips was never a writer and so much of his story comes from others, with Knepp&#x27;s Journal at the top of this pile. Like the rest of us, Knepp does not seem to have understood the role Phips was intended to play, either in support of Randolph or as a possible decoy and cleanup for the &quot;Falcon&quot; &amp; &quot;Bonetta&quot;. In Knepp&#x27;s first interaction, he says that he is seeking signatures between the crew and the King though the July 13 agreement (see image) would more accurately be portrayed as between Phips and the crew, as the first mate protests. Knepp&#x27;s job seemed to be to seek additional signatures from the crew, which is easily done when Phips returns to the ship, with Randolph acting as a witness. Next, Knepp complained to Phips about the firing of the ships cannons to set the watch. By the time the ship set sail the next day, Phips and Knepp were distinctly at odds, as Knepp records when asked for a cabin or berth and was told he would have to make do sleeping on a trunk. This was an unfortunate turn of events for both of them, as well as the historian who would prefer to have Knepp at the Captain&#x27;s table recording the dinner conversation between Randolph, his brother, and Phips. Class friction surely played a strong role in the conflict between Knepp and Phips. Knepp consistently presents himself as a victim, and there are many times he is bullied and badly mistreated, but it also seems that he must have set himself above and thought of himself as being of a higher class than Phips. The articles of agreement testify to the trust that the King and Narborough placed in Phips, and the crew seemed willing to do as Phips commanded, but Knepp acts as if he is not beholden to Phips. Knepp&#x27;s journal is addressed to Narborough (and Haddock), and it reads like a sycophant&#x27;s strong gambit for a future promotion. He presents Phips as the trope of a tarpaulin captain—every sailor his comrade, questionable literacy level—and so it is probably safe to infer that Knepp was of the gentleman class and likely some years younger than Phips, perhaps in his mid-twenties. Knepp is excellent at taking coordinates and seems trained in piloting, but does not exhibit a breadth of experience or knowledge of the rigging. Though he records every perceived misstep by Phips, his careful plotting of the journey also shows the great ability Phips possessed as a sailor, crossing the Atlantic in half the time of another ship that they meet and making first landfall at Cape Ann.

=== Randolph arrived at Boston ===
On October 27, Increase Mather recorded his one and only diary entry for all of 1683: &quot;Randolph arrived at Boston.&quot; Phips quickly began to provide a show of force for Randolph by insisting other ships strike their colors and firing across their bows if they did not. Knepp claims that Narborough did not condone this, and many historians have followed his lead in treating Phips&#x27; activities in Boston harbor as arrogant showboating, but it seems clear from the letters of Randolph and Blathwayt that Phips was not doing this merely for some explosive fun. Phips cites personal instructions from the King, and indeed Charles II was known to have insisted on a salute to his flag. As Phips was creating chaos for the Massachusetts government, he continued to pursue his original intention of gathering diving equipment and divers to take to the Bahamas. Phips later followed the same procedures of requiring ships to strike in the West Indies and with a new crew in Bermuda. Phips lack of experience in the Royal Navy would suggest he likely made mistakes and did not always go about this procedure in the best way. It must have been a strange and uncomfortable chore for someone whose loyalties were with Boston (in &#x27;76 the records show initiated the building of a house in Boston). Randolph was never one to withhold criticism, but he did not complain of Phips activities in Boston harbor that winter, and Randolph even seems to have assisted Phips by searching a ship for him. But choosing a threatening posture showed Randolph&#x27;s inability to understand the New England character, and it did not produce the effect Randolph intended. The magistrates voted to submit to the crown, but the deputies resisted. Phips and the &quot;Rose&quot; became a focal point for the resistance, as Knepp dutifully recorded without understanding the subtext: &quot;Phips crew say that they would as soon fire against this town as against Algiers and called us rebels,&quot; is one deposition Knepp records though Knepp seems to believe he is merely recording a barroom brawl. &quot; ... one of the constables in particular told him that he thought Capt. Phips had been a town born child, Captain Phips answering him, &#x27;Let him be what he would, he had been sworn at sixteen years of age to be true to the King and his government.&quot; (As if in an act of delayed vengeance, HMS &quot;Rose&quot; would be boarded and demasted, and its captain John George imprisoned, less than six years later during the Boston revolt.)

Randolph&#x27;s writ of &quot;quo warranto&quot; required a response from Massachusetts by the end of &quot;Michaelmas term.&quot; Empty-handed, Randolph and his brother boarded a pink bound for England on December 14. A few days later, Phips began making preparations but was detained by problems with the Boston government and the ongoing search for victuals. In a discussion with Phips, Knepp allows, as a purser, that many of the crew owe him money and says that he would have them thrown into jail except that it would hinder His Majesty&#x27;s treasure hunt. Phips finally sailed clear of the Boston Harbor on January 19, 1684 but unfortunately not before some of his rogue-ish crew could cause a small riot in Boston and perpetrate a despicable assault in Hull, according to Knepp. Knepp was not on board, meaning he had effectively deserted according to the Articles, &quot;though I should be almost undone by it&quot; and so it became all the more important for Knepp to show Phips in a bad light.

Two days after Phips left the Boston area, Increase Mather gave a rousing speech to the deputies and freemen advising them not to submit to the Crown and to resist the &quot;quo warranto&quot;. One historian calls this Increase Mather&#x27;s &quot;first important entry into politics.&quot; {Mather&#x27;s &quot;Remarkable Providences&quot; was distributed this same month, with echoes to the New England government Increase Mather assembles in 1692.} It had been Phips&#x27; debut into colonial politics too, if clumsily and involuntarily. To what extent he was swayed by the arguments of Randolph as they crossed the Atlantic, it is hard to know, but Phips certainly played the role with bluster, and he seems to have spoken up as a royalist to the Boston government in the meetings he had with Bradstreet and Stoughton, at least as recorded by Knepp. By 1688, Phips had crossed over to Increase Mather&#x27;s side and begun to consistently oppose Randolph and the Dominion government he helped bring about and with a vehemence that would seem to suggest some degree of shame and dismay for the role he played as Captain of HMS &quot;Rose&quot; in 1683–84.

After leaving Boston, Phips searched the picked over wrecks in the Bahamas with limited success. Too many other treasure hunters had already gone before. When some of his crew became mutinous, he had them put off in Jamaica. On November 18, 1684, Phips was in Port Royal, Jamaica, the same time as Captain Stanley of the &quot;Bonetta&quot;. There is no record of their joining forces or sharing information. It seems likely they met up, but it is unknown if it was preordained. If Phips was unwittingly being used as a decoy to distract the other treasure hunters away from Stanley, it might have dawned on him at this time. Soon afterward, Phips visited the north coast of Hispaniola and slowly cruised north exploring the banks where Stanley had been diligently searching for over a year. The decisiveness with which Phips later returned and quickly located the treasure suggests that he was able to gather valuable knowledge and began to formulate a clear plan, though he would have to wait two years to bring it to fruition.

After Phips returned to London in August 1685, Samuel Pepys ordered the Navy Board to assess the &quot;Rose&quot;. Pepys had been out of power when Narborough set the strange plan in motion. In March and May 1686, Phips was ordered to attend the Lord Treasurer, where it was found that the king was only to receive £471 in treasure, though the wear and tear on the &quot;Rose&quot; was estimated at £700. In this age of piracy and high mortality, Phips making it back to London alive and with the King&#x27;s ship still afloat was probably enough for him to pass the test. Already Narborough had a new plan in the works for Captain Phips, though this time it would be a private venture. Narborough&#x27;s long infatuation with the Hispaniola treasure had not been diminished by Captain Stanley&#x27;s discouragement on the &quot;Bonetta&quot;. And Knepp&#x27;s report on Phips did not disqualify him. Phips had shown that he was serviceable: willing to harass the harbor of his hometown and to compromise between his own interests and the interests of the Crown. This was surely noted at Whitehall, even by the more conservative elements.

== Striking silver and gold ==
With Captain Stanley of the &quot;Bonetta&quot; expressing disinterest in continuing to search for the Hispaniola treasure, while Captain Phips probably expressed enthusiasm and new confidence, the next logical choice for commander was obvious. Narborough turned to the hard-partying Duke of Albemarle who assembled a group of private investors to fund another expedition. Phips was tasked with finding suitable ships and these came to be the &quot;James and Mary&quot;, a 22-gun 200-ton frigate, and the 45-ton &quot;Henry of London&quot;, a sloop commanded by Francis Rogers, Phips&#x27; second mate on the previous voyage (he had left the &quot;Rose&quot; in Boston ISTG Vol 4 - Salee Rose). Phips utilized experience as a sailor and shipwright to select high quality anchors, chains, and cables to hold their ships securely in close proximity to the shoals for months as they tried to fish treasure from it. £500 worth of merchandize was taken along to barter for provisions, as well as to provide cover, or a ruse, that they were in Hispaniola merely as merchants, not treasure hunters. The London investors must have felt confident because they paid a total of £3,210 outfitting the ships for the voyage. Unlike the voyage of the &quot;Rose&quot;, the crew were to be paid regular wages.
Phips sailed from the Downs on September 12, 1686, and on November 28, arrived in Hispaniola, Samana Bay, where they spent two weeks restocking their water and provender. The weather was bad, and the search consequently did not get underway for a few more weeks. On January 12, Phips sent out Captain Rogers in the smaller &quot;Henry of London&quot; along with three Native American divers (including Jonas Abimeleck and John Pasqua; the name of the other diver is not listed) to search what was then called the Ambrosia Bank (now the Silver Bank). There was a bit more delay due to the weather, but Peter Earle writes, &quot;There is no doubt that he knew exactly where he was going.&quot; On January 20, they spotted cannons from a shipwreck lying on the white sands of the reef. The ship they had found was the Almiranta of the Spanish silver fleet (later determined to be &quot;Nuestra Señora de la Concepción&quot;; the English did not know the name of the ship) wrecked in 1641. Over the next two days, the divers were able to bring up 3,000 coins and 3 silver bars. They decided to travel back to Phips to let him know, but this turned out to be a somewhat slow and treacherous trip among the reefs.

After Phips was discreetly informed of their amazing find, he spent the next nine days preparing the ships and gathering enough food to sustain the men over months of bringing up treasure. (During the controversies that surrounded Phips at the end of his life, his critics like to portray him as hot-headed, ill-bred, and impatient, so it seems worth noting his careful conduct during this life-changing and momentous time.)

Through March and April, the divers and ships&#x27; crews worked to recover all manner of treasure: silver coins, silver bullion, doubloons, jewelry, a small amount of gold, and other artifacts. Concerned about the possibility of mutiny, Phips guaranteed to the crew, who had been hired for seaman&#x27;s wages, that they would receive shares in the find even if he had to pay them from his own percentage. He carefully avoided putting in at any ports before anchoring at Gravesend, where he dispatched a courier to London with the news.

The treasure weighed in at over 34 tons, or £205,536. Almost a quarter went to Albemarle. Phips, after paying out £8,000 in crew shares, received £11,000. Phips was treated as a hero in London, and the find was the talk of the town. Some economic historians argue that Phips&#x27; find significantly affected history, because it led to a major increase in the formation of joint-stock companies and even played a role in the eventual formation of the Bank of England.

Phips and the crew were rewarded by the investors with medals, and Phips was knighted by James in June. James also rewarded Phips with the post of Provost Marshal General (Chief Sheriff) of the Dominion of New England, serving under Sir Edmund Andros. In September 1687, Phips returned to the wreck, though he did not command the venture. Admiral Narborough elected to personally lead the expedition, but it was not nearly as successful. The wreck had been discovered by others, and the arrival of the English scattered more than 20 smaller ships. Treasure worth £10,000 was recovered before Narborough&#x27;s death in May 1688 brought the expedition to an end. Phips had by then already left the wreck site in early May, sailing for Boston for what seems to have been his first time home in four and a half years, to take up his new post as Provost Marshal General.

== Provost Marshal General ==
Phips arrived back in Boston in the summer of 1688 and was welcomed back as a hero. His wife seemed very happy to see him. He was celebrated in sermons and at the Harvard College commencement he was compared to Jason fetching the Golden Fleece. Andros and Randolph were not so happy to see him, and it seems the feeling was mutual. Almost all of New England was unified in their opposition to Andros and Randolph. Phips, despite having been Captain of Randolph&#x27;s gunship in 1683-4, does not seem to have carried an association with Randolph in the minds of the people of Massachusetts Bay.

Andros swore Phips into his new post in early July, but his council refused Phips&#x27; demand that the previously named sheriffs be dismissed. If Phips had simply wanted a share in the spoils of the Dominion, he might have stuck around and kept his head down. Instead, he stayed home in Boston only six weeks before shipping back to London to join with Increase Mather in opposing the Dominion and seeking to restore the original charter. This seems to be the first mention of Phips in Increase Mather&#x27;s diary or correspondence. Motivated by a shared dislike of Andros, Phips and Increase Mather worked together to bring about his downfall. After the Glorious Revolution in late 1688 replaced the Catholic James with the Protestant monarchs William III and Mary II, Phips and Mather petitioned the new monarchs for restoration of the Massachusetts charter and successfully convinced the Lords of Trade to delay the transmission of formal instructions about the change of power to Andros. Phips returned to Boston in May 1689, carrying proclamations from the King and Queen and found Andros and Randolph had already been arrested in a revolt in Boston. Phips served for a time as an Overseer guarding Andros and Randolph in the prison at Castle Island.

== Becoming free: The political baptism of Phips ==
If Paris were worth a mass to Henry IV, Boston was worth a conversion, in the Puritan sense, to William Phips. 

The turmoil in England and William&#x27;s accession to the throne had prompted New France&#x27;s Governor to take advantage of the political turmoil in New England, launching a series of Indian raids across the northern frontier in 1689 and early 1690. When a frontier town in Maine was overrun in early March 1690, the French were perceived as instigators and the provisional government of Massachusetts began casting about for a major general to lead an expedition against the French in Acadia. Phips had not demonstrated military interests as a young man. During King Philip&#x27;s War, when many took up arms, Phips built ships and cut lumber. John Knepp&#x27;s journal testifies to Phips&#x27; constitutional disinterest in military discipline. Yet Phips&#x27; control of a naval gunship, and his subsequent actions, seem to have suggested he was a good candidate to lead a large military expedition. Sewall writes:

Saturday, March 22. Sir William Phips offers himself to go in person, the Governor [Bradstreet] sends for me, and tells me of it, I tell the [General] Court; they send for Sir William who accepts to go, and is appointed to command the forces. Major Townsend relinquishes with thanks. Sir William had been sent to at first; but some feared he would not go; others thought his Lady would not consent. Court makes Sir William free and swear him Major General, and several others. Adjourn to Boston, Wednesday,14 night one o&#x27;clock.

This is Sewall&#x27;s entire entry, and he has no entry for the next day. It shows that Phips, though knighted, one of the richest men in the colony, and highly active on the colony&#x27;s behalf, was not yet able to vote or serve under the provisional government because they were following the old charter, wherein only church members were free. The court, not the church, made Phips free on this Saturday, according to Sewall. Sewall was religiously devout and active in his church congregation and would not likely have misspoken or deliberately withheld information on this point. Sewall&#x27;s diary is generally considered trustworthy and is widely referenced by historians.

Some years later, after Phips&#x27; death and a good bit of political upheaval involving Phips and the Mathers, Cotton Mather anonymously wrote a biography of Phips and sent it away to London for publication although he had Boston printing presses at his beck and call. He implausibly cast this scenario as a spontaneous spiritual awakening, including heartfelt testimony, which Cotton Mather claims to faithfully transcribe &quot;without adding so much as one word unto it.&quot; (Cotton Mather loved puns and inside jokes, which could be interpreted as his sly way of saying Phips wrote &quot;not a single word&quot;.)

Both events are not mutually exclusive. Cotton Mather places the baptism the next day, March 23. The general court in which Cotton Mather played an active role may have made Phips free with the understanding that Cotton Mather would add him to the rolls of the North Church. Records of the North Church show Phips&#x27; name added to admissions. (Curiously, a &quot;B&quot; for &quot;brother&quot; is withheld as prefix to his name, unlike all others. See image.) Another book, mostly recording infant baptisms, lists Phips as &quot;Admitted and Baptized.&quot; Phip&#x27;s wife&#x27;s name does not seems not to appear in the records at all. The admission and baptism of an adult was generally a somewhat drawn-out process over some weeks. There seems to be no surviving record of Phips &quot;coming to the table&quot; to partake in the Lord&#x27;s Supper, as only church members were invited to do.

The only other reference to a baptism of Phips is not first-hand but a sardonic reference by Blathwayt (Randolph&#x27;s boss in London) mentioning Phips being made a general the same year he was &quot;publicly christened at Boston.&quot; Expanding the franchise of New England away from the control of the clergy was one of Blathwayt&#x27;s obsessions, and his comment probably goes to this point, as well as noting Phips loyalty with New England as opposed to the crown. In short, if something like Cotton Mather&#x27;s March 23 church scene happened at all, it should be understood as foremost a political event.

==Major General==
===Port Royal expedition===
In late April, leading a fleet of seven ships and over 700 men, Phips sailed from Boston to the Acadian capital, Port Royal. On May 9 he summoned Governor Louis-Alexandre des Friches de Meneval to surrender. Meneval, in command of about 70 men and a fort in disrepair, promptly negotiated terms of capitulation. When Phips came ashore the next day, it was discovered that Acadians had been removing valuables, including some that were government property (and thus were supposed to come under the victor&#x27;s control).

Phips, whose motives continue to be debated by historians today, claimed this was a violation of the terms of capitulation and consequently declared the agreement void. He allowed his troops to sack the town and destroy the church, acts that he had promised to prevent in the oral surrender agreement. He had the fortifications destroyed, removing all of their weaponry. Before he left, he convinced a number of Acadians to swear oaths of allegiance to the English Crown, appointed a council of locals to administer the town, and then sailed back to Boston, carrying Meneval and his garrison as prisoners of war. Phips received a hero&#x27;s welcome and was lavished with praise, although he was criticized in some circles (and has been vilified in French and Acadian histories) for allowing the sacking of Port Royal.

===Quebec expedition===
In the wake of the success, the Massachusetts provisional government agreed to organize an expedition on a larger scale against Quebec, the capital of New France, and gave its command to Phips. Originally intending to coordinate with a simultaneous overland attack on Montreal launched from Albany, New York, the expedition&#x27;s departure was delayed in the vain hope that needed munitions would arrive from England. The expedition, counting 34 ships and more than 2,000 soldiers, finally sailed on August 20. It was short on ammunition, had no pilots familiar with the Saint Lawrence River, and carried what would turn out to be inadequate provisions.

Because of contrary winds and the difficulty in navigating the Saint Lawrence, the expedition took eight weeks to reach Quebec. The late arrival (wintry conditions were already setting in on the river) and the long voyage meant that it would be impossible to conduct a lengthy siege. Phips sent a message into the citadel demanding its surrender. Governor General Louis de Buade de Frontenac declared that his only response would be from &quot;the mouths of my cannons&quot;. Phips then held a war council, which decided to make a combined land assault and naval bombardment. Both failed. The landing force, 1,200 men led by Major John Walley, were unable to cross the well-defended Saint-Charles River, and the naval bombardment failed because the New Englanders&#x27; guns were unable to reach the high battlements of the city, and they furthermore soon ran out of ammunition. The fighting, according to Phips, cost the expedition 30 deaths and one field cannon, as well as numerous wounded; disease and disaster took an additional toll. Smallpox ravaged the troops, and two transports were lost to accidents; another 200 men were lost to these causes.
The expedition cost the colony £50,000 to mount, for which it issued paper currency, a first in the English colonies. Many of the expedition&#x27;s participants and creditors were unhappy at being paid this way, and Phips generously purchased some of the depreciated paper with hard currency, incurring financial losses in the process. At this same time, Governor Meneval petitioned for the return of minor valuables (silverware and other small items) that Phips had taken. Phips was outraged when the General Council heard Meneval&#x27;s case. He returned to England in February 1691 to seek support for another expedition against Quebec.

== Governor of Massachusetts ==
Soon after returning to England, Phips joined up again with Increase Mather, and again supported him in dealing with Whitehall. Increase Mather&#x27;s diary says they are together on March 25, 1691, and again on March 26. On March 31, they are together as Increase Mather writes a response to the Board of Trade. Also at this meeting is Sir Henry Ashurst. These three—Mather the clergyman, flanked by two knights: Sir William Phips and Sir Henry Ashurst—would emerge later as the major proponents of the various compromises that brought about a new charter. Not counting Phips, there seem to have been a total of four agents acting on behalf of Massachusetts in seeking to restore the old charter. The two agents holding official commission papers from the Massachusetts council—Cooke and Oakes—were also the least compromising and the least politically deft. The Board of Trade seems to have sought a policy of pushing through a new charter by cleaving the two knights away from these two agents. On July 24, Increase Mather recorded in his diary that he would &quot;part with my life sooner than [compromise on charter]&quot;. Not long after this, Increase Mather left London on vacation. On August 11, 1691, a letter was written from Whitehall to King William&#x27;s secretary: &quot;I must now desire your Lordship to acquaint the King that they are willing to accept their Charter ... and no longer Insist upon the Alterations mentioned ... &quot; This could not have been Cooke and Oakes because they never wavered in their stance opposing a new charter. Mather&#x27;s diary entry one week later (August 19) indicates that he is still either unaware or has not yet accepted this move. On August 20, the Earl of Nottingham told a committee that he had been with Sir William Phips, who informed him that the New England agents &quot;did acquiesce therein [with the new charter].&quot; By August 27, Increase Mather had decided to participate in the process of shaping this new charter, if reluctantly.

A number of Mather&#x27;s requests concerning the new charter were rejected, but William and Mary allowed Mather to nominate the colony&#x27;s lieutenant governor and council members. The monarchs appointed Phips as the first Royal Governor, with Increase Mather&#x27;s approval, under a newly issued colonial charter for the Province of Massachusetts Bay. The charter greatly expanded the colony&#x27;s bounds, including not just the territories of the Massachusetts Bay Colony but also those of the Plymouth Colony, islands south of Cape Cod including Martha&#x27;s Vineyard and Nantucket, and the present-day territories of Maine, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia. It also expanded the franchise to be nearly universal (for males).

Phips and Increase Mather were odd fellows, without much in common, but they had become politically conjoined to the new charter, and it would be their job to sell it to the people of Massachusetts, who were expecting their agents to return with nothing less than the old charter restored.

== Salem witch trials ==
Phips and Increase Mather reached Boston in separate ships on May 14, 1692. This was a Saturday afternoon, meaning all activity was to cease at sundown according to the old Puritan laws regarding the sabbath. Unlike his arrival in HMS &quot;Rose&quot; in 1683, when Phips showed little regard for the sabbath, on this occasion, Phips was highly deferential toward the theocracy. Phips&#x27;s elaborate swearing-in ceremony at the meeting house was halted at sundown and delayed until the following Monday. According to one letter writer, Phips presented himself as having no intentions to oppose the ancient laws and customs of Puritan Boston. He promised to rule as a weak governor, according to the tradition of his predecessors. The speech itself had likely been crafted with the care and attention of Increase Mather as they crossed the Atlantic. They seemed to have come to an agreement—you work your side of the street and I&#x27;ll work mine—whereby Phips would tend to the frontier while Increase Mather and his slate of cohorts would see to domestic affairs.

Unfortunately, their crossing also coincided with the great swelling of the infamous witchcraft hysteria. More than 125 people had been arrested on charges of witchcraft and were being held in Boston and Salem prisons. On May 27, a special Court of Oyer and Terminer was created to hear the accumulated cases. This may have been Increase Mather&#x27;s idea since such courts were specifically mentioned in the new charter and no one had spent more time working on the details of the charter than Increase Mather. Nonetheless, Phips signed the order and may have composed it. The language of the order itself is curious because it speaks of concern for the welfare of those &quot;imprisoned during this hot time of the year&quot;. Increase Mather&#x27;s pick for lieutenant governor, William Stoughton, was chosen as chief judge of this new court. There was little then to indicate that Stoughton would proceed with such ruthless conviction. Phips later claimed to have chosen nominations for the court from &quot;persons of the best prudence and figure that could then be pitched upon&quot;, and indeed, as Thomas Brattle pointed out, most were well-known and respected merchants from the Boston area.

On June 8, William Stoughton ordered a woman accused of witchcraft (Bridget Bishop) to be executed only two days later, though tradition had been to allow at least four days between order and execution. The following Monday, the clergy all around the Boston area were asked to officially weigh in on the issue. There is no official record of this meeting except what was written down by Increase Mather&#x27;s son Cotton Mather and usually referred to as &quot;The Return of the Ministers&quot;, which was put into print at the end of 1692 in a book by Increase Mather, after Phips&#x27;s had disrupted the trials and disbanded the Court of Oyer and Terminer. The manuscript was unknown to historians until 1943, when it was presented to archivists in a trove of documents including the infamous Letter from Cotton Mather to William Stoughton, September 2, 1692. Cotton Mather&#x27;s manuscript is carefully scribed with few cross-outs or mistakes, suggesting it was not so much &quot;minutes&quot; of a meeting as a careful construction after the fact. It is not endorsed by any minister or government official. According to Cotton Mather&#x27;s telling, the ministers at the gathering simultaneously urged both caution and speedy prosecution. Most importantly, Cotton Mather&#x27;s &quot;Return&quot; does not disallow, or discredit, the admission of spectral evidence (accusations of a crime committed by one&#x27;s &quot;specter&quot;, against which there is no alibi possible). The Mathers, father and son, continued to debate this issue with other area ministers, like Samuel Willard, throughout the summer and into the fall, as documented by the minutes of the Cambridge Association.

At the end of June, five more women were condemned to die. Phips granted a reprieve to one of these but was impressed upon &quot;by some Salem gentlemen&quot; to take it back. At this point, Phips seemed to wash his hands of the proceedings, not relishing the idea of gaining the enmity of his own lieutenant governor and powerful clergymen, including the fully committed Cotton Mather and the somewhat more waffling Increase Mather. There is no record of Phips ever having traveled north to meet any of the &quot;afflicted&quot; or attend a single Oyer and Terminer trial or execution. Instead, Phips continued to work on recruiting troops and gathering supplies to build a fort in Maine, and he left the province around August 1 and was gone the entire month and much of September. William Stoughton seems to have officially taken over executive powers in this period of Phips&#x27;s absence.

French and Indian raids had resumed in the years following Phips&#x27;s 1690 expeditions, so he sought to improve the province&#x27;s defenses. Pursuant to his instructions from London, in 1692, he oversaw the construction of a stone fort, which was dubbed Fort William Henry, at Pemaquid (present-day Bristol, Maine), where a wooden fort had been destroyed in 1689. He recruited Major Benjamin Church to lead a 450-man expedition eventually leading to a tenuous peace agreement with the Abenaki people.

By the time Phips returned from Maine on September 29, 1692, twenty people had been executed and the accusations and arrests continued, including charges against many high-profile individuals, allegedly including Phips&#x27;s own wife. At this point, Phips finally let it be known that the Court of Oyer and Terminer &quot;must fall&quot;. A new court was formed with instructions to entirely disregard spectral evidence. But Stoughton was once again selected by his peers to be chief justice. In late January 1693, Stoughton ordered eight graves dug in advance of his next round of execution orders, not realizing that Phips would no longer appease him.

All eight were cleared by Phips&#x27;s proclamations, leading Stoughton to storm from the court. His replacement on the court was more inclined to mercy for the accused. Beginning in February 1693, no more of the accused were condemned to die, and almost all had been released from prison by May.

== Recall to London ==

Phips&#x27; leadership was dependent on the support of the powerful Mathers, father and son, as well as their pick to be his lieutenant governor. This strange and disparate coalition had been badly fractured by the witchcraft proceedings, and Phips&#x27; resolute and final, if slow, move to shut it down. In a letter written October 20, 1692, Cotton Mather expressed anguish over the ending of the &quot;proceedings&quot; and stated his displeasure with his father&#x27;s recent call for presumed innocence (&quot;Cases of Conscience&quot;). When Phips stood up to Stoughton, he gained a terrible foe. Furthermore, Joseph Dudley, a Massachusetts native (and former Dominion official alongside Randolph) was in London, scheming to replace Phips, and in early 1693 Stoughton joined forces with him.

The strain of this seems to have gotten to Phips in a way that so many previous seemingly insurmountable challenges had not. In January 1693, Phips was involved in an embarrassing and unseemly physical altercation with his subordinate captain in the royal navy, Richard Short. Their accusations against each other in letters to Whitehall follow the standard lines of the Tarpaulin vs. Gentleman. Short is called a drunk, corrupt, unwilling to withstand hardships, or obey direct orders. His lieutenant captain is accused of cowardice. Phips, as usual, is accused of having only a carpenter&#x27;s education, poor manners, and disregarding standard procedure (reminiscent of the journal of Knepp). Phips&#x27; pick for a replacement captain, Dobbins, is accused of the same. Phips is also accused of corruption, which was a standard charge, and a standard problem for colonial leadership at this time. But Phips, having traded silver for paper after the fiasco of Quebec, and building his own ship to chase pirates in Maine, seems to take the teeth out of this accusation.

Following the Dominion government, in which Andros oversaw all of the colonies, there was a good bit of jealousy, border disputes, and jockeying for position between the new governors of the various colonies, and Phips seems to have done as much to inflame these jealousies as to work past them. Phips expressed outrage at the execution of Leisler and harbored enemies of Fletcher and the New York government that replaced Leisler. Phips&#x27; ongoing struggles with Usher in New Hampshire continued as before. (In 1695, following Phips&#x27; death, Bellomont was placed over Fletcher, Usher, and Stoughton, suggesting Whitehall was unimpressed by the bickering of the three provinces and not swayed by the particular merits of any of their arguments. Bellomont ordered a posthumous pardon of Leisler.)

Keeping up the longstanding tradition of Massachusetts Bay, Phips fought against the office of custom inspectors, arguing that the port of Massachusetts did not see enough enumerated goods to warrant their presence. Instead Phips attempted to re-establish a naval office, with himself acting as head of the admiralty, thereby doling out favors to gain the support of the powerful merchant class. This was part of an old turf battle between the Admiralty and Customs, but it led to an altercation with Randolph&#x27;s custom inspector, Jahleel Brenton, which seemed to follow the similar embarrassing and unseemly pattern as his altercation with Captain Short. The two altercations weighed together against Phips. Phips was accused of violating the Navigation Acts, as his predecessor had been. Blathwayt was slowly and steadily working to standardize the flow of tributes from the colonies to the Crown, and if Phips was clogging these pipes, he would need to answer for it.

By the spring elections of 1693, Phips needed new connections to balance against the dangerous enmity of Stoughton. Elisha Cooke was elected, and Phips negated his seat. For a royally appointed governor to exercise such veto power, granted only by the controversial new charter, was a highly unpopular move and could establish a dangerous precedent. Increase Mather had fought unsuccessfully to keep this veto power out of the new charter, but ironically, he seems to have been the architect of this move. A few weeks later, Phips invited both men to dinner but was unable to broker a truce. Phips was still trying to maintain a bond of loyalty to Increase Mather. By many counts this move against Cooke was considered poor political calculus. The Mathers, father and son, were a house divided, trying to heal itself. The Mathers had lost much credibility and public trust. Phips seemed slow to realize that Increase Mather should no longer be his trusted adviser. A year later, when Elisha Cooke was again elected, Phips allowed it to stand. But by this time, it was probably too little, too late.

On July 31, 1693, Phips hosted at his house a meeting of the General Council, including Stoughton and four other O&amp;T judges, and read a letter that had arrived the day before from the Queen. The letter supported Phips in his ending of the trials and stated that &quot;the greatest moderation and all due circumspection be used..[toward those accused of witchcraft].&quot; No doubt Phips wanted the letter read into the official minutes, but by hosting the meeting at his house, one wonders if he was not trying to provoke, especially if his own wife had been among the accused.

On November 30, 1693, little over a year after Phips had shut down the Court of Oyer and Terminer, Whitehall heard complaints against Phips regarding Short and Brenton, shepherded to London by Stoughton and Dudley. A recall with the internal date of February 15, 1694, summoned Phips back to London to answer the charges. It took months for the letter to reach Boston. On July 4, 1694, Phips received the summons to appear before the Lords of Trade. Stoughton, of all people, was ordered to oversee the gathering of evidence for the hearing, a galling reversal of fortunes for Phips. Phips spent much of the summer in Maine, at Pemaquid, securing a peace treaty and overseeing the frontier defenses near his birthplace.

Phips finally sailed for England on November 17. Increase Mather was asked to go along in support but decided against it, citing the difficulty of the journey, though his diary from the time is full of yearning to return to England. They were still friendly, but it seems their coalition and partnership was in tatters.

As a final stroke, before Phips left, he pardoned all those who had been accused of witchcraft. Most had already been reprieved, but a pardon ensured they would not be brought to trial in his absence. He sailed from the harbor after sunset on the sabbath, firing guns from his ship. Samuel Sewall notes the similarity to his &quot;uncomfortable&quot; time of arrival, but the differences are more telling. Phips was no longer sensitive to the customs of the Puritan clergy, he was loudly defying them.

Phips arrived in London in early January, 1695. Upon his arrival in London, he was arrested on exaggerated charges, levied by Dudley, that he had conspired to withhold customs monies. Phips was bailed out by Sir Henry Ashurst but fell ill with a fever and died on February 18, 1695, aged 44, before his charges were heard. He was buried in London at the Church of St. Mary Woolnoth.

==Family and legacy==

William and Mary Phips had no children. They adopted Spencer Bennett, the son of Mary&#x27;s sister Rebecca, who formally took the Phips name in 1716. He went on to serve as Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts, including two periods as acting governor.
Phippsburg, Maine, is named in his honor.

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Profile, law2.umkc.edu; accessed December 23, 2014.
* Nathaniel Hawthorne on Phips in the collection &quot;Memoir of Nathaniel Hawthorne with Stories ... &quot; (Public Domain).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1896325" start="0" end="17" title="William Phips" label="Sir William Phips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896325" start="22" end="28" title="William Phips" label="Phipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="377" end="406" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="596" end="614" title="Salem Witch Trials" label="Salem Witch Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q550193" start="815" end="830" title="Woolwich, Maine" label="Woolwich, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431323" start="855" end="869" title="Kennebec River" label="Kennebec River"/>
<link wikidata="Q380719" start="1017" end="1030" title="Cotton Mather" label="Cotton Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="1341" end="1356" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163845" start="1380" end="1398" title="Constantine Phipps (Lord Chancellor of Ireland)" label="Constantine Phipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="2140" end="2146" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451696" start="2322" end="2331" title="John Hull (merchant)" label="John Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="2657" end="2665" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11750440" start="2673" end="2688" title="Sheepscot River" label="Sheepscot River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820518" start="2692" end="2708" title="Merrymeeting Bay" label="Merrymeeting Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="2745" end="2761" title="King Philips War" label="King Philips War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354826" start="3037" end="3068" title="Northeast Coast Campaign (1676)" label="Northeast Coast Campaign (1676)"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="3437" end="3444" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451696" start="3717" end="3726" title="John Hull (merchant)" label="John Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="3986" end="3993" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="4226" end="4236" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="4240" end="4245" title="Sloop-of-war" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q322987" start="4442" end="4461" title="John Narborough" label="Sir John Narborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="4502" end="4512" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="4538" end="4553" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="4686" end="4696" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344984" start="6603" end="6618" title="Edward Randolph (colonial administrator)" label="Edward Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524435" start="7201" end="7216" title="Leoline Jenkins" label="Leoline Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430835" start="11445" end="11452" title="Richard Haddock" label="Haddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632251" start="12235" end="12250" title="Increase Mather" label="Increase Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686608" start="12720" end="12729" title="William Blathwayt" label="Blathwayt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136592" start="14737" end="14750" title="1689 Boston revolt" label="Boston revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835655" start="14862" end="14877" title="Michaelmas term" label="Michaelmas term"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632251" start="15805" end="15820" title="Increase Mather" label="Increase Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q120355505" start="16074" end="16096" title="Remarkable Providences" label="Remarkable Providences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518325" start="16559" end="16569" title="Simon Bradstreet" label="Bradstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568979" start="16574" end="16583" title="William Stoughton (judge)" label="Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="16729" end="16737" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q685357" start="17182" end="17192" title="Port Royal" label="Port Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="17597" end="17607" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="18000" end="18012" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191129" start="19408" end="19425" title="Christopher Monck, 2nd Duke of Albemarle" label="Duke of Albemarle"/>
<link wikidata="Q210223" start="19667" end="19672" title="sloop" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q286837" start="20954" end="20965" title="Silver Bank" label="Silver Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="22174" end="22181" title="bullion" label="bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q389152" start="22183" end="22191" title="doubloon" label="doubloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q676689" start="22525" end="22534" title="Gravesend, Kent" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="22965" end="22986" title="Joint-stock company" label="joint-stock companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="23043" end="23058" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="23255" end="23278" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q659069" start="23294" end="23311" title="Edmund Andros" label="Sir Edmund Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="25212" end="25231" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="25302" end="25313" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="25318" end="25325" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="25448" end="25462" title="Board of Trade" label="Lords of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136592" start="25695" end="25711" title="1689 Boston revolt" label="revolt in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="26058" end="26068" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="26468" end="26474" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398298" start="30417" end="30427" title="Port-Royal (Acadia)" label="Port Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872090" start="30441" end="30458" title="Battle of Port Royal (1690)" label="summoned Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260305" start="30459" end="30497" title="Louis-Alexandre des Friches de Menneval" label="Louis-Alexandre des Friches de Meneval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="31798" end="31804" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="31938" end="31946" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="31961" end="31977" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q475604" start="32217" end="32223" title="Maritime pilot" label="pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="32242" end="32262" title="Saint Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q125029" start="32690" end="32717" title="Louis de Buade de Frontenac" label="Louis de Buade de Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707745" start="33009" end="33028" title="Saint-Charles River (Quebec City)" label="Saint-Charles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="33366" end="33374" title="Smallpox" label="Smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="36487" end="36516" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="36696" end="36704" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q49148" start="36715" end="36737" title="Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard" label="Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="36742" end="36751" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="36788" end="36793" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="36795" end="36808" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="36814" end="36825" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="38365" end="38375" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116266" start="38520" end="38546" title="Oyer and terminer" label="Court of Oyer and Terminer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="38562" end="38588" title="Salem witch trials" label="hear the accumulated cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568979" start="39063" end="39080" title="William Stoughton (judge)" label="William Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888034" start="40279" end="40344" title="Letter from Cotton Mather to William Stoughton, September 2, 1692" label="Letter from Cotton Mather to William Stoughton, September 2, 1692"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575189" start="40836" end="40853" title="spectral evidence" label="spectral evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221910" start="41058" end="41072" title="Samuel Willard" label="Samuel Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073785" start="41151" end="41172" title="Cambridge Association" label="Cambridge Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472349" start="42328" end="42346" title="Fort William Henry (Pemaquid Beach, Maine)" label="Fort William Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740437" start="42373" end="42387" title="Bristol, Maine" label="Bristol, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510302" start="42419" end="42436" title="Siege of Pemaquid (1689)" label="destroyed in 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896036" start="42457" end="42472" title="Benjamin Church (ranger)" label="Benjamin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="42559" end="42573" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120352" start="44170" end="44183" title="Joseph Dudley" label="Joseph Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520240" start="45766" end="45773" title="Leisler&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Leisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934786" start="45976" end="45985" title="Richard Coote, 1st Earl of Bellomont" label="Bellomont"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="46978" end="46993" title="Navigation Acts" label="Navigation Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499734" start="47322" end="47334" title="Elisha Cooke Sr." label="Elisha Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594608" start="50788" end="50815" title="St Mary Woolnoth" label="Church of St. Mary Woolnoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490678" start="50894" end="50909" title="Spencer Phips" label="Spencer Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449666" start="51095" end="51112" title="Phippsburg, Maine" label="Phippsburg, Maine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="969667" wikidata="Q4836816" url="?curid=969667" title="BU cars (New York City Subway car)">
<text>BU cars is the generic term for BRT elevated gate cars used on predecessor lines of the New York City Subway system. Various orders of these cars were built by the Osgood-Bradley, Brill, Cincinnati, Laconia, Pullman, Gilbert &amp; Bush, Harlan &amp; Hollingsworth, Wason, Pressed Steel, Brooklyn Heights Railroad, John Stephenson, and Jewett car companies.

==Background==
These cars consisted of a variety of equipment used on the BRT and later BMT. Some cars were inherited from steam railroads that became part of the BRT, while others were built new for the BRT as late as 1907. In 1913, the BRT introduced an advanced steel car design for subway service (the AB Standard), thus ending BU cars&#x27; production.

The term BU was derived from the Brooklyn Union Elevated Railroad (BUERR) Company, one of the last operating companies of Brooklyn elevated lines before the BRT formed the New York Consolidated Railroad in 1912 to absorb the BUERR and other properties.

Historians disagree as to whether the term &quot;BU&quot; was commonly used before the BMT was purchased by the City of New York in 1940, or whether it was mainly an introduced term to describe the wooden elevated cars of the former private company.

==Disambiguation==
The primary distinguishing feature of BU cars is that they were elevated cars built mostly or substantially of wood, with or without steel frames, where passenger access to the cars was provided by open platforms at both ends of each car. A trainman between each pair of cars manually opened and closed folding gates to admit or bar passengers from entering or leaving.

All &quot;gate&quot; cars used in BRT elevated service can be described as BUs. This excludes several classes of elevated equipment:
*Steam coaches of companies preceding the BUERR that were never converted to, and used in, regular BUERR or BRT elevated service;
*Steam excursion coaches of the former Sea Beach Railway that &quot;were&quot; acquired by the BRT (&quot;3200 class&quot;) but not used in elevated service and numbered as part of the streetcar department;
*Former BU cars (the C-types and Q-types) that were converted into closed cars and the gates replaced by automatically operated subway-style sliding doors.

The BU cars should not be confused with the Manhattan El cars, a series of gate cars that were operated by the Interborough Rapid Transit Company.

==BUs in the New York Transit Museum fleet==

Three BU cars that were converted to closed Q-type cars in 1938 for BMT service to the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair were converted back into BU gate cars in the Coney Island Rapid Transit Car Overhaul Shop for the transit museum in 1979. The conversion was made of wood with steel frames and dates from 1903 to 1907. However, the cars retain their 1957 lowered roofs and 1950 lightweight trucks, as well as modified marker light positions on the ends. They also remain unitized as a three car set, rather than as three self-contained cars as originally built.

These cars are the oldest operational members of the New York Transit Museum fleet. Those built in 1907 were the last BU cars ever built. They are fully operational and are occasionally used on museum-sponsored excursions; however, when the excursion goes through underground subway tunnels, they must be towed by steel cars. For safety reasons, passengers may not ride in these cars in subway tunnels; non-employees must ride in the accompanying steel cars during the tunnel portions of the trip.

The three museum BUs are currently numbered and coupled as 1407-1273-1404. They were rebuilt from Q-type unit 1622A-B-C in the late 1970s. As part of the June 22, 1965 &quot;Transit Day&quot; commemoration at the World&#x27;s Fair, Q-type 1622A-B-C were rehabilitated and repainted in the original colors used for the 1939–40 World&#x27;s Fair, blue and orange, which are also the colors of the New York City flag. After they were converted back into gate cars, they were given their original numbers and received the red paint scheme that they originally wore when they were brand new.

==Other surviving BUs==
Besides the three cars preserved at the New York Transit Museum, many other still-extant cars have been preserved;

* Cars 197, 659, 999, 1227, 1349, and 1362 are preserved at the Shore Line Trolley Museum. Some have been modified with trolley poles and are occasionally (but not often) used for trips around the museum, while others need restoration.
* Car 1365 is preserved at the St. Louis Museum of Transportation. It is currently a static display.
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4836816" start="0" end="7" title="BU cars (New York City Subway car)" label="BU cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926166" start="32" end="35" title="Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company" label="BRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="88" end="108" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106535" start="164" end="178" title="Osgood Bradley Car Company" label="Osgood-Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676325" start="180" end="185" title="J. G. Brill Company" label="Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120226" start="187" end="197" title="Cincinnati Car Company" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153320" start="199" end="206" title="Laconia Car Company" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="208" end="215" title="Pullman Company" label="Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560836" start="217" end="235" title="Gilbert Car Company" label="Gilbert &amp;amp; Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658399" start="237" end="263" title="Harlan &amp;amp; Hollingsworth" label="Harlan &amp;amp; Hollingsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972705" start="265" end="270" title="Wason Car Company" label="Wason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241654" start="272" end="285" title="Pressed Steel Car Company" label="Pressed Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974843" start="287" end="312" title="Brooklyn Heights Railroad" label="Brooklyn Heights Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259050" start="314" end="329" title="John Stephenson Company" label="John Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189690" start="335" end="341" title="Jewett Car Company" label="Jewett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926164" start="446" end="449" title="Brooklyn–Manhattan Transit Corporation" label="BMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142599" start="481" end="495" title="steam railroad" label="steam railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="623" end="628" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="644" end="650" title="rapid transit" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650453" start="664" end="675" title="AB Standard (New York City Subway car)" label="AB Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294235" start="750" end="782" title="Brooklyn Union Elevated Railroad" label="Brooklyn Union Elevated Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="839" end="847" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1083" end="1099" title="New York City" label="City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q603656" start="1914" end="1931" title="BMT Sea Beach Line" label="Sea Beach Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926166" start="1970" end="1973" title="Brooklyn Rapid Transit" label="BRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="2060" end="2069" title="streetcar" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005970" start="2103" end="2109" title="C-type (New York City Subway car)" label="C-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265314" start="2115" end="2122" title="Q-type Queens car (New York City Subway car)" label="Q-types"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316636" start="2283" end="2295" title="Manhattan El (New York City Subway car)" label="Manhattan El"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523955" start="2350" end="2384" title="Interborough Rapid Transit Company" label="Interborough Rapid Transit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265314" start="2477" end="2483" title="Q-type Queens car (New York City Subway car)" label="Q-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="2520" end="2551" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481369" start="2597" end="2641" title="Coney Island Rapid Transit Car Overhaul Shop" label="Coney Island Rapid Transit Car Overhaul Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503777" start="3050" end="3073" title="New York Transit Museum" label="New York Transit Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="3273" end="3279" title="rapid transit" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189910" start="3709" end="3726" title="1964 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3891" end="3904" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501308" start="4288" end="4313" title="Shore Line Trolley Museum" label="Shore Line Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941038" start="4491" end="4525" title="St. Louis Museum of Transportation" label="St. Louis Museum of Transportation"/>
</links>
</doc>
