<doc id="683704" wikidata="Q1048268" url="?curid=683704" title="European integration">
<text>European integration is the process of political, legal, social, regional and economic integration of states wholly or partially in Europe, or nearby. European integration has primarily but not exclusively come about through the European Union and its policies, and can include cultural assimilation and centralisation.

The history of European integration is marked by the Roman Empire&#x27;s consolidation of European and Mediterranean territories, which set a precedent for the notion of a unified Europe. This idea was echoed through attempts at unity, such as the Holy Roman Empire, the Hanseatic League, and the Napoleonic Empire. The devastation of World War I reignited the concept of a unified Europe, leading to the establishment of international organizations aimed at political coordination across Europe. The interwar period saw politicians such as Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi and Aristide Briand advocating for European unity, albeit with differing visions.

Post-World War II Europe saw a significant push towards integration, with Winston Churchill&#x27;s call for a &quot;United States of Europe&quot; in 1946 being a notable example. This period saw the formation of theories around European integration, categorizing into proto-integration, explaining integration, analyzing governance, and constructing the EU, reflecting a shift from viewing European integration as a unique process, to incorporating broader international relations and comparative politics theories.

Citizens&#x27; organizations have played a role in advocating further European integration, exemplified by the Union of European Federalists and the European Movement International. Various agreements and memberships demonstrate the web of relations and commitments between European countries, showing the multi-layered nature of integration.
==History==

In antiquity, the Roman Empire brought about integration of multiple European and Mediterranean territories. The numerous subsequent claims of succession of the Roman Empire, even the iterations of the Classical Empire and its ancient peoples, have occasionally been reinterpreted in the light of post-1950 European integration as providing inspiration and historical precedents. Important examples include the Holy Roman Empire, the Hanseatic League, the Peace of Westphalia, the Napoleonic Empire, and the unification of Germany, Italy, and the Balkans as well as the Latin Monetary Union.
Following the catastrophe of the First World War of 1914–1918, thinkers and visionaries from a range of political traditions again began to float the idea of a politically unified Europe. In the early 1920s a range of international organisations were founded (or re-founded) to help like-minded political parties to coordinate their activities. These ranged from the Comintern (1919), to the Labour and Socialist International (1921) to the Radical and Democratic Entente of centre-left progressive parties (1924), to the Green International of farmers&#x27; parties (1923), to the centre-right International Secretariat of Democratic Parties inspired by Christianity (1925).
While the remit of these international bodies was global, the predominance of political parties from Europe meant that they facilitated interaction between the adherents of a given ideology across European borders. Within each political tradition, voices emerged advocating not merely the cooperation of various national parties, but the pursuit of political institutions at the European level.

One of the first to articulate this view was Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, who outlined a conservative vision of European unity in his Pan-Europa manifesto (1923). The First Paneuropean Congress took place in Vienna in 1926, and the association possessed 8000 members by the time of the 1929 Wall Street crash. They envisaged a specifically Christian, and by implication Catholic, Europe. The British civil-servant and future Conservative minister Arthur Salter published a book advocating &quot;The United States of Europe&quot; in 1933.

In contrast the Soviet commissar (minister) Leon Trotsky raised the slogan &quot;For a Soviet United States of Europe&quot; in 1923, advocating a Europe united along communist principles.

Among liberal-democratic parties, the French centre-left undertook several initiatives to group like-minded parties from the European states. In 1927, the French mathematician and politician Émile Borel, a leader of the centre-left Radical Party and the founder of the Radical International, set up a French Committee for European Cooperation, and a further twenty countries set up equivalent committees. However, it remained an élite venture: the largest committee, the French one, possessed fewer than six-hundred members, two-thirds of them parliamentarians. Two centre-left French prime ministers went further. In 1929 Aristide Briand gave a speech in the presence of the League of Nations Assembly in which he proposed the idea of a federation of European nations based on solidarity and in the pursuit of economic prosperity and political and social co-operation. In 1930, at the League&#x27;s request, Briand presented a &quot;Memorandum on the organisation of a system of European Federal Union&quot;. The next year the future French prime minister Édouard Herriot published his book &quot;The United States of Europe&quot;. Indeed, a template for such a system already existed, in the form of the 1921 Belgian and Luxembourgish customs and monetary union.

Support for the proposals by the French centre-left came from a range of prestigious figures. Many eminent economists, aware that the economic race-to-the-bottom between states was creating ever-greater instability, supported the view: these included John Maynard Keynes. The French political scientist and economist Bertrand Jouvenel remembered a widespread mood after 1924 calling for a &quot;harmonisation of national interests along the lines of European union, for the purpose of common prosperity&quot;. The Spanish philosopher and politician, Ortega y Gasset, expressed a position shared by many within Republican Spain: &quot;European unity is no fantasy, but reality itself; and the fantasy is precisely the opposite: the belief that France, Germany, Italy or Spain are substantive &amp; independent realities.&quot; Eleftherios Venizelos, Prime Minister of Greece, outlined his government&#x27;s support in a 1929 speech by saying that &quot;the United States of Europe will represent, even without Russia, a power strong enough to advance, up to a satisfactory point, the prosperity of the other continents as well&quot;.

Between the two world wars, the Polish statesman Józef Piłsudski (1867–1935) envisaged the idea of a European federation that he called &quot;Międzymorze&quot; (&quot;Intersea&quot; or &quot;Between-seas&quot;), known in English as &quot;Intermarium&quot;, which was a Polish-oriented version of Mitteleuropa.

The Great Depression, the rise of fascism and communism and subsequently World War II prevented the inter-war movements from gaining further support: between 1933 and 1936 most of Europe&#x27;s remaining democracies became dictatorships, and Ortega&#x27;s Spain and Venizelos&#x27;s Greece had both plunged into civil war. But although the social-democratic, liberal or Christian-democratic supporters of European unity were out of power during the 1930s and unable to put their ideas into practice, many would find themselves in power in the 1940s and 1950s, and better-placed to put into effect their earlier remedies against economic and political crisis.

During World War II (1939–1945) Nazi Germany came to dominate – directly or indirectly – much of Europe at various times. The plans for German-oriented political, social, and economic integration of Europe – such as the New Order, the Greater Germanic Reich and – did not survive the war.

At the end of World War II, the continental political climate favoured unity in democratic European countries, seen by many as an escape from the extreme forms of nationalism which had devastated the continent. In a speech delivered on 19 September 1946 at the University of Zürich in Switzerland, Winston Churchill postulated a United States of Europe. The same speech however contains remarks, less-often quoted, which make it clear that Churchill did not initially see Britain as being part of this United States of Europe:
==Theories of integration==
European integration scholars Thomas Diez and Antje Wiener identify the general tendencies in the development of European integration theory and suggest to divide theories of integration into three broad phases, which are preceded by a normative proto-integration theory period. There&#x27;s a gradual shift from theories studying European integration as sui generis towards new approaches that incorporate theories of International Relations and Comparative politics.

=== Proto-integration period ===
The question of how to avoid wars between the nation-states was essential for the first theories. Federalism and functionalism proposed the containment of the nation-state, while transactionalism sought to theorise the conditions for the stabilisation of the nation-state system. Early federalism was more like a political movement calling for European federation by various political actors, for example, Altiero Spinelli calling for a federal Europe in his Ventotene Manifesto, and Paul Valéry envisioning European civilization for unity. State sovereignty was an issue for federalists who hoped political organizations at higher regional level would solve the issue. A representative scholar of functionalism was David Mitrany, who also saw states and their sovereignty as a core problem and believed that one should restrain states to prevent future wars. However, Mitrany disagreed with regional integration as he viewed it as mere replication of the state-model. Transactionalism, on the other hand, sees increased cross-border exchanges as promoting regional integration so that the risk of war is reduced.

=== First phase: explaining integration, 1960s onwards ===
European integration theory initially focused on explaining integration process of supranational institution-building. One of the most influential theories of European integration is neofunctionalism, influenced by functionalist ideas, developed by Ernst B. Haas (1958) and further investigated by Leon Lindberg (1963). This theory focuses on spillovers of integration, where well-integrated and interdependent areas led to more integration. Neofunctionalism well captures the spillover from the European Coal and Steel Community to the European Economic Community established in the 1957 Treaties of Rome. Transfers of loyalties from the national level to the supranational level is expected to occur as integration progresses.

The other big influential theory in Integration Studies is Intergovernmentalism, advanced by Stanley Hoffmann after the Empty Chair Crisis by French President Charles De Gaulle in the 1960s. Intergovernmentalism and later, Liberal Intergovernmentalism, developed in the 1980s by Andrew Moravcsik focus on governmental actors&#x27; impacts that are enhanced by supranational institutions but not restrained from them. The important debate between neofunctionalism and (liberal) intergovernmentalism still remains central in understanding the development and setbacks of the European integration.

=== Second phase: analyzing governance, 1980s onwards ===
As the empirical world has changed, so have the theories and thus the understanding of European Integration. The second generation of integration theorists focused on the importance of institutions and their impacts on both integration process and European governance development. The second phase brought in perspectives from comparative politics in addition to traditional International Relations theoretical references. Studies attempted to understand what kind of polity the EU is and how it operates. For example, new theory multi-level governance (MLG) was developed to understand the workings and development of the EU.

=== Third phase: constructing the EU, 1990s onwards ===
The third phase of integration theory marked a return of International Relations theory with the rise of critical and constructivist approaches in the 1990s. Perspectives from social constructivists, post-structuralists, critical theories, feminist theories are incorporated in integration theories to conceptualize European integration process of widening and deepening.

==Citizens&#x27; organisations calling for further integration==
Various federalist organisations have been created over time supporting the idea of a federal Europe. These include the Union of European Federalists, the Young European Federalists, the European Movement International, the European Federalist Party, and Volt Europa. The Union of European Federalists (UEF) is a European non-governmental organisation, campaigning for a Federal Europe. It consists of 20 constituent organisations and it has been active at the European, national and local levels for more than 50 years. The European Movement International is a lobbying association that coordinates the efforts of associations and national councils with the goal of promoting European integration, and disseminating information about it. The European Federalist Party is a pro-European, pan-European and federalist political party which advocates further integration of the EU and the establishment of a Federal Europe. Its aim is to gather all Europeans to promote European federalism and to participate in all elections all over Europe. It has national sections in 15 countries. Volt Europa is a pan-European and European federalist political movement that also serves as the pan-European structure for subsidiary parties in EU member states. It is present in 29 countries and participates in elections all over the EU on the local, national and European level.

==Overlap of membership in various agreements==
There are various agreements with overlapping membership. Several countries take part in a larger number of agreements than others.

===Common membership of member states of the European Union===
All member states of the European Union (EU) are members of the:
* Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), Secretariat: Vienna, Austria
* European Political Community (EPC)
* Council of Europe (CoE), HQ: Strasbourg, France
* European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC), HQ: Neuilly-sur-Seine/Paris, France
* European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation (Eurocontrol), HQ: Brussels, Belgium
* European Committee for Standardization (CEN), HQ: Brussels, Belgium
* European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), HQ: Sophia Antipolis, France
* European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC), HQ: Brussels, Belgium
* European Union Customs Union (EUCU)
* European Olympic Committees (EOC), HQ: Rome, Italy
* European Patent Convention (EPC)/European Patent Organisation (EPOrg)
* European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC, Euratom)
* Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA)
* European Common Aviation Area (ECAA)
* European Higher Education Area (EHEA) – Belgium as Flemish Community and French Community, i.e. the German-speaking Community of Belgium is not included.
have organizations that are members of the:
* European Broadcasting Union (EBU), HQ: Geneva, Switzerland
* Union of European Football Associations (UEFA), HQ: Nyon, Switzerland
* European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity, HQ: Brussels, Belgium
have organisations that are members, associated partners or observers of the
* European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas, HQ: Brussels, Belgium
are located in the European Broadcasting Area (EBA)

===Most integrated countries===
21 states are part of the Eurozone or in ERM II without Euro opt-out.

These are Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain.

They are all members of or take part in:
* the European Union
* the European Defence Agency (EDA)
* the European Economic Area (EEA)


==Geographic scope==

===Beyond geographic Europe===
Some agreements that are mostly related to countries of the European continent, are also valid in territories outside the continent.

Not listed below are agreements if their scope is beyond geographic Europe only because the agreement includes:
* Territories of transcontinental countries: Russia, Kazakhstan, Turkey, Cyprus, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia contain some territory in Europe and some in Asia
* The EU uses bilateral Enhanced Partnership and Cooperation Agreements as an integration tool.
* Special territories of European countries, e.g. Special territories of member states of the European Union
* Cyprus, which is a member of the Council of Europe and several other agreements

List:
* NATO contains USA and Canada, but has a European focus, Article 10 of the North Atlantic Treaty describes how non-member states may join: &quot;The Parties may [...] invite any other European State in a position to further the principles of this Treaty&quot;
* Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) contains the United States, Canada, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Mongolia
* European Broadcasting Union (EBU) contains North African and Middle East countries
* European Olympic Committees (EOC) contains Israel

===Limited to regions within geographic Europe===
Several regional integration efforts have effectively promoted intergovernmental cooperation and reduced the possibility of regional armed conflict. Other initiatives have removed barriers to free trade in European regions, and increased the free movement of people, labour, goods, and capital across national borders.

====Nordic countries====
Since the end of the Second World War, the following organisations have been established in the Nordic region:

The Nordic Council and the Nordic Council of Ministers is a co-operation forum for the parliaments and governments of the Nordic countries created in February 1953. It includes the states of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden, and their autonomous territories (Greenland, Faroe Islands and Åland).

The Nordic Passport Union, created in 1954 but implemented on 1 May 1958, establishes free movement across borders without passports for the countries&#x27; citizens. It comprises Denmark, Sweden and Norway as foundational states; further, it includes Finland and Iceland since 24 September 1965, and the Danish autonomous territories of Faroe Islands since 1 January 1966.

====Baltic Sea region====
The following political and/or economic organisations have been in the Baltic region in the post-modern era:

The Baltic Assembly aims to promote co-operation between the parliaments of the Baltic states, namely the Republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The organisation was planned in Vilnius on 1 December 1990, and the three nations agreed to its structure and rules on 13 June 1994.

The Baltic Free Trade Area (BAFTA) was a trade agreement between Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia. It was signed on 13 September 1993 and came into force on 1 April 1994. The agreement was later extended to apply also to agricultural products, effective from 1 January 1997. BAFTA ceased to exist when its members joined the EU on 1 May 2004.

The Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) was founded in 1992 to promote intergovernmental cooperation among Baltic Sea countries in questions concerning economy, civil society development, human rights issues, and nuclear and radiation safety. It has 12 members including Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Iceland (since 1995), Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Russia, Sweden and the European Commission.

In 2009 the European Council approved the EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region (EUSBSR) following a communication from the European Commission. The EUSBSR was the first macro-regional strategy in Europe. The Strategy aims to reinforce cooperation within the Baltic Sea Region, to address challenges together, and to promote balanced development in the Region. The Strategy contributes to major EU policies, including Europe 2020, and reinforces integration within the Region.

====Nordic-Baltic Eight====
====Low Countries region (Benelux)====
Since the end of the First World War the following unions have been set in the Low Countries region:

The Benelux is an economic and political union between Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg. On 5 September 1944, a treaty establishing the Benelux Customs Union was signed. It entered into force in 1948, and ceased to exist on 1 November 1960, when it was replaced by the Benelux Economic Union after a treaty signed in The Hague on 3 February 1958. A Benelux Parliament was created in 1955.

The Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) can be seen as a forerunner of the Benelux. BLEU was created by the treaty signed on 25 July 1921. It established a single market between both countries, while setting the Belgian franc and Luxembourgian franc at a fixed parity.

====Black Sea region====
Several regional organisations have been founded in the Black Sea region since the fall of the Soviet Union, such as:

The Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) aims to ensure peace, stability and prosperity by encouraging friendly and good-neighbourly relations among the 12 state members, located mainly in the Black Sea region. It was created on 25 June 1992 in Istanbul, and entered into force on 1 May 1999. The 11 founding members were Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Turkey, and Ukraine. Serbia (then Serbia and Montenegro) joined in April 2004.

The GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development is a regional organisation of four post-Soviet states, which aims to promote cooperation and democratic values, ensure stable development, enhance international and regional security, and stepping up European integration. Current members include the four founding ones, namely, Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova. Uzbekistan joined in 1999, and left in 2005.

====United Kingdom and Ireland====
Since the end of the First World War, the following agreements have been signed in the United Kingdom and Ireland region:

The British–Irish Council was created by the Good Friday Agreement in 1998 to &quot;promote the harmonious and mutually beneficial development of the totality of relationships among the peoples of these islands&quot;. It was formally established on 2 December 1999. Its membership comprises Ireland, the United Kingdom, three of the countries of the UK (Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales), and three British Crown dependencies (Guernsey, the Isle of Man and Jersey). Because England does not have a devolved parliament, it is not represented on the council as a separate entity.

The Common Travel Area is a passport-free zone established in 1922 that comprises Ireland, the United Kingdom, the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey. Under Irish law, all British citizens are exempt from immigration control and immune from deportation. They are entitled to live in Ireland without any restrictions or conditions. Under British law, Irish citizens are entitled to enter and live in the United Kingdom without any restrictions or conditions. They also have the right to vote, work, study and access welfare and healthcare services.

In January 2020, the United Kingdom left the EU, reversing most aspects of its 40+ years of participation in EU integration. Ireland continues to remain an enthusiastic member of the Union and participates in some elements of the Schengen Agreement other than the common visa policy [a position likely to remain for as a long as Northern Ireland remains part of the United Kingdom]. The Common Travel Area continues to operate though, , other aspects of the relationship are encountering difficulties.

====Central Europe====

The following cooperation agreements have been signed in Central Europe:

The Visegrád Group is a Central-European alliance for cooperation and European integration, based on an ancient strategic alliance of core Central European countries. The Group originated in a summit meeting of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland held in the Hungarian castle town of Visegrád on 15 February 1991. The Czech Republic and Slovakia became members after the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993.

In 1989, the Central European Initiative, a forum of regional cooperation in Central and Eastern Europe with 18 member states, was formed in Budapest. The CEI headquarters have been in Trieste, Italy, since 1996.

The Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) is a trade agreement between countries in Central Europe and the Balkans, which works as a preparation for full European Union membership. , it has 7 members: North Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia and the UNMIK (as Kosovo).

It was established in 1992 by Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, but came into force only in 1994. Czechoslovakia had in the meantime split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Slovenia joined in 1996, while Romania did the same in 1997, Bulgaria in 1999, and Croatia in 2003. In 2004, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Slovenia left the CEFTA to join the EU. Romania and Bulgaria left it in 2007 for the same reason. Subsequently, North Macedonia joined it in 2006, and Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia and UNMIK (on behalf of Kosovo) in 2007. In 2013, Croatia left the CEFTA to join the EU.

Switzerland and Liechtenstein participate in a customs union since 1924, and both employ the Swiss franc as national currency.

====Eastern Europe ====
The effects of the EU integration process of the countries from the former Eastern bloc are still debated. As a result, the relationship between immigration levels and EU public support remains uncertain. Through the integration, the countries in Eastern Europe have experienced growth of the economy, benefits of the free market agreements and freedom of the labor movement within the EU. However, the results of the empirical socioeconomic analyses suggest that in Spain, France, Ireland and the Netherlands, the immigration from CEE had negative effects on support for European integration in the host societies. The research also implies that the immigration from the CEE seems to undermine the long-term effects of the integration. There are theories for the programs of social development that range in views from: an extended contact with the immigrants from Eastern Europe might help forge a common European identity and it could also lead to a potential national isolation, caused by tightening support mechanisms for the labor immigration. Equal amount of research also implies that the internal migration of the countries within the EU is necessary for the successful development of its economic union.

====Danube region====
The EU Strategy for the Danube Region was endorsed by the European Council in 2011 and is the second macro-regional strategy in Europe. The Strategy provides a basis for improved cooperation among 14 countries along the Danube River. It aims to improve the effectiveness of regional integration efforts and leverage the impact of policies at the EU, national and local levels.

====Balkans====

The Craiova Group, Craiova Four, or C4 is a cooperation project of four European states – Romania, Bulgaria, Greece and Serbia – for the purposes of furthering their European integration as well as economic, transport and energy cooperation with one another.

==Council of Europe==

Against the background of the devastation and human suffering during the Second World War as well as the need for reconciliation after the war, the idea of European integration led to the creation of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg in 1949.

The most important achievement of the Council of Europe is the European Convention on Human Rights of 1950 with its European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, which serves as a &quot;de facto&quot; supreme court for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout Europe. Human rights are also protected by the Council of Europe&#x27;s Committee for the Prevention of Torture and the European Social Charter.

Most conventions of the Council of Europe pursue the aim of greater legal integration, such as the conventions on legal assistance, against corruption, against money laundering, against doping in sport, or internet crime.

Cultural co-operation is based on the Cultural Convention of 1954 and subsequent conventions on the recognition of university studies and diplomas as well as on the protection of minority languages.

After the fall of the Berlin Wall, former communist European countries were able to accede to the Council of Europe, which now comprises 46 states in Europe. Therefore, European integration has practically succeeded at the level of the Council of Europe, encompassing almost the whole European continent, with the exception of Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Russia, and the Vatican City.

European integration at the level of the Council of Europe functions through the accession of member states to its conventions, and through political coordination at the level of ministerial conferences and inter-parliamentary sessions. In accordance with its Statute of 1949, the Council of Europe works to achieve greater unity among its members based on common values, such as human rights and democracy.

==European Political Community==
The European Political Community (EPC) is an intergovernmental forum for political and strategic discussions about the future of Europe. The inaugural summit was held on 6 October 2022 in Prague, with participants from 44 European countries, as well as the Presidents of the European Council and the European Commission.

==Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe==
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) is a trans-Atlantic intergovernmental organisation whose aim is to secure stability in Europe. It was established as the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) in July 1973, and was subsequently transformed into its current form in January 1995. The OSCE has 56 member states, covering most of the northern hemisphere.

The OSCE develops three lines of activities, namely the &quot;Politico-Military Dimension&quot;, the &quot;Economic and Environmental Dimension&quot; and the &quot;Human Dimension&quot;. These respectively promote (i) mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution; (ii) the monitoring, alerting and assistance in case of economic and environmental threats; and (iii) full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

==European Free Trade Association==

The European Free Trade Association (EFTA) is a European trade bloc which was established on 3 May 1960 as an alternative for European states who did not join the EEC. EFTA currently has four member states: Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, and Liechtenstein; just Norway and Switzerland are founding members.

The EFTA Convention was signed on 4 January 1960 in Stockholm by seven states: Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. Finland became an associate member in 1961 and a full member in 1986; Iceland joined in 1970 and Liechtenstein did the same in 1991. A revised Convention, the Vaduz Convention, was signed on 21 June 2001 and entered into force on 1 June 2002.

The United Kingdom and Denmark left in 1973, when they joined the European Community (EC). Portugal left EFTA in 1986, when it also joined the EC. Austria, Finland and Sweden ceased to be EFTA members in 1995 by joining the European Union, which superseded the EC in 1993.
==European Broadcasting Union==
The European Broadcasting Union (EBU) is an alliance of public service media entities, established on 12 February 1950. , the organisation comprises 112 active members in 54 countries, and 30 associate members from a further 19 countries. Most EU states are part of this organisation, and therefore the EBU has been subject to supranational legislation and regulation. It also hosted debates between candidates for the European Commission presidency for the 2014 parliamentary elections, but is unrelated to the EU itself.
==European Patent Convention==
The European Patent Convention (EPC), also known as the Convention on the Grant of European Patents of 5 October 1973, is a multilateral treaty instituting the European Patent Organisation and providing an autonomous legal system according to which European patents are granted. As of 2022, there are 39 parties to the European Patent Convention. The Convention on the Grant of European Patents was first signed on 5 October 1973.

==European Communities==
In 1951, Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and West Germany agreed to confer powers over their steel and coal production to the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in the Treaty of Paris, which came into force on 23 July 1952.

Coal and steel production was essential for the reconstruction of countries in Europe after the Second World War and this sector of the national economy had been important for warfare in the First and Second World Wars. Therefore, France had originally maintained its occupation of the Saarland with its steel companies after the founding of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) in 1949. By transferring national powers over the coal and steel production to a newly created ECSC Commission, the member states of the ECSC were able to provide for greater transparency and trust among themselves.

This transfer of national powers to a &quot;Community&quot; to be exercised by its commission was paralleled under the 1957 Treaty of Rome establishing the European Atomic Energy Community (or Euratom) and the European Economic Community (EEC) in Brussels.

In 1967, the Merger Treaty (or Brussels Treaty) combine the institutions of the ECSC and Euratom into that of the EEC. They already shared a Parliamentary Assembly and Courts. Collectively they were known as the European Communities. In 1987, the Single European Act (SEA) was the first major revision of the Treaty of Rome that formally established the single European market and the European Political Cooperation. The Communities originally had independent personalities although they were increasingly integrated, and over the years were transformed into what is now called the European Union.

The six states that founded the three Communities were known as the &quot;inner six&quot; (the &quot;outer seven&quot; were those countries who formed the European Free Trade Association). These were Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Germany. The first enlargement was in 1973, with the accession of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom. Greece joined in 1981, and Portugal and Spain in 1986. On 3 October 1990 East Germany and West Germany were reunified, hence East Germany became part of the Community in the new reunified Germany (not increasing the number of states).

A key person in the Community creation process was Jean Monnet, regarded as the &quot;founding father&quot; of the European Union, which is seen as the dominant force in European integration.

==European Union==
The European Union (EU) is an association of 27 sovereign member states, that by treaty have delegated certain of their competences to common institutions, in order to coordinate their policies in a number of areas, without however constituting a new state on top of the member states. Officially established by the Treaty of Maastricht in 1993 upon the foundations of the pre-existing European Economic Community.

Thus, 12 states are founding members, namely, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom. In 1995, Austria, Finland and Sweden entered the EU. Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia joined in 2004. Bulgaria and Romania joined in 2007. Croatia acceded in 2013. The United Kingdom withdrew in 2020 after 47 years of membership. Official candidate states include Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, North Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia, Turkey and Ukraine. Morocco&#x27;s application was rejected by the EEC. Iceland and Switzerland have withdrawn their respective applications. Norway rejected membership in two referendums. The membership negotiations process between the EU and Turkey, which started on 3 October 2005, has been suspended since 2019. 

The institutions of the European Union, its parliamentarians, judges, commissioners and secretariat, the governments of its member states as well as their people, all play a role in European Integration. Nevertheless, the question of who plays the key role is disputed as there are different theories on European Integration focusing on different actors and agency.

The European Union has a number of relationships with nations that are not formally part of the Union. According to the European Union&#x27;s official site, and a statement by Commissioner Günter Verheugen, the aim is to have a ring of countries, sharing EU&#x27;s democratic ideals and joining them in further integration without necessarily becoming full member states.

===Competences===

Whilst most responsibilities (&#x27;competences&#x27;) are retained by the member states, some competences are conferred exclusively on the Union for collective decision, some are shared pending Union action and some receive Union support. These are shown on this table:
===Economic integration===
The European Union operates a single economic market across the territory of all its members, and uses a single currency between the Eurozone members. Further, the EU has a number of economic relationships with nations that are not formally part of the Union through the European Economic Area and customs union agreements.

====Free trade area====

The creation of the EEC eliminated tariffs, quotas and preferences on goods among member states, which are the requisites to define a free trade area (FTA). The United Kingdom remains part of the FTA during the transition period of the Brexit withdrawal agreement.

Numerous countries have signed a European Union Association Agreement (AA) with FTA provisions. These mainly include Mediterranean countries (Algeria in 2005, Egypt in 2004, Israel in 2000, Jordan in 2002, Lebanon in 2006, Morocco in 2000, Palestinian National Authority in 1997, and Tunisia in 1998), albeit some countries from other trade blocs have also signed one (such as Chile in 2003, Mexico in 2000, and South Africa in 2000).

Further, many Balkan states have signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with FTA provisions, such as Albania (signed 2006), Montenegro (2007), North Macedonia (2004), Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia (both 2008, entry-into-force pending).

In 2008, Poland and Sweden proposed the Eastern Partnership which would include setting a FTA between the EU and Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine.

====Customs union====
The European Union Customs Union defines an area where no customs are levied on goods travelling within it. It includes all member states of the European Union. The abolition of internal tariff barriers between EEC member states was achieved in 1968.

Andorra and San Marino belong to the EU customs unions with third states. Turkey is linked by the European Union–Turkey Customs Union.
====European Single Market====

A prominent goal of the EU since its creation by the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 is establishing and maintaining a single market. This seeks to guarantee the four basic freedoms, which are related to ensure the free movement of goods, services, capital and people around the EU&#x27;s internal market.

The United Kingdom remained part of the single market during the transition period of the Brexit withdrawal agreement. The European Economic Area (EEA) agreement allows Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein to participate in the European Single Market without joining the EU. The four basic freedoms apply. However, some restrictions on fisheries and agriculture take place. Switzerland is linked to the European Union by Swiss-EU bilateral agreements, with a different content from that of the EEA agreement.
====Eurozone====
The Eurozone refers to the European Union member states that have adopted the euro currency union as the third stage of the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Further, certain states outside the EU have adopted the euro as their currency, despite not belonging to the EMU. Thus, a total of 26 states, including 20 European Union states and six non-EU members, currently use the euro.

The Eurozone came into existence with the official launch of the euro on 1 January 1999. Physical coins and banknotes were introduced on 1 January 2002.

The original members were Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. Greece adopted the euro on 1 January 2001. Slovenia joined on 1 January 2007, Cyprus and Malta were admitted on 1 January 2008, Slovakia joined on 1 January 2009, Estonia on 1 January 2011, Latvia on 1 January 2014, Lithuania on 1 January 2015 and Croatia on 1 January 2023.

Outside the EU, agreements have been concluded with Andorra, Monaco, San Marino, and Vatican City for formal adoption, including the right to issue their own coins. Montenegro and Kosovo} unilaterally adopted the euro when it launched.
====Fiscal union====

There has long been speculation about the possibility of the European Union eventually becoming a fiscal union. In the wake of the European debt crisis that began in 2009, calls for closer fiscal ties, possibly leading to some sort of fiscal union have increased; though it is generally regarded as implausible in the short term, some analysts regard fiscal union as a long-term necessity. While stressing the need for coordination, governments have rejected talk of fiscal union or harmonisation in this regard.

====Aviation====
There are three main aviation related institutions present in Europe:
* European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC)
* Eurocontrol
* European Common Aviation Area (ECAA)
====Energy====

The transnational energy related structures present in Europe are:
* Energy Community
* European Atomic Energy Community
* European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity
* European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas
* INOGATE
* Energy Charter Treaty
====Standardisation====
The transnational standardisation organisations present in Europe are:

* European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)
* European Committee for Standardization (CEN)
* European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC)
* Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM)
===Social and political integration===

====Education====
The ERASMUS programme (European Region Action Scheme for the Mobility of University Students) seeks to encourage and support free movement of the academic community. It was established in 1987.

A total of 33 states (including all European Union states, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Switzerland and Turkey) are involved.
The European Higher Education Area (EHEA) aims to integrate education systems in Europe. Thus, degrees and study periods are recognised mutually. This is done by following the Bologna process, and under the Lisbon Recognition Convention of the Council of Europe.

The Bologna declaration was signed in 1999 by 29 countries, all EU members or candidates at the moment (except Cyprus which joined later) and three out of four EFTA countries: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and United Kingdom. Croatia, Cyprus, Liechtenstein, and Turkey joined in 2001. In 2003, Albania, Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Holy See (a Council of Europe permanent observer), North Macedonia, Russia, and Serbia signed the convention. Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine followed in 2005. Montenegro joined in 2007. Finally, Kazakhstan (not a member of the Council of Europe) joined in 2010. This makes a total of 47 member states. Monaco and San Marino are the only members of the Council of Europe which have not adopted the convention. The other European nation that is eligible to join, but has not, is Belarus.

====Research====
There are a number of multinational research institutions based in Europe.

*In the EIROforum collaboration:
** European Space Agency 
** European Molecular Biology Laboratory 
** European Fusion Development Agreement 
** European Southern Observatory 
** Particle physics:
*** CERN
*** European Synchrotron Radiation Facility
*** Institut Laue–Langevin
*** European XFEL
*Meteorology:
** EUMETSAT
** European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
** EUMETNET

====Health====

The European Health Insurance Card (or EHIC) is issued free of charge and allows anyone who is insured by or covered by a statutory social security scheme of the EEA countries and Switzerland to receive medical treatment in another member state for free or at a reduced cost, if that treatment becomes necessary during their visit (for example, due to illness or an accident), or if they have a chronic pre-existing condition which requires care such as kidney dialysis.

The epSOS project, also known as &quot;Smart Open Services for European Patients&quot;, aims to promote free movement of patients. It will allow health professionals to electronically access the data from patients from another country, to electronically process prescriptions in all involved countries, or to provide treatment in another EU state to a patient on a waiting list.

The project has been launched by the EU and 47 member institutions from 23 EU member states and 3 non-EU members. They include national health ministries, national competence centres, social insurance institutions and scientific institutions as well as technical and administrative management entities.

====Charter of Fundamental Rights====
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union is a document enshrining certain fundamental rights. The wording of the document has been agreed at ministerial level and has been incorporated into the Treaty of Lisbon. Poland has negotiated an opt out from this Charter, as had the United Kingdom before the latter&#x27;s withdrawal from the European Union.

====Right to vote====
The European integration process has extended the right of foreigners to vote. Thus, European Union citizens were given voting rights in local elections by the 1992 Maastricht Treaty. Several member states (Belgium, Luxembourg, Lithuania, and Slovenia) have extended since then the right to vote to all foreign residents. This was already the case in Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands and Sweden. Further, voting and eligibility rights are granted among citizens of the Nordic Passport Union, and between numerous countries through bilateral treaties (i.e. between Norway and Spain, or between Portugal and Brazil, Cape Verde, Iceland, Norway, Uruguay, Venezuela, Chile and Argentina), or without them (i.e. Ireland and the United Kingdom). Finally, within the EEA, Iceland and Norway also grant the right to vote to all foreign residents.

====Schengen Area====
The main purpose of the establishment of the Schengen Agreement is the abolition of physical borders among European countries. A total of 30 states, including 26 European Union states (all except Ireland, which is part of the Common Travel Area with the United Kingdom) and four non-EU members (Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland), are subject to the Schengen rules. Its provisions have already been implemented by 29 states, leaving just Cyprus to do so among signatory states.

Further, Monaco, San Marino and Vatican City are &quot;de facto&quot; members.

====Visa policy in EU====

European Union has visa-free regime agreements with some European countries outside EU and discussing such agreements with others; Armenia, Russia, Ukraine, and Moldova. Matters concerning Turkey have also been debated. Ireland maintains an independent visa policy in the EU.

===Defence===
There are a number of multi-national military and peacekeeping forces which are ultimately under the command of the EU, and therefore can be seen as the core for a future European Union army. These corps include forces from 26 EU states (all except Malta, which currently does not participate in any battlegroup), Norway and Turkey. Denmark used to have an opt-out clause in its accession treaty and was not obliged to participate in the common defence policy, but in 2022 decided to abandon its stance. Further, the Western European Union (WEU) capabilities and functions have been transferred to the European Union, under its developing Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP).

The EU also has close ties with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), according to the Berlin Plus agreement. This is a comprehensive package of agreements made between NATO and the EU on 16 December 2002. With this agreement the EU is given the possibility to use NATO assets in case it wanted to act independently in an international crisis, on the condition that NATO does not want to act itself – the so-called &quot;right of first refusal&quot;.

In fact, many EU member states are among the 32 NATO members. The Treaty of Brussels is considered the precursor to NATO. The North Atlantic Treaty was signed in Washington, D.C., in 1949. It included the five Treaty of Brussels states, as well as the United States, Canada, Portugal, Italy, Norway, Denmark and Iceland. Greece and Turkey joined the alliance in 1952, and West Germany did the same in 1955. Spain entered in 1982. In 1999, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Poland became NATO members. Finally, Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovenia, and Slovakia joined in 2004. In 2009, Albania and Croatia joined. In 2008, Ukraine and Georgia were told that they will also eventually become members. Montenegro and North Macedonia joined in 2017 and 2020 respectively. In 2023 and 2024, Finland and Sweden joined. Thus, 23 out of 32 NATO states are among the 27 EU members, another two are members of the EEA, and one more is an EU candidate and also a member of the European Union Customs Union.
===Space===

On 22 May 2007, the member states of the European Union have agreed to create a common political framework for space activities in Europe by unifying the approach of the European Space Agency (ESA) with those of the individual European Union member states.

However, ESA is an intergovernmental organisation with no formal organic link to the EU; indeed the two institutions have different member states and are governed by different rules and procedures. ESA was created in 1975 by the merger of the two pre-existing European organisations engaged in space activities, ELDO and ESRO. The 10 founding members were Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. Ireland joined on 31 December 1975. In 1987, Austria and Norway became member states. Finland joined in 1995, Portugal in 2000, Greece and Luxembourg in 2005, the Czech Republic in 2008, and Romania in 2011. Currently, it has 20 member states: all the EU member states before 2004, plus Czech Republic, Norway, Poland, Romania, and Switzerland. In addition, Canada has had the special status of a Cooperating State under a series of cooperation agreements dating since 1979.

In 2007 the political perspective of the European Union was to make ESA an agency of the EU by 2014. ESA is likely to expand in the coming years with the countries which joined the EU in both 2004 and 2007. Currently, almost all EU member states are in different stages of affiliation with ESA. Poland has joined on 19 November 2012. Hungary and Estonia have signed ESA Convention. Latvia and Slovenia have started to implement a Plan for European Cooperating State (PECS) Charter. Slovakia, Lithuania and Bulgaria have signed a European Cooperating State (ECS) Agreement. Cyprus, Malta and Croatia have signed Cooperation Agreements with ESA.

===Membership in European Union agreements===
A small group of EU member states have joined all European treaties, instead of opting out on some. They drive the development of a federal model for the European integration. This is linked to the concept of Multi-speed Europe where some countries would create a core union; and goes back to the Inner Six references to the founding member states of the European Communities.

At present, the formation of a formal Core Europe Federation (&quot;a federation within the confederation&quot;) has been held off at every occasion where such a federation treaty had been discussed. Instead, supranational institutions are created that govern more areas in &quot;Inner Europe&quot; than existing European integration provides for.

Among the 27 EU state members, 18 states have signed all integration agreements: Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Finland, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain. The agreements considered include the fifth stage of economic integration or EMU, the Schengen agreement, and the Area of freedom, security and justice (AFSJ).

Thus, among the 27 EU countries, 20 have joined the Eurozone, 25 have joined Schengen, and also 25 have no opt-outs under AFSJ.

Further, some countries which do not belong to the EU have joined several of these initiatives, albeit sometimes at a lower stage such as the Customs Union, the Common Market (EEA), or even unilaterally adopting the euro, and by taking part in Schengen, either as a signatory state, or &quot;de facto.&quot;

Thus, 6 non-EU countries have adopted the euro (4 through an agreement with the EU and 2 unilaterally), and 4 non-EU states have joined the Schengen agreement officially.

The following table shows the status of each state membership to the different agreements promoted by the EU. It lists 47 countries, including the 27 EU member states, 9 candidate states, 3 members of the EEA and Switzerland, Kosovo which has applied for membership, 4 microstates, and the United Kingdom and Armenia as special cases.

Hence, this table summarises some components of EU laws applied in most European states. Some territories of EU member states also have a special status in regard to EU laws applied. Some territories of EFTA member states also have a special status in regard to EU laws applied as is the case with some European microstates. For member states that do not have special-status territories the EU law applies fully with the exception of the opt-outs in the European Union and states under a safeguard clause or alternatively some states participate in enhanced co-operation between a subset of the EU members. Additionally, there are various examples of non-participation by some EU members and non-EU states participation in particular Agencies of the European Union, the programmes for European Higher Education Area, European Research Area and Erasmus Mundus.

Notes:
==Future of European integration==
There is no fixed end to the process of integration. The discussion on the possible final political shape or configuration of the European Union is sometimes referred to as the debate on the finalité politique (French for &quot;political purpose&quot;). Integration and enlargement of the European Union are major issues in the politics of Europe, each at European, national and local level. Integration may conflict with national sovereignty and cultural identity, and is opposed by eurosceptics. To the east of the European Union, the countries of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia launched the creation of the Eurasian Economic Union in the year 2015, which was subsequently joined by Armenia and Kyrgyzstan. Other states in the region, such as Moldova and Tajikistan may also join. Meanwhile, the post-Soviet disputed states of Abkhazia, Artsakh, South Ossetia, and Transnistria have created the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations to closer integrate among each other. Some Eastern European countries such as Armenia have opted to cooperate with both the EU and the Eurasian Union. On 24 February 2017 Tigran Sargsyan, the Chairman of the Eurasian Economic Commission stated that Armenia&#x27;s stance was to cooperate and work with both the European Union and the Eurasian Economic Union. Sargsyan added that although Armenia is part of the Eurasian Union, a new European Union Association Agreement between Armenia and the EU would be finalized shortly.

Several countries in Eastern Europe have engaged the EU with the aim to grow economic and political ties. The Euronest Parliamentary Assembly, established in 2003, is the inter-parliamentary forum in which members of the European Parliament and the national parliaments of Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia participate and forge closer political and economic ties with the European Union. All of these States participate in the EU&#x27;s Eastern Partnership program. The Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation and the Community of Democratic Choice are other organizations established to promote European integration, stability, and democracy. On 12 January 2002, the European Parliament noted that Armenia and Georgia may enter the EU in the future. On 2 March 2024, Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan advised that Armenia would officially &quot;apply to become a candidate for EU membership in the coming days, within a month at most&quot;. On 5 March, Pashinyan stated that Armenia would apply for EU candidacy by autumn 2024 at the latest. On 12 March 2024, the European Parliament passed a resolution confirming Armenia meets Maastricht Treaty requirements and may apply for EU membership. The National Assembly of Armenia approved the matter in January 2025 to start the accession of Armenia to the European Union and the matter will be put to a referendum for confirmation or rejection by the Armenian people. On 9 January 2025, the Armenian government approved the bill to launch a bid for the country to join the European Union. Currently, Georgia is the only country in the Caucasus actively seeking EU membership.

===European Security Treaty===
In 2008, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev announced a new concept for Russian foreign politics and called for the creation of a common space in Euro-Atlantic and Eurasia area &quot;from Vancouver to Vladivostok&quot;. On 5 June 2009 in Berlin he proposed a new all-European pact for security that would include all European, CIS countries and the United States. On 29 November 2009 a draft version of the European Security Treaty appeared. French president Sarkozy spoke positively about Medvedev&#x27;s ideas and called for closer security and economic relation between Europe and Russia.

===Common space from Lisbon to Vladivostok===

Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin in a German newspaper in 2010 called for common economic space, free-trade area or more advanced economic integration, stretching from Lisbon to Vladivostok. He also said it is quite possible Russia could join the eurozone one day. French president Nicolas Sarkozy in 2010 said he believed in 10 or 15 years there will be common economic space between EU and Russia with visa-free regime and general concept of security.

Instead Russia has chosen economic policy of self-sufficiency and economic autarky. Russia has been unable to compete with the EU economy, so integration might be at the cost of its own political and socio-economic stability.

===Concept of a single legal space for the CIS and Europe===
Russian legal scholar Oleg Kutafin and economist Alexander Zakharov produced a Concept of a Single Legal Space for the CIS and Europe in 2002. This idea was fully incorporated in the resolution of the 2003 Moscow Legal Forum. The Forum gathered representatives of more than 20 countries including 10 CIS countries. In 2007 both the International Union of Jurists of the CIS and the International Union (Commonwealth) of Advocates passed resolutions that strongly support the Concept of a Single Legal Space for Europe and post-Soviet Countries.

The concept said: &quot;Obviously, to improve its legislation Russia and other countries of CIS should be oriented toward the continental legal family of European law. The civil law system is much closer to the Russian and other CIS countries will be instrumental in harmonising legislation of CIS countries and the European Community but all values of common law should be also investigated on the subject of possible implementation in some laws and norms.
It is suggested that the introduction of the concept of a Single legal space and a single Rule of Law space for Europe and CIS be implemented in four steps:
# Development plans at the national level regarding adoption of selected EC legal standards in the legislation of CIS countries;
# Promotion of measures for harmonisation of law with the goal of developing a single legal space for Europe and CIS countries in the area of commercial and corporate law;
# Making the harmonisation of judicial practice of CIS countries compatible with Rule of Law principles and coordination of the basic requirements of the Rule of Law in CIS countries with the EU legal standards.
# Development of ideas the Roerich Pact (International Treaty on the Protection of Artistic and Scientific Institution and Historic Monuments initiated by Russian thinker Nicholas Roerich and signed in 1935 by 40 % of sovereign states in Washington D.C.) into the law of CIS countries and European law.
==Beyond Europe==
===Euro-Mediterranean Partnership===

The Euro-Mediterranean Partnership or Barcelona Process was organised by the European Union to strengthen its relations with the countries in the Mashriq and Maghreb regions. It started in 1995 with the Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean Conference, and it has been developed in successive annual meetings.

The European Union enlargement of 2004 brought two more Mediterranean countries (Cyprus and Malta) into the Union, while adding a total of 10 to the number of Member States. The Euro-Mediterranean Partnership today comprises 43 members: 27 European Union member states, and 15 partner countries (Albania, Algeria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Syria and Tunisia, as well as the Palestinian Territories). Libya has had observer status since 1999.

The Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area (EU-MEFTA) is based on the Barcelona Process and European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP). It will cover the EU, the EFTA, the EU customs unions with third states (Andorra, San Marino, and Turkey), the EU candidate states, and the partners of the Barcelona Process.

The Union for the Mediterranean is a community of countries, mostly bordering the Mediterranean Sea, established in July 2008.

====Ties with partners====
Morocco already has a number of close ties with the EU, including an Association Agreement with FTA provisions, air transport integration, or the participation in military operations such as ALTHEA in Bosnia.

Further, it will be the first partner to go beyond association by enhancing political and economic ties, entering the Single Market, and participating in some EU agencies.

===Commonwealth of Independent States===

The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) is a loose organisation in which most former Soviet republics participate. A visa-free regime operates among members and a free-trade area is planned. Ukraine is not an official member, but has participated in the organisation. Some members are more integrated than others, for example Russia and Belarus form a Union State. In 2010, Belarus, Russia and Kazakhstan formed a customs union and a single market (Common Economic Space) commenced on 1 January 2012. The Presidents of Belarus, Russia and Kazakhstan established the Eurasian Economic Union with a Eurasian Commission in 2015, subsequently joined by Armenia and Kyrgyzstan. A common currency is also planned, potentially to be named &quot;evraz&quot;. Some other countries in the region, such as Moldova are potential members of these organisations.

===Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations===
The post-Soviet disputed states of Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Transnistria are all members of the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations which aims to forge closer integration.

===EU and other regions and countries in the world===

The European Union cooperates with some other countries and regions via loose organisations and regular meetings. The ASEM forum, consisting of the EU and some Asian countries, has been held every two years since 1996. The EU and African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States form the ACP–EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, promoting ACP–EU development cooperation, democracy and human rights. The EU and Latin American countries form the Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly. TAFTA is a proposed free-trade area between EU and United States.

* ASEM – Asia–Europe Meeting
* ACP – African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (Economic Partnership Agreements)
* EuroLat – Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly
* TAFTA – Transatlantic Free Trade Area

===Other organisations in world===
European countries like the United Kingdom, France, Spain, Portugal have made organisations with other countries in the world with which they have strong cultural and historical links.
===European languages in the world===
English is considered to be the global lingua franca. European languages like English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Russian and German are official, co-official or widely in use in many countries with a colonial past or with a European diaspora.

===World integration===

==See also==

*Assembly of European Regions
*Centre Virtuel de la Connaissance sur l&#x27;Europe – Virtual Centre for Knowledge on Europe
*Differentiated integration
*European Federation
*European Policy Centre
*Europe Day
*EuroVoc
*Mechanism for Cooperation and Verification
*North American integration
*Pan-European identity
*Paneuropean Union
*Pulse of Europe
*Regions of Europe
*TRACECA

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Carrasco, C. A., &amp; Peinado, P. (2014). &quot;On the origin of European imbalances in the context of European integration,&quot; Working papers wpaper71, Financialisation, Economy, Society &amp; Sustainable Development (FESSUD) Project.
* Glencross, A. (2014). The Politics of European Integration: Political Union or a House Divided.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="0" end="20" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q462668" start="65" end="73" title="regional integration" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q729438" start="78" end="98" title="economic integration" label="economic integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="132" end="138" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="229" end="243" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="278" end="299" title="cultural assimilation" label="cultural assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="304" end="318" title="centralisation" label="centralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="374" end="386" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="569" end="586" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="592" end="608" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="618" end="635" title="Napoleonic Empire" label="Napoleonic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q78525" start="862" end="892" title="Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi" label="Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="897" end="912" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1050" end="1067" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972527" start="1604" end="1633" title="Union of European Federalists" label="Union of European Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377261" start="1642" end="1673" title="European Movement International" label="European Movement International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1867" end="1879" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q96590840" start="1992" end="2022" title="succession of the Roman Empire" label="succession of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2260" end="2277" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="2283" end="2299" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="2305" end="2324" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="2330" end="2347" title="First French Empire" label="Napoleonic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="2372" end="2379" title="Unification of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="2381" end="2386" title="Unification of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="2392" end="2403" title="Yugoslavia" label="the Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q613420" start="2419" end="2439" title="Latin Monetary Union" label="Latin Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2474" end="2489" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="2808" end="2817" title="Communist International" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q703593" start="2833" end="2867" title="Labour and Socialist International" label="Labour and Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="2882" end="2912" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="Radical and Democratic Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124124" start="2963" end="2982" title="International Agrarian Bureau" label="Green International"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="3065" end="3108" title="Christian democracy" label="Democratic Parties inspired by Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q78525" start="3558" end="3588" title="Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi" label="Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3650" end="3670" title="Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi#Pan-European political activist" label="Pan-Europa manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294864" start="3689" end="3700" title="Paneuropean" label="Paneuropean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="3724" end="3730" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="3807" end="3824" title="Wall Street crash of 1929" label="Wall Street crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800220" start="3963" end="3976" title="Arthur Salter, 1st Baron Salter" label="Arthur Salter"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="4099" end="4111" title="Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4142" end="4148" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q154356" start="4435" end="4446" title="Émile Borel" label="Émile Borel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="4867" end="4882" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="4920" end="4937" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q274344" start="5301" end="5316" title="Édouard Herriot" label="Édouard Herriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="5336" end="5375" title="European Federation" label="&amp;quot;The United States of Europe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542735" start="5455" end="5508" title="Belgium–Luxembourg Economic Union" label="Belgian and Luxembourgish customs and monetary union."/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="5761" end="5780" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q828641" start="5827" end="5844" title="Bertrand de Jouvenel" label="Bertrand Jouvenel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153020" start="6060" end="6075" title="José Ortega y Gasset" label="Ortega y Gasset"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="6120" end="6136" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republican Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="6336" end="6357" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q265824" start="6377" end="6383" title="Second Hellenic Republic" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="6466" end="6489" title="European Federation" label="United States of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="6644" end="6670" title="Interwar period" label="Between the two world wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="6693" end="6708" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364972" start="6786" end="6797" title="Międzymorze" label="Międzymorze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364972" start="6882" end="6893" title="Intermarium" label="Intermarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498665" start="6940" end="6952" title="Mitteleuropa" label="Mitteleuropa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="6959" end="6975" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="6989" end="6996" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="7001" end="7010" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7028" end="7040" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="7647" end="7659" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="7679" end="7687" title="German-occupied Europe" label="directly"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="7691" end="7701" title="Axis powers" label="indirectly"/>
<link wikidata="Q649117" start="7835" end="7844" title="New Order (Nazism)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914778" start="7850" end="7872" title="Greater Germanic Reich" label="Greater Germanic Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="8068" end="8079" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206702" start="8166" end="8186" title="University of Zürich" label="University of Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="8203" end="8220" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="8234" end="8257" title="European Federation" label="United States of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q311290" start="8815" end="8826" title="sui generis" label="sui generis"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="9061" end="9071" title="Federalism" label="Federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474578" start="9076" end="9089" title="Functionalism in international relations" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313512" start="9142" end="9158" title="transactionalism" label="transactionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q441294" start="9369" end="9385" title="Altiero Spinelli" label="Altiero Spinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890411" start="9422" end="9441" title="Ventotene Manifesto" label="Ventotene Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q200639" start="9447" end="9458" title="Paul Valéry" label="Paul Valéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175715" start="9679" end="9692" title="David Mitrany" label="David Mitrany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335818" start="10220" end="10233" title="Supranational union" label="supranational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977515" start="10320" end="10336" title="neofunctionalism" label="neofunctionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q86184" start="10386" end="10399" title="Ernst B. Haas" label="Ernst B. Haas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10435" end="10448" title="Leon Lindberg" label="Leon Lindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="10633" end="10666" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666079" start="10926" end="10946" title="Intergovernmentalism" label="Intergovernmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q555421" start="10960" end="10976" title="Stanley Hoffmann" label="Stanley Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780264" start="10987" end="11005" title="Empty chair crisis" label="Empty Chair Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="11026" end="11043" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles De Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540843" start="11090" end="11118" title="Liberal intergovernmentalism" label="Liberal Intergovernmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q506379" start="11146" end="11162" title="Andrew Moravcsik" label="Andrew Moravcsik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459305" start="12051" end="12073" title="multi-level governance" label="multi-level governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972527" start="12763" end="12792" title="Union of European Federalists" label="Union of European Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713336" start="12798" end="12824" title="Young European Federalists" label="Young European Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377261" start="12830" end="12861" title="European Movement International" label="European Movement International"/>
<link wikidata="Q972613" start="12867" end="12892" title="European Federalist Party" label="European Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q55229798" start="12898" end="12909" title="Volt Europa" label="Volt Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972527" start="12915" end="12944" title="Union of European Federalists" label="Union of European Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377261" start="13168" end="13199" title="European Movement International" label="European Movement International"/>
<link wikidata="Q972613" start="13386" end="13411" title="European Federalist Party" label="European Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="13417" end="13429" title="pro-European" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q55229798" start="13725" end="13736" title="Volt Europa" label="Volt Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="14257" end="14292" title="member states of the European Union" label="member states of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="14320" end="14372" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q113834800" start="14412" end="14440" title="European Political Community" label="European Political Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="14449" end="14466" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377616" start="14499" end="14533" title="European Civil Aviation Conference" label="European Civil Aviation Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q663492" start="14580" end="14634" title="European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation" label="European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q648403" start="14674" end="14712" title="European Committee for Standardization" label="European Committee for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q899383" start="14744" end="14791" title="European Telecommunications Standards Institute" label="European Telecommunications Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378146" start="14831" end="14886" title="European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization" label="European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="14922" end="14950" title="European Union Customs Union" label="European Union Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q642949" start="14960" end="14987" title="European Olympic Committees" label="European Olympic Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378173" start="15013" end="15039" title="European Patent Convention" label="European Patent Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="15085" end="15117" title="European Atomic Energy Community" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307754" start="15136" end="15161" title="Single Euro Payments Area" label="Single Euro Payments Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412411" start="15171" end="15200" title="European Common Aviation Area" label="European Common Aviation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377863" start="15210" end="15240" title="European Higher Education Area" label="European Higher Education Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="15261" end="15278" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="15283" end="15299" title="French Community of Belgium" label="French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q90027" start="15310" end="15346" title="German-speaking Community of Belgium" label="German-speaking Community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="15410" end="15437" title="European Broadcasting Union" label="European Broadcasting Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="15471" end="15510" title="Union of European Football Associations" label="Union of European Football Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413905" start="15543" end="15608" title="European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity" label="European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513667" start="15711" end="15768" title="European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas" label="European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597869" start="15811" end="15837" title="European Broadcasting Area" label="European Broadcasting Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="15903" end="15911" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="16205" end="16219" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134173" start="16226" end="16249" title="European Defence Agency" label="European Defence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="16262" end="16284" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q844266" start="16901" end="16959" title="Special territories of member states of the European Union" label="Special territories of member states of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q877399" start="17125" end="17146" title="North Atlantic Treaty" label="North Atlantic Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="17312" end="17364" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="17473" end="17500" title="European Broadcasting Union" label="European Broadcasting Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q642949" start="17558" end="17585" title="European Olympic Committees" label="European Olympic Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="17601" end="17607" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q462668" start="17667" end="17687" title="regional integration" label="regional integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="18100" end="18113" title="Nordic region" label="Nordic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q146165" start="18120" end="18134" title="Nordic Council" label="Nordic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="18238" end="18254" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="18307" end="18314" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="18316" end="18323" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="18325" end="18332" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="18334" end="18340" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="18345" end="18351" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="18387" end="18396" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="18398" end="18411" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="18416" end="18421" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151921" start="18429" end="18450" title="Nordic Passport Union" label="Nordic Passport Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="18763" end="18776" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="18897" end="18910" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249769" start="18918" end="18933" title="postmodernity" label="post-modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q670356" start="18940" end="18955" title="Baltic Assembly" label="Baltic Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="19016" end="19029" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="19118" end="19125" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338737" start="19224" end="19246" title="Baltic Free Trade Area" label="Baltic Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q789769" start="19565" end="19597" title="Council of the Baltic Sea States" label="Council of the Baltic Sea States"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="19672" end="19682" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="19836" end="19843" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="19845" end="19852" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="19854" end="19861" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="19863" end="19870" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="19872" end="19879" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="19894" end="19900" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="19902" end="19911" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="19913" end="19919" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="19921" end="19927" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="19937" end="19943" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="19952" end="19971" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="19986" end="20002" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="20098" end="20117" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q992993" start="20392" end="20403" title="Europe 2020" label="Europe 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="20598" end="20611" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="20625" end="20632" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="20898" end="20920" title="Benelux Economic Union" label="Benelux Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q723249" start="20978" end="20996" title="Benelux Parliament" label="Benelux Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542735" start="21023" end="21056" title="Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union" label="Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="21180" end="21193" title="single market" label="single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q232415" start="21236" end="21249" title="Belgian franc" label="Belgian franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q213940" start="21254" end="21273" title="Luxembourgian franc" label="Luxembourgian franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="21375" end="21384" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q380340" start="21442" end="21492" title="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation" label="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q326816" start="21948" end="22004" title="GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development" label="GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655795" start="22534" end="22555" title="British–Irish Council" label="British–Irish Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="22575" end="22596" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="22863" end="22882" title="countries of the United Kingdom" label="countries of the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="22884" end="22900" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="22941" end="22959" title="Crown dependencies" label="Crown dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="22961" end="22969" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="22975" end="22986" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="22991" end="22997" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267668" start="23032" end="23051" title="devolved English parliament" label="devolved parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="23117" end="23135" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004994" start="23448" end="23459" title="Immigration Act 1971" label="British law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="23677" end="23707" title="Brexit" label="the United Kingdom left the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="23989" end="24005" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24135" end="24160" title="Northern Ireland Protocol Bill#Irish government" label="encountering difficulties"/>
<link wikidata="Q244323" start="24265" end="24279" title="Visegrád Group" label="Visegrád Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="24472" end="24486" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q548097" start="24544" end="24552" title="Visegrád" label="Visegrád"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="24631" end="24660" title="dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="dissolution of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q392805" start="24684" end="24711" title="Central European Initiative" label="Central European Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q900636" start="24748" end="24774" title="Central and Eastern Europe" label="Central and Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="24812" end="24820" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="24856" end="24863" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q319014" start="24889" end="24926" title="CEFTA" label="Central European Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="25094" end="25109" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="25120" end="25142" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="25144" end="25151" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="25153" end="25163" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="25165" end="25171" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="25180" end="25185" title="UNMIK" label="UNMIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="25190" end="25196" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="25755" end="25760" title="UNMIK" label="UNMIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="25888" end="25901" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="25934" end="25945" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="26068" end="26080" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="26460" end="26465" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="26467" end="26473" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="26475" end="26482" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="26491" end="26502" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="26859" end="26873" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="27450" end="27462" title="Danube River" label="Danube River"/>
<link wikidata="Q20036753" start="27629" end="27642" title="Craiova Group" label="Craiova Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="28112" end="28129" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="28133" end="28143" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="28217" end="28252" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="28270" end="28300" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378135" start="28494" end="28533" title="Committee for the Prevention of Torture" label="Committee for the Prevention of Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334480" start="28542" end="28565" title="European Social Charter" label="European Social Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="28728" end="28744" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q166376" start="28754" end="28769" title="doping in sport" label="doping in sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="28774" end="28788" title="internet crime" label="internet crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566342" start="28829" end="28856" title="Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict" label="Cultural Convention of 1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="29013" end="29024" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="29865" end="29882" title="Intergovernmental organization" label="intergovernmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q114061388" start="29961" end="29977" title="1st European Political Community Summit" label="inaugural summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="30008" end="30014" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q228197" start="30042" end="30060" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories in Europe" label="European countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q735587" start="30077" end="30111" title="President of the European Council" label="Presidents of the European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8882" start="30120" end="30139" title="President of the European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="30203" end="30255" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="30283" end="30313" title="intergovernmental organization" label="intergovernmental organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11859074" start="30384" end="30433" title="Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="30579" end="30598" title="northern hemisphere" label="northern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="31070" end="31101" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129645" start="31123" end="31133" title="trade bloc" label="trade bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="31229" end="31232" title="European Economic Community" label="EEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="31425" end="31434" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844" start="31691" end="31696" title="Vaduz" label="Vaduz"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="31842" end="31860" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q97374157" start="32408" end="32421" title="Supranational legislature" label="supranational"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="32500" end="32519" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q784304" start="32520" end="32530" title="President of the European Union" label="presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376095" start="32539" end="32567" title="2014 European Parliament election" label="2014 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="32772" end="32778" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q685547" start="32795" end="32823" title="European Patent Organisation" label="European Patent Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="33238" end="33271" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q724496" start="33286" end="33301" title="Treaty of Paris (1951)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201" start="33629" end="33637" title="Saarland" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="34073" end="34087" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="34105" end="34137" title="European Atomic Energy Community" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="34159" end="34186" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q622766" start="34220" end="34233" title="Merger Treaty" label="Merger Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="34348" end="34370" title="European Parliament" label="Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="34375" end="34381" title="European Court of Justice" label="Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="34419" end="34439" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q622649" start="34454" end="34473" title="Single European Act" label="Single European Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369938" start="34880" end="34889" title="inner six" label="inner six"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="34961" end="34992" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q159700" start="35462" end="35473" title="Jean Monnet" label="Jean Monnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="35681" end="35694" title="member states of the European Union" label="member states"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="35939" end="35959" title="Treaty of Maastricht" label="Treaty of Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="36009" end="36036" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q814935" start="36829" end="36886" title="Accession of Turkey to the European Union" label="membership negotiations process between the EU and Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="38144" end="38152" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="38282" end="38304" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335686" start="38495" end="38510" title="free trade area" label="free trade area"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476704" start="38597" end="38624" title="Brexit withdrawal agreement" label="Brexit withdrawal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426710" start="38660" end="38696" title="European Union Association Agreement" label="European Union Association Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="38867" end="38897" title="Palestinian National Authority" label="Palestinian National Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259507" start="39105" end="39144" title="Stabilisation and Association Process" label="Stabilisation and Association Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q208019" start="39360" end="39379" title="Eastern Partnership" label="Eastern Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="39520" end="39548" title="European Union Customs Union" label="European Union Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="39640" end="39675" title="member states of the European Union" label="member states of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="39727" end="39730" title="European Economic Community" label="EEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413378" start="39866" end="39901" title="European Union–Turkey Customs Union" label="European Union–Turkey Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="39988" end="40005" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="40048" end="40061" title="single market" label="single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="40091" end="40110" title="Four Freedoms (European Union)" label="four basic freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476704" start="40326" end="40353" title="Brexit withdrawal agreement" label="Brexit withdrawal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="40359" end="40381" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q672237" start="40654" end="40683" title="Switzerland and the European Union" label="Swiss-EU bilateral agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="40763" end="40771" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="40842" end="40856" title="currency union" label="currency union"/>
<link wikidata="Q212141" start="40883" end="40919" title="Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union" label="European Economic and Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q218010" start="41251" end="41256" title="Euro coins" label="coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q338071" start="41261" end="41270" title="Euro banknotes" label="banknotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q651677" start="42075" end="42087" title="fiscal union" label="fiscal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="42108" end="42128" title="European debt crisis" label="European debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377616" start="42580" end="42621" title="European Civil Aviation Conference" label="European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q663492" start="42624" end="42635" title="Eurocontrol" label="Eurocontrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412411" start="42638" end="42674" title="European Common Aviation Area" label="European Common Aviation Area (ECAA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989312" start="42760" end="42776" title="Energy Community" label="Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="42779" end="42811" title="European Atomic Energy Community" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413905" start="42814" end="42879" title="European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity" label="European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513667" start="42882" end="42939" title="European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas" label="European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459896" start="42942" end="42949" title="INOGATE" label="INOGATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001857" start="42952" end="42973" title="Energy Charter Treaty" label="Energy Charter Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q899383" start="43072" end="43126" title="European Telecommunications Standards Institute" label="European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q648403" start="43129" end="43173" title="European Committee for Standardization" label="European Committee for Standardization (CEN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378146" start="43176" end="43241" title="European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization" label="European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q924157" start="43244" end="43301" title="Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements" label="Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q254168" start="43364" end="43381" title="ERASMUS programme" label="ERASMUS programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377863" start="43688" end="43718" title="European Higher Education Area" label="European Higher Education Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q187073" start="43860" end="43875" title="Bologna process" label="Bologna process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546127" start="43891" end="43920" title="Lisbon Recognition Convention" label="Lisbon Recognition Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="43928" end="43945" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="44526" end="44534" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045937" start="45133" end="45142" title="EIROforum" label="EIROforum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="45161" end="45182" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q695267" start="45187" end="45224" title="European Molecular Biology Laboratory" label="European Molecular Biology Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782930" start="45229" end="45266" title="European Fusion Development Agreement" label="European Fusion Development Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="45271" end="45300" title="European Southern Observatory" label="European Southern Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="45327" end="45331" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q901751" start="45336" end="45375" title="European Synchrotron Radiation Facility" label="European Synchrotron Radiation Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536754" start="45380" end="45402" title="Institut Laue–Langevin" label="Institut Laue–Langevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462592" start="45407" end="45420" title="European XFEL" label="European XFEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q692163" start="45438" end="45446" title="EUMETSAT" label="EUMETSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274195" start="45450" end="45500" title="European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts" label="European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046245" start="45504" end="45512" title="EUMETNET" label="EUMETNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q569412" start="45534" end="45564" title="European Health Insurance Card" label="European Health Insurance Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="45692" end="45695" title="European Economic Area" label="EEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="45710" end="45721" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239228" start="45933" end="45955" title="pre-existing condition" label="pre-existing condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="45984" end="45999" title="kidney dialysis" label="kidney dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="46728" end="46779" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="46813" end="46831" title="fundamental rights" label="fundamental rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="46933" end="46949" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="47054" end="47088" title="Brexit" label="withdrawal from the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q474839" start="47163" end="47190" title="right of foreigners to vote" label="right of foreigners to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="47233" end="47246" title="voting rights" label="voting rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q15966540" start="47250" end="47264" title="local election" label="local election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="47278" end="47295" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151921" start="47583" end="47604" title="Nordic Passport Union" label="Nordic Passport Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="47874" end="47877" title="European Economic Area" label="EEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="48021" end="48039" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="48202" end="48220" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="49384" end="49406" title="WEU" label="Western European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q672788" start="49506" end="49540" title="Common Foreign and Security Policy" label="Common Foreign and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q511733" start="49552" end="49588" title="European Security and Defence Policy" label="European Security and Defence Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="49634" end="49668" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q821323" start="49694" end="49715" title="Berlin Plus agreement" label="Berlin Plus agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q845737" start="50125" end="50143" title="Treaty of Brussels" label="Treaty of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q877399" start="50185" end="50206" title="North Atlantic Treaty" label="North Atlantic Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="51044" end="51072" title="European Union Customs Union" label="European Union Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="51257" end="51278" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q697744" start="51657" end="51661" title="ELDO" label="ELDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473105" start="51666" end="51670" title="ESRO" label="ESRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q392918" start="52362" end="52378" title="Agency of the European Union" label="agency of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375275" start="53187" end="53205" title="Multi-speed Europe" label="Multi-speed Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369938" start="53275" end="53284" title="Inner Six" label="Inner Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="53333" end="53353" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q212141" start="54031" end="54034" title="Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union" label="EMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="54040" end="54058" title="Schengen agreement" label="Schengen agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133343" start="54068" end="54105" title="Area of freedom, security and justice" label="Area of freedom, security and justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="54386" end="54399" title="European Union Customs Union" label="Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="54405" end="54424" title="European Economic Area" label="Common Market (EEA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="54488" end="54496" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="54930" end="54933" title="European Economic Area" label="EEA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55199" end="55213" title="Special Member State territories and the European Union#Summary" label="special status"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="55295" end="55309" title="EFTA and the European Union" label="special status"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55364" end="55384" title="Microstates and the European Union#Summary" label="European microstates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349687" start="55499" end="55529" title="opt-outs in the European Union" label="opt-outs in the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804651" start="55534" end="55565" title="Mechanism for Cooperation and Verification" label="states under a safeguard clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349638" start="55610" end="55631" title="enhanced co-operation" label="enhanced co-operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q392918" start="55795" end="55825" title="Agencies of the European Union" label="Agencies of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377863" start="55846" end="55876" title="European Higher Education Area" label="European Higher Education Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377820" start="55878" end="55900" title="European Research Area" label="European Research Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092820" start="55905" end="55919" title="Erasmus Mundus" label="Erasmus Mundus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47232" start="56234" end="56267" title="enlargement of the European Union" label="enlargement of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192040" start="56292" end="56310" title="politics of Europe" label="politics of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="56395" end="56406" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368367" start="56411" end="56428" title="cultural identity" label="cultural identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="56448" end="56460" title="euroscepticism" label="eurosceptics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="56514" end="56521" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="56523" end="56533" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173083" start="56574" end="56597" title="Eurasian Economic Union" label="Eurasian Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="56649" end="56656" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="56661" end="56671" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="56709" end="56716" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="56721" end="56731" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="56774" end="56789" title="disputed states" label="disputed states"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="56793" end="56801" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244165" start="56803" end="56810" title="Republic of Artsakh" label="Artsakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="56812" end="56825" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="56831" end="56843" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500985" start="56861" end="56906" title="Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations" label="Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="56985" end="56992" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110233" start="57078" end="57093" title="Tigran Sargsyan" label="Tigran Sargsyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173076" start="57115" end="57143" title="Eurasian Economic Commission" label="Eurasian Economic Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="57218" end="57232" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173083" start="57241" end="57264" title="Eurasian Economic Union" label="Eurasian Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426710" start="57340" end="57376" title="European Union Association Agreement" label="European Union Association Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="57454" end="57468" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412008" start="57543" end="57574" title="Euronest Parliamentary Assembly" label="Euronest Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="57654" end="57673" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="57706" end="57713" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="57715" end="57722" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="57724" end="57731" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="57733" end="57740" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="57742" end="57752" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="57757" end="57764" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208019" start="57896" end="57915" title="Eastern Partnership" label="Eastern Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q380340" start="57929" end="57979" title="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation" label="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500982" start="57988" end="58018" title="Community of Democratic Choice" label="Community of Democratic Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="58138" end="58157" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7035479" start="58262" end="58277" title="Nikol Pashinyan" label="Nikol Pashinyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="58606" end="58623" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337463" start="58674" end="58702" title="National Assembly (Armenia)" label="National Assembly of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131736480" start="58752" end="58794" title="Accession of Armenia to the European Union" label="accession of Armenia to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417106" start="58915" end="58934" title="Government of Armenia" label="Armenian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="59024" end="59031" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="59059" end="59067" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23530" start="59159" end="59174" title="Dmitry Medvedev" label="Dmitry Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="59458" end="59461" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="59794" end="59808" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="59944" end="59950" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="59954" end="59965" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="60058" end="60073" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="60638" end="60641" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850313" start="62220" end="62232" title="Roerich Pact" label="Roerich Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="62556" end="62586" title="Euro-Mediterranean Partnership" label="Euro-Mediterranean Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="62590" end="62607" title="Barcelona Process" label="Barcelona Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q503282" start="62698" end="62705" title="Mashriq" label="Mashriq"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="62710" end="62717" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="62755" end="62794" title="Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean Conference" label="Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575889" start="63379" end="63413" title="Euro-Mediterranean free trade area" label="Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="63441" end="63458" title="Barcelona Process" label="Barcelona Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q583535" start="63463" end="63492" title="European Neighbourhood Policy" label="European Neighbourhood Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="63526" end="63530" title="European Free Trade Association" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="63536" end="63571" title="European Union Customs Union" label="EU customs unions with third states"/>
<link wikidata="Q47232" start="63611" end="63630" title="Enlargement of the European Union" label="EU candidate states"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="63656" end="63673" title="Barcelona Process" label="Barcelona Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="63680" end="63707" title="Union for the Mediterranean" label="Union for the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="63758" end="63775" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="64260" end="64294" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q166110" start="64613" end="64624" title="Union State" label="Union State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663713" start="64675" end="64688" title="Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364717" start="64695" end="64708" title="Common Economic Space (CIS)" label="single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364717" start="64710" end="64731" title="Common Economic Space (CIS)" label="Common Economic Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173083" start="64827" end="64850" title="Eurasian Economic Union" label="Eurasian Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="64910" end="64917" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="64922" end="64932" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="64936" end="64951" title="common currency" label="common currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="65056" end="65063" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="65179" end="65194" title="disputed states" label="disputed states"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="65198" end="65206" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="65208" end="65221" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="65227" end="65239" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500985" start="65263" end="65308" title="Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations" label="Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q726746" start="65523" end="65527" title="ASEM" label="ASEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="65635" end="65681" title="African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States" label="African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867102" start="65691" end="65726" title="ACP–EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly" label="ACP–EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650776" start="65738" end="65768" title="ACP–EU development cooperation" label="ACP–EU development cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q684066" start="65843" end="65885" title="Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly" label="Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289959" start="65887" end="65892" title="TAFTA" label="TAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q726746" start="65963" end="65982" title="Asia–Europe Meeting" label="Asia–Europe Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="65991" end="66037" title="African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States" label="African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194845" start="66039" end="66070" title="Economic Partnership Agreements" label="Economic Partnership Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q684066" start="66084" end="66126" title="Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly" label="Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289959" start="66137" end="66166" title="Transatlantic Free Trade Area" label="Transatlantic Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="66247" end="66253" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="66255" end="66260" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="66262" end="66270" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="66465" end="66478" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="66513" end="66519" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="66521" end="66528" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="66530" end="66540" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="66542" end="66549" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="66551" end="66558" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="66563" end="66569" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="66638" end="66646" title="colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819571" start="66662" end="66679" title="European diaspora" label="European diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q958154" start="66722" end="66750" title="Assembly of European Regions" label="Assembly of European Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946113" start="66752" end="66803" title="Centre Virtuel de la Connaissance sur l&amp;#x27;Europe" label="Centre Virtuel de la Connaissance sur l&amp;#x27;Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q117795413" start="66846" end="66872" title="Differentiated integration" label="Differentiated integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="66874" end="66893" title="European Federation" label="European Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q769334" start="66895" end="66917" title="European Policy Centre" label="European Policy Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207811" start="66919" end="66929" title="Europe Day" label="Europe Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370467" start="66931" end="66938" title="EuroVoc" label="EuroVoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804651" start="66940" end="66982" title="Mechanism for Cooperation and Verification" label="Mechanism for Cooperation and Verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053929" start="66984" end="67010" title="North American integration" label="North American integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294864" start="67012" end="67033" title="Pan-European identity" label="Pan-European identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q603388" start="67035" end="67052" title="Paneuropean Union" label="Paneuropean Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746168" start="67054" end="67069" title="Pulse of Europe" label="Pulse of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470668" start="67071" end="67088" title="Regions of Europe" label="Regions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q453562" start="67090" end="67097" title="TRACECA" label="TRACECA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683716" wikidata="Q1707765" url="?curid=683716" title="Joseph P. Hoar">
<text>Joseph Paul Hoar (December 30, 1934 – September 17, 2022) was a United States Marine Corps four-star general. He served as Commander in Chief of United States Central Command from 1991 to 1994, retiring from the Marine Corps on September 1, 1994.

==Marine Corps career==
Hoar attended Boston College High School, then went on to graduate from Tufts University and receive a second lieutenant&#x27;s commission in the Marine Corps in 1957. After graduating from the Basic School at Quantico, he was assigned as a rifle platoon commander with the 5th Marine Regiment. Later assignments included duty with 1st Battalion, 1st Marines at Camp Pendleton, battalion staff officer on Okinawa, the Marine Barracks at Yorktown, Virginia, and Assistant Manpower, Personnel and Administration Officer at Camp Lejeune.

During the Vietnam War, Hoar was assigned with the 2nd Marine Division, commanding Company M, 3rd Battalion, 2nd Marine Regiment of that unit. He later served as a battalion and brigade adviser with a South Vietnamese Marine Corps unit. He then returned stateside, completing a three-year tour of duty in Washington, D.C. as an operations officer and as Special Assistant to the Assistant Marine Corps Commandant. In 1971, he again went overseas as Executive Officer of 1st Battalion, 9th Marines.

From 1972 to 1976 Hoar was an instructor at the Marine Corps Command and Staff College, later returning to Marine Headquarters where he served in the Personnel Management Division. In 1977, he returned to 1st Marines as commander of its 3rd Battalion, later accepting duty with the Division&#x27;s staff, where he was promoted to colonel. Hoar assumed command of 1st Marine Regiment from 17 November 1979 to 24 April 1981.

After completing this tour he was assigned to the 31st Marine Amphibious Unit aboard , participating in three deployments in the Indian Ocean. He then returned to the U.S. as Assistant Chief of Staff for Manpower, Personnel and Administration, gaining a promotion to brigadier general in February 1984. In 1985, he returned to Washington as Director of the Facilities and Services Division at Marine HQ. 1987 saw Hoar accept a position as Commanding General at the Parris Island recruit depot; later that year he was promoted to major general.

Hoar moved to MacDill AFB, Florida in 1988 as Chief of Staff for United States Central Command. He returned to Headquarters Marine Corps in June 1990, earning a promotion to lieutenant general while serving there as Deputy Chief of Staff for Plans, Policies and Operations. After a year at this assignment he returned to CENTCOM as its commander on August 9, 1991, relieving General H. Norman Schwarzkopf. He remained in that capacity until his retirement three years later.

While in command of CENTCOM, General Hoar oversaw a number of different operations in the region, including enforcement of the Persian Gulf and Red Sea naval embargo, enforcement of the southern no-fly zone over Iraq, ground operations in Somalia, and American troop evacuation from Yemen during that country&#x27;s civil war in 1994.

==Post-military career and death==
After retirement, he set up a consulting company involved in business ventures in various places in the Middle East and Africa. He has served as Director of Hawaiian Airlines, as a Fellow of the World Economic Forum, and on the boards of trustees of Suffolk University and the Center for Naval Analyses.

General Hoar drew upon his experience with CENTCOM in the days leading up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq to stress the importance of allied cooperation, notably the ability to base military operations from Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Turkey, as key to success in the region. As U.S. strategy for the invasion coalesced, Hoar expressed misgivings, in particular regarding the number of troops committed to the operation.

A year after the official cessation of hostilities, Hoar continued to maintain that coalition forces did not have enough troops on the ground to accomplish their mission. In December 2003, Hoar stated that Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz, &quot;...doesn&#x27;t know much about the business he&#x27;s in&quot;. In testimony before the Senate committee on foreign relations on May 19, 2004, he stated regarding the situation in Iraq, &quot;I believe we are absolutely on the brink of failure. We are looking into the abyss&quot;.

On September 7, 2004, Hoar and seven other retired officers wrote an open letter to President Bush expressing their concern over the number of allegations of abuse of prisoners in U.S. military custody. In it they wrote:

We urge you to commit – immediately and publicly – to support the creation of a comprehensive, independent commission to investigate and report on the truth about all of these allegations, and to chart a course for how practices that violate the law should be addressed.

In March 2006, Hoar joined fellow former United States Marines General Tony Zinni, Lt. General Greg Newbold, Lt. General Frank E. Petersen, and Congressman Jack Murtha in endorsing fellow former U.S. Marine and Secretary of the Navy Jim Webb for U.S. Senate in Virginia.

Hoar served on the Board of Directors for the Middle East Policy Council, a Washington D.C.–based non-profit organization that seeks to educate American citizens and policy makers about the political, economic and security issues impacting U.S. national interests in the Middle East. He also served on the National Advisory Board of the Center for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation, the research arm of Council for a Livable World.

He died on September 17, 2022, of complications related to Alzheimer&#x27;s disease.

==Education and awards==
Hoar held a master&#x27;s degree from George Washington University and was also a graduate of the National War College and the Marine Corps Command and Staff College.

His military decorations include: 


==See also==
* David M. Brahms
* James Cullen
* John L. Fugh
* Robert Gard
* Lee F. Gunn
* John D. Hutson
* Richard O&#x27;Meara

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1707765" start="0" end="16" title="Joseph P. Hoar" label="Joseph Paul Hoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="64" end="90" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="145" end="174" title="United States Central Command" label="United States Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947835" start="286" end="312" title="Boston College High School" label="Boston College High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="344" end="360" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715757" start="462" end="478" title="the Basic School" label="the Basic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="482" end="490" title="Marine Corps Base Quantico" label="Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641369" start="546" end="565" title="5th Marine Regiment (United States)" label="5th Marine Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q195334" start="634" end="648" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton" label="Camp Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q600614" start="677" end="684" title="Okinawa Island" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="709" end="727" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479693" start="793" end="805" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune" label="Camp Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="819" end="830" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q210606" start="859" end="878" title="2nd Marine Division (United States)" label="2nd Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503757" start="1009" end="1038" title="Republic of Vietnam Marine Division" label="South Vietnamese Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1113" end="1129" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4596201" start="1278" end="1291" title="1st Battalion 9th Marines" label="1st Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646609" start="1293" end="1304" title="9th Marine Regiment (United States)" label="9th Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689905" start="1414" end="1433" title="Headquarters Marine Corps" label="Marine Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778866" start="1512" end="1523" title="1st Marine Regiment (United States)" label="1st Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636678" start="1544" end="1557" title="3rd Battalion 1st Marines" label="3rd Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778866" start="1670" end="1689" title="1st Marine Regiment" label="1st Marine Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="1860" end="1872" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424369" start="2196" end="2223" title="Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island" label="Parris Island recruit depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583022" start="2290" end="2301" title="MacDill Air Force Base" label="MacDill AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="2341" end="2370" title="United States Central Command" label="United States Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q310188" start="2659" end="2680" title="H. Norman Schwarzkopf" label="H. Norman Schwarzkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="2879" end="2891" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="2896" end="2903" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026406" start="2938" end="2958" title="Operation Southern Watch" label="southern no-fly zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q52226" start="2991" end="2998" title="Battle of Mogadishu (1993)" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="3035" end="3040" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="3068" end="3077" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q642610" start="3280" end="3297" title="Hawaiian Airlines" label="Hawaiian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="3318" end="3338" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056123" start="3373" end="3391" title="Suffolk University" label="Suffolk University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059792" start="3400" end="3425" title="Center for Naval Analyses" label="Center for Naval Analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="3509" end="3530" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="3632" end="3644" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="3646" end="3652" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3657" end="3663" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297543" start="4050" end="4077" title="Deputy Secretary of Defense" label="Deputy Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q219861" start="4078" end="4092" title="Paul Wolfowitz" label="Paul Wolfowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4189" end="4195" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="4919" end="4940" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q572954" start="4949" end="4959" title="Tony Zinni" label="Tony Zinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607151" start="4973" end="4985" title="Greg Newbold" label="Greg Newbold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486398" start="4999" end="5016" title="Frank E. Petersen" label="Frank E. Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q982347" start="5034" end="5045" title="Jack Murtha" label="Jack Murtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="5073" end="5084" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="5089" end="5110" title="Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q532279" start="5111" end="5119" title="Jim Webb" label="Jim Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="5124" end="5135" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5139" end="5147" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090273" start="5196" end="5222" title="Middle East Policy Council" label="Middle East Policy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176324" start="5554" end="5581" title="Council for a Livable World" label="Council for a Livable World"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="5643" end="5667" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="5707" end="5727" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="5733" end="5761" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q137269" start="5793" end="5813" title="National War College" label="National War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236896" start="5915" end="5930" title="David M. Brahms" label="David M. Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140764" start="5933" end="5945" title="James Cullen (US Army JAG)" label="James Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275176" start="5948" end="5960" title="John L. Fugh" label="John L. Fugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344664" start="5963" end="5974" title="Robert G. Gard Jr." label="Robert Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513577" start="5977" end="5988" title="Lee F. Gunn" label="Lee F. Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240538" start="5991" end="6005" title="John D. Hutson" label="John D. Hutson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328134" start="6008" end="6028" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Meara" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Meara"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683718" wikidata="Q949387" url="?curid=683718" title="Paul L. Smith">
<text>Paul Lawrence Smith (June 24, 1936 – April 25, 2012) was an American-Israeli actor and director. Burly, bearded and imposing, he appeared in feature films and occasionally on television since the 1960s, generally playing &quot;heavies&quot; and bad guys. His most notable roles include Hamidou, the vicious prison guard in &quot;Midnight Express&quot; (1978), Bluto in Robert Altman&#x27;s &quot;Popeye&quot; (1980), Gideon in the ABC miniseries &quot;Masada&quot; (1981), Glossu &quot;Beast&quot; Rabban in David Lynch&#x27;s &quot;Dune&quot; (1984) and Falkon in &quot;Red Sonja&quot; (1985). He was most frequently credited as Paul Smith or Paul L. Smith, but was also billed as P. L. Smith and Paul Lawrence Smith.

==Career==
Smith&#x27;s first acting role, at age 24, was in Otto Preminger&#x27;s 1960 epic &quot;Exodus&quot;, which was filmed in Israel. This was his first visit to the country. In 1967, Smith returned to Israel as a Mahal volunteer in the Six-Day War and remained for six years, appearing in locally filmed features and television productions. He received director credit on the 1970 documentary &quot;Milhemet 20 HaShanim&quot; (&quot;War of 20 Years&quot;) and the 1972 crime drama &quot;Jacko Vehayatzaniot&quot; (&quot;Jacko and the Prostitute&quot; or &quot;Tel Aviv Call Girls&quot;).

Between 1973 and 1977, Smith made a series of films with Michael Coby (pseudonym of Antonio Cantafora), a couple formed with the purpose of copying the successful films of the duo Terence Hill and Bud Spencer. Smith played Bud Spencer-like characters while Coby was a Terence Hill lookalike in &quot;Bud &amp; Terence&quot;-fashion. One of these films, &quot;Convoy Buddies&quot;, was selected for American release by Film Ventures International, and producer Edward L. Montoro changed Smith&#x27;s name to &quot;Bob Spencer&quot; and Cantafora&#x27;s name to &quot;Terrence Hall&quot;. Smith sued, successfully arguing that an actor&#x27;s name recognition is vital to his career. The judicial system agreed and ruled against FVI, which paid Smith damages and court costs.

Smith made appearances in such films as &quot;21 Hours at Munich&quot; (1976), &quot;Midnight Express&quot; (1978), as Bluto in &quot;Popeye&quot; (1980), and as Glossu Rabban in &quot;Dune&quot; (1984). On television, he appeared in such established series as &quot;Emergency!&quot;, &quot;CHiPS&quot;, &quot;Wonder Woman&quot;, &quot;Barney Miller&quot; and &quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot;.

==Personal life==
On April 25, 2012, Smith died in Ra&#x27;anana from undisclosed causes, at the age of 75.

==Filmography==
==Discography==
* &quot;I&#x27;m Mean&quot; (1980)

==References==
==Sources==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q949387" start="0" end="19" title="Paul L. Smith" label="Paul Lawrence Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="141" end="153" title="feature film" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q174699" start="329" end="345" title="Midnight Express (film)" label="Midnight Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519837" start="360" end="365" title="Bluto" label="Bluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="369" end="382" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q941944" start="396" end="402" title="Popeye (film)" label="Popeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="431" end="434" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568835" start="452" end="458" title="Masada (miniseries)" label="Masada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="473" end="504" title="Glossu &amp;quot;Beast&amp;quot; Rabban" label="Glossu &amp;quot;Beast&amp;quot; Rabban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="508" end="519" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q114819" start="533" end="537" title="Dune (1984 film)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q858860" start="571" end="580" title="Red Sonja (1985 film)" label="Red Sonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q52997" start="781" end="795" title="Otto Preminger" label="Otto Preminger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355901" start="819" end="825" title="Exodus (1960 film)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="853" end="859" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075662" start="941" end="956" title="Mahal volunteer" label="Mahal volunteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="964" end="975" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q601198" start="1401" end="1418" title="Antonio Cantafora" label="Antonio Cantafora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646344" start="1497" end="1525" title="Terence Hill and Bud Spencer" label="Terence Hill and Bud Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221074" start="1540" end="1551" title="Bud Spencer" label="Bud Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q243430" start="1585" end="1597" title="Terence Hill" label="Terence Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646344" start="1617" end="1634" title="Terence Hill and Bud Spencer" label="Bud &amp;amp; Terence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10400547" start="1676" end="1690" title="Convoy Buddies" label="Convoy Buddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448978" start="1735" end="1762" title="Film Ventures International" label="Film Ventures International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344019" start="1777" end="1794" title="Edward L. Montoro" label="Edward L. Montoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q820238" start="2138" end="2156" title="21 Hours at Munich" label="21 Hours at Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q174699" start="2177" end="2193" title="Midnight Express (film)" label="Midnight Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519837" start="2211" end="2216" title="Bluto" label="Bluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q941944" start="2226" end="2232" title="Popeye (film)" label="Popeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="2254" end="2267" title="Glossu Rabban" label="Glossu Rabban"/>
<link wikidata="Q114819" start="2277" end="2281" title="Dune (1984 film)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247463" start="2359" end="2369" title="Emergency!" label="Emergency!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023688" start="2383" end="2388" title="CHiPS" label="CHiPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247495" start="2402" end="2414" title="Wonder Woman (TV series)" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q808487" start="2428" end="2441" title="Barney Miller" label="Barney Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q697407" start="2458" end="2471" title="Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)" label="Hawaii Five-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q309164" start="2531" end="2544" title="Ra&amp;#x27;anana" label="Ra&amp;#x27;anana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683719" wikidata="Q1951483" url="?curid=683719" title="Mriya">
<text>Mriya, Ukrainian for &#x27;dream&#x27;, may refer to:

* Antonov An-225 Mriya, a cargo aircraft, destroyed during Russia&#x27;s 2022 invasion of Ukraine
* Mriya, a Ukrainian bank bought up by Russia&#x27;s VTB Bank </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178351" start="57" end="77" title="Antonov An-225 Mriya" label="Antonov An-225 Mriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549389" start="206" end="214" title="VTB Bank" label="VTB Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683726" wikidata="Q676413" url="?curid=683726" title="Dandelin spheres">
<text>In geometry, the Dandelin spheres are one or two spheres that are tangent both to a plane and to a cone that intersects the plane. The intersection of the cone and the plane is a conic section, and the point at which either sphere touches the plane is a focus of the conic section, so the Dandelin spheres are also sometimes called focal spheres.

The Dandelin spheres were discovered in 1822. They are named in honor of the French mathematician Germinal Pierre Dandelin, though Adolphe Quetelet is sometimes given partial credit as well. 

The Dandelin spheres can be used to give elegant modern proofs of two classical theorems known to Apollonius. The first theorem is that a closed conic section (i.e. an ellipse) is the locus of points such that the sum of the distances to two fixed points (the foci) is constant. The second theorem is that for any conic section, the distance from a fixed point (the focus) is proportional to the distance from a fixed line (the directrix), the constant of proportionality being called the eccentricity. 

A conic section has one Dandelin sphere for each focus. An ellipse has two Dandelin spheres touching the same nappe of the cone, while hyperbola has two Dandelin spheres touching opposite nappes. A parabola has just one Dandelin sphere.

== Proof that the intersection curve has constant sum of distances to foci ==
Consider the illustration, depicting a cone with apex &quot;S&quot; at the top. A plane &quot;e&quot; intersects the cone in a curve &quot;C&quot; (with blue interior). The following proof shall show that the curve &quot;C&quot; is an ellipse.

The two brown Dandelin spheres, &quot;G&quot;1 and &quot;G&quot;2, are placed tangent to both the plane and the cone: &quot;G&quot;1 above the plane, &quot;G&quot;2 below. Each sphere touches the cone along a circle (colored white), formula_1 and formula_2.

Denote the point of tangency of the plane with &quot;G&quot;1 by &quot;F&quot;1,
and similarly for &quot;G&quot;2 and &quot;F&quot;2 . Let &quot;P&quot; be a typical point on the curve &quot;C&quot;.

&quot;To Prove:&quot; The sum of distances formula_3 remains constant as the point &quot;P&quot; moves along the intersection curve &quot;C&quot;. (This is one definition of &quot;C&quot; being an ellipse, with formula_4 and formula_5 being its foci.)
*A line passing through &quot;P&quot; and the vertex &quot;S&quot; of the cone intersects the two circles, touching &quot;G&quot;1 and &quot;G&quot;2 respectively at points &quot;P&quot;1 and &quot;P&quot;2.
*As &quot;P&quot; moves around the curve, &quot;P&quot;1 and &quot;P&quot;2 move along the two circles, and their distance &quot;d&quot;(&quot;P&quot;1, &quot;P&quot;2) remains constant.
*The distance from &quot;P&quot; to &quot;F&quot;1 is the same as the distance from &quot;P&quot; to &quot;P&quot;1, because the line segments &quot;PF&quot;1 and &quot;PP&quot;1 are both tangent to the same sphere &quot;G&quot;1.
*By a symmetrical argument, the distance from &quot;P&quot; to &quot;F&quot;2 is the same as the distance from &quot;P&quot; to &quot;P&quot;2.
*Consequently, we compute the sum of distances as formula_6 which is constant as &quot;P&quot; moves along the curve. 

This gives a different proof of a theorem of Apollonius of Perga.

If we define an ellipse to mean the locus of points &quot;P&quot; such that &quot;d&quot;(&quot;F&quot;1, &quot;P&quot;) + &quot;d&quot;(&quot;F&quot;2, &quot;P&quot;) = a constant, then the above argument proves that the intersection curve &quot;C&quot; is indeed an ellipse. That the intersection of the plane with the cone is symmetric about the perpendicular bisector of the line through &quot;F&quot;1 and &quot;F&quot;2 may be counterintuitive, but this argument makes it clear.
Adaptations of this argument work for hyperbolas and parabolas as intersections of a plane with a cone. Another adaptation works for an ellipse realized as the intersection of a plane with a right circular cylinder.

== Proof of the focus-directrix property ==
The directrix of a conic section can be found using Dandelin&#x27;s construction. Each Dandelin sphere intersects the cone at a circle; let both of these circles define their own planes. The intersections of these two parallel planes with the conic section&#x27;s plane will be two parallel lines; these lines are the directrices of the conic section. However, a parabola has only one Dandelin sphere, and thus has only one directrix.

Using the Dandelin spheres, it can be proved that any conic section is the locus of points for which the distance from a point (focus) is proportional to the distance from the directrix. Ancient Greek mathematicians such as Pappus of Alexandria were aware of this property, but the Dandelin spheres facilitate the proof.

Neither Dandelin nor Quetelet used the Dandelin spheres to prove the focus-directrix property. The first to do so may have been Pierce Morton in 1829,
or perhaps Hugh Hamilton who remarked (in 1758) that a sphere touches the cone at a circle which defines a plane whose intersection with the plane of the conic section is a directrix. The focus-directrix property can be used to prove that astronomical objects move along conic sections around the Sun.

== Notes ==
== External links ==

*Dandelin Spheres page by Hop David
*Math Academy page on Dandelin&#x27;s spheres 
*Les théorèmes belges by Xavier Hubaut (in French).
*Conic Section Orbits – Dandelin spheres by Greg Egan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3" end="11" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q676413" start="17" end="33" title="Dandelin spheres" label="Dandelin spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="49" end="55" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="66" end="73" title="tangent" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="84" end="89" title="Plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q42344" start="99" end="103" title="Cone (geometry)" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="179" end="192" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568" start="254" end="259" title="Focus (geometry)" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q676413" start="332" end="345" title="Dandelin spheres" label="focal spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="425" end="431" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q983354" start="446" end="470" title="Germinal Pierre Dandelin" label="Germinal Pierre Dandelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012" start="479" end="495" title="Adolphe Quetelet" label="Adolphe Quetelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="611" end="620" title="Ancient Greece" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q180109" start="639" end="649" title="Apollonius of Perga" label="Apollonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="709" end="716" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q211548" start="725" end="730" title="locus (mathematics)" label="locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="969" end="978" title="directrix (conic section)" label="directrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q104486" start="1030" end="1042" title="Eccentricity (mathematics)" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q429335" start="1156" end="1161" title="Nappe (disambiguation)" label="nappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="1181" end="1190" title="hyperbola" label="hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="1244" end="1252" title="parabola" label="parabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858200" start="2365" end="2371" title="Apex (geometry)" label="vertex"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="2902" end="2909" title="tangent" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q180109" start="3254" end="3273" title="Apollonius of Perga" label="Apollonius of Perga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3799" end="3809" title="hyperbola#As plane section of a cone" label="hyperbolas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3814" end="3823" title="parabola#Alternative proof with Dandelin spheres" label="parabolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="3967" end="3975" title="Cylinder (geometry)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q211783" start="4682" end="4702" title="Pappus of Alexandria" label="Pappus of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931024" start="4942" end="4955" title="Hugh Hamilton (bishop)" label="Hugh Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5170" end="5216" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion#Derivation from Newton&amp;#x27;s laws" label="astronomical objects move along conic sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q316785" start="5447" end="5456" title="Greg Egan" label="Greg Egan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683727" wikidata="Q353225" url="?curid=683727" title="East Cleveland">
<text>East Cleveland is the name of the following places:

*In the United States of America:
**East Cleveland, Ohio
**East Cleveland, Tennessee
*In the United Kingdom:
**Redcar and Cleveland
***Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland parliament constituency</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q998878" start="89" end="109" title="East Cleveland, Ohio" label="East Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018972" start="112" end="137" title="East Cleveland, Tennessee" label="East Cleveland, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434448" start="164" end="184" title="Redcar and Cleveland" label="Redcar and Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053429" start="188" end="226" title="Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland" label="Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683733" wikidata="Q357754" url="?curid=683733" title="U9">
<text>U-9 or U9 may refer to:

* German submarine &quot;U-9&quot;, the designation of several German U-boats
* U-9, a U.S. Army designation for the Aero Commander 500, a light twin-engined aircraft
* U9, the IATA code for Tatarstan Airlines
* U9 (Berlin U-Bahn), a subway line in Berlin, Germany
* U9, a model of the Motorola ROKR cell phone
* &quot;Ultima IX: Ascension&quot;, a video game
* U9 League, a private university alliance in Taiwan.
* Yangwang U9, an electric supercar produced by BYD Auto
==See also==
* 9U (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q357754" start="0" end="3" title="U9" label="U-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q357754" start="7" end="9" title="U9" label="U9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551843" start="27" end="59" title="German submarine U-9" label="German submarine &amp;quot;U-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q381283" start="142" end="160" title="Aero Commander 500" label="Aero Commander 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785216" start="216" end="234" title="Tatarstan Airlines" label="Tatarstan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q99744" start="237" end="255" title="U9 (Berlin U-Bahn)" label="U9 (Berlin U-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q553799" start="311" end="324" title="Motorola ROKR" label="Motorola ROKR"/>
<link wikidata="" start="344" end="364" title="Ultima IX: Ascension" label="Ultima IX: Ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q26227639" start="387" end="396" title="U9 League" label="U9 League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861173" start="408" end="437" title="university alliances in Taiwan" label="university alliance in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q118288015" start="441" end="452" title="Yangwang U9" label="Yangwang U9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646375" start="511" end="530" title="9U (disambiguation)" label="9U (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683735" wikidata="Q339030" url="?curid=683735" title="Michael Kearney">
<text>Michael Kevin Kearney (born January 18, 1984) is an American college teaching assistant and game show contestant. He is known for setting several world records related to graduating at a young age, as well as teaching college students while still a teenager. Additionally, as a game-show contestant, he has won over one million dollars.

==Early life==
Michael was homeschooled by his mother and father, especially his mother, a Japanese American. He was diagnosed with ADHD, but his parents declined to use the offered prescription of Ritalin. His younger sister, Maeghan, is also a child prodigy and graduated from college at the age of sixteen. According to psychology professor, Kearney was helped to adjust well to his surroundings by his parents&#x27; determination, and the &quot;take-on-the-world&quot; attitude they passed down to him.

Kearney attended San Marin High School in Novato, California, for one year, graduating at the age of six in 1990. In 1994, Kearney and his parents were on &quot;The Tonight Show&quot;.

==College education==
Kearney graduated from high school at 6 and went to Santa Rosa Junior College in Sonoma County, California, where he obtained an Associate of Science in Geology at age 8. In 1993, his family moved to Alabama. Circa 1996, he was interviewed by Meredith Vieira on &quot;Turning Point&quot; (ABC News). As of 2019, Kearney remained the youngest person to have a high-school diploma and undergraduate degrees.

At the age of 8 he enrolled at The University of South Alabama, where he received in 1994 a bachelor&#x27;s degree in anthropology and is listed in the Guinness Book as the world&#x27;s youngest university graduate at the age of ten.

===Research and teaching===
Kearney graduated from Middle Tennessee State University with a master&#x27;s degree in biochemistry at the age of fourteen. His 118-page thesis was entitled &quot;Kinetic Isotope Effects of Thymidine Phosphorylase&quot;; the research focused on the kinetics of a glycosyltransferase involved in nucleotide synthesis. At the time, Kearney was the world&#x27;s youngest postgraduate (the master&#x27;s degree record was since broken in 1999 by Tathagat Avatar Tulsi).

In 1996, the family moved to Murfreesboro, Tennessee, and Kearney attended Vanderbilt University, taking classes and, by age fourteen, teaching as well (he was not yet legally able to drive). Kearney received his second master&#x27;s degree, this one from Vanderbilt University, at age seventeen or eighteen, in computer science. Kearney received his doctorate in chemistry at age 22, having returned to Middle Tennessee State University as a teaching assistant (also in chemistry).

==Involvement with game shows==
When young, Kearney attempted a career as a game-show host; he and his parents moved to Hollywood, to shoot a pilot episode, but the proposed game-show was not picked up.

In October 2006, Kearney became a finalist on the trivia-and-puzzle game &quot;Gold Rush&quot;, winning $100,000. In November 2006, in front of a national audience on &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot;, he went on to win the grand prize of an additional $1 million.

Kearney was a contestant on &quot;Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?&quot; which aired on April 25 &amp; 28, 2008, winning twenty-five thousand dollars. He was also a contestant on &quot;Million Dollar Password&quot; which aired on June 14, 2009, but he did not pass the elimination round (losing the tiebreaker).

==Life after education==
In 2018, he was working for an improv theater group in Nashville.

==See also==
* Intellectual giftedness

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q339030" start="0" end="21" title="Michael Kearney" label="Michael Kevin Kearney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="146" end="159" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="world records"/>
<link wikidata="Q83602" start="365" end="377" title="homeschooling" label="homeschooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="429" end="446" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="470" end="474" title="Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="536" end="543" title="Ritalin" label="Ritalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414827" start="863" end="884" title="San Marin High School" label="San Marin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q851004" start="888" end="906" title="Novato, California" label="Novato, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338655" start="1007" end="1023" title="The Tonight Show" label="The Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419896" start="1106" end="1131" title="Santa Rosa Junior College" label="Santa Rosa Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067" start="1135" end="1160" title="Sonoma County, California" label="Sonoma County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="1183" end="1203" title="associate&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Associate of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1207" end="1214" title="Geology" label="Geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q434497" start="1297" end="1312" title="Meredith Vieira" label="Meredith Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236937" start="1322" end="1335" title="Turning Point (TV program)" label="Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="1343" end="1351" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q13572981" start="1492" end="1523" title="The University of South Alabama" label="The University of South Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1553" end="1575" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="1579" end="1591" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="1613" end="1626" title="Guinness Book" label="Guinness Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784748" start="1747" end="1780" title="Middle Tennessee State University" label="Middle Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="1788" end="1808" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="1812" end="1824" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="1862" end="1868" title="thesis" label="thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="1888" end="1895" title="kinetic energy" label="Kinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="1896" end="1903" title="Isotope" label="Isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q422464" start="1915" end="1924" title="Thymidine" label="Thymidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425067" start="1925" end="1938" title="Phosphorylase" label="Phosphorylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q67201373" start="1988" end="2007" title="glycosyltransferase" label="glycosyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="2020" end="2040" title="nucleotide synthesis" label="nucleotide synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="2093" end="2105" title="postgraduate" label="postgraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q378410" start="2167" end="2188" title="Tathagat Avatar Tulsi" label="Tathagat Avatar Tulsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501766" start="2221" end="2244" title="Murfreesboro, Tennessee" label="Murfreesboro, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="2267" end="2288" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="2360" end="2381" title="driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="legally able to drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="2412" end="2432" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="2448" end="2469" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="2504" end="2520" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="2543" end="2552" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784748" start="2596" end="2629" title="Middle Tennessee State University" label="Middle Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070313" start="2635" end="2653" title="teaching assistant" label="teaching assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="2818" end="2831" title="pilot episode" label="pilot episode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2868" end="2877" title="Television pilot#Unsold pilot" label="picked up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578841" start="2959" end="2968" title="Gold Rush (virtual contest)" label="Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055086" start="3053" end="3074" title="Entertainment Tonight" label="Entertainment Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q200562" start="3180" end="3210" title="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?" label="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?"/>
<link wikidata="Q425836" start="3329" end="3352" title="Million Dollar Password" label="Million Dollar Password"/>
<link wikidata="Q908513" start="3443" end="3453" title="tiebreaker" label="tiebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="3513" end="3527" title="improv theater" label="improv theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q467677" start="3564" end="3587" title="Intellectual giftedness" label="Intellectual giftedness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683737" wikidata="Q703484" url="?curid=683737" title="Mike O'Malley">
<text>Michael Edward O&#x27;Malley (born October 31, 1966) is an American actor, writer and television producer. Born in Boston and raised in New Hampshire, O&#x27;Malley hosted the early 1990s children&#x27;s game shows &quot;Get the Picture&quot; and &quot;Nickelodeon Guts&quot; before moving to Los Angeles later that decade to star in his own sitcom for NBC called &quot;The Mike O&#x27;Malley Show&quot;. He is best known for his role as Jimmy Hughes on &quot;Yes, Dear&quot;, a CBS series which aired from 2000 to 2006. He was nominated for an Emmy Award for his role as Burt Hummel on the Fox series &quot;Glee&quot;.

O&#x27;Malley has also guest-starred in series including &quot;My Name Is Earl&quot;, &quot;Raising Hope&quot;, &quot;Parenthood&quot;, and &quot;Parks and Recreation&quot;, and has appeared in films including &quot;28 Days&quot;; &quot;Deep Impact&quot;; &quot;Leatherheads&quot;; &quot;Eat, Pray, Love&quot;; &quot;R.I.P.D.&quot;; &quot;Concussion&quot;; and &quot;Sully&quot;.

O&#x27;Malley is also a published playwright whose plays include &quot;Three Years From Thirty&quot; and &quot;Diverting Devotion&quot;. He adapted another play called &quot;Searching for Certainty&quot; for Peter Askin&#x27;s film &quot;Certainty&quot;, which premiered at the Boston Film Festival in 2011. O&#x27;Malley was also a writer on Showtime&#x27;s comedy-drama &quot;Shameless&quot;.

O&#x27;Malley was the creator and an executive producer of the Starz series &quot;Survivor&#x27;s Remorse&quot;, which ran for four seasons between 2014 and 2017. He has recently been a regular on the TNT series &quot;Snowpiercer&quot; based on the film of the same name.

==Early life==
O&#x27;Malley was born in Boston, Massachusetts, and raised in Nashua, New Hampshire. His mother Marianne was a career counselor and father Tony O&#x27;Malley an executive in the defense industry.

O&#x27;Malley graduated from Bishop Guertin High School in Nashua, New Hampshire in 1984, and from the University of New Hampshire in 1988, where he studied theater. He is also a member of Kappa Sigma fraternity.

== Career ==
=== Television ===
O&#x27;Malley&#x27;s first career breakthrough came as the host of Nickelodeon children&#x27;s game show &quot;Get the Picture&quot; in 1991. A year later, in 1992, he was the host of &quot;Nickelodeon Guts&quot; and later &quot;Global GUTS&quot; from 1992 to 1995. On the advice of Marc Summers, O&#x27;Malley moved to Los Angeles after the conclusion of &quot;GUTS&quot; to further pursue his acting career. O&#x27;Malley starred in &quot;Life with Roger&quot;, a series which aired from 1996 to 1997. In 1999, two of thirteen filmed episodes of &quot;The Mike O&#x27;Malley Show&quot; aired before the show was canceled. During the 1990s, he also appeared as &quot;The Rick&quot;, a character in a series of ads for the ESPN network. In 2018, The Rick made a return in ads for the ESPN+ streaming service.

From 2000 to 2006, O&#x27;Malley starred as Jimmy Hughes on the CBS comedy &quot;Yes, Dear&quot;. He later reprised this role in 2013 on the sitcom &quot;Raising Hope&quot;. Along with &quot;Yes, Dear&quot; costar Anthony Clark, O&#x27;Malley appeared in the Alan Jackson music video &quot;The Talkin&#x27; Song Repair Blues&quot;. From 2000 to 2002, O&#x27;Malley also provided the voice of Darryl MacPherson for The WB&#x27;s &quot;Baby Blues&quot;.

In 2006, O&#x27;Malley made a guest appearance on &quot;My Name Is Earl&quot; as a police officer with bowling aspirations, and made several more guest appearances on the show. In 2008, O&#x27;Malley appeared in the NBC drama &quot;My Own Worst Enemy&quot;.

In 2008, O&#x27;Malley became the spokesman for Time Warner Cable&#x27;s digital cable. In 2009, O&#x27;Malley began playing the recurring character, Burt Hummel, the father of a student, on &quot;Glee&quot;. The role lead to &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;&#x27;s Tim Stack to say, &quot;If Mike O&#x27;Malley doesn&#x27;t win an Emmy for playing Burt Hummel, I will be sorely disappointed.&quot; Chris Colfer, who plays Burt&#x27;s son Kurt, has credited his off-screen relationship with O&#x27;Malley with improving the quality of their scenes together.

Beginning in 2010, O&#x27;Malley portrayed a recurring character on &quot;Parenthood&quot;. He also hosted &quot;The World&#x27;s Funniest Office Commercials&quot; in 2010. On July 8, 2010, O&#x27;Malley received a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor – Comedy Series for playing Burt Hummel on &quot;Glee&quot;. Prior to its second season, O&#x27;Malley was made a series regular on &quot;Glee&quot;. On August 8, 2010, O&#x27;Malley won the Teen Choice Award for Best Parental Unit. He returned to recurring guest star status for the show&#x27;s third season.

=== Film ===
O&#x27;Malley made his film debut in the 1998 film &quot;Deep Impact&quot;, playing Elijah Wood&#x27;s astronomy teacher. He followed that with a supporting role in the comedy &quot;Pushing Tin&quot;. In 2000, he portrayed Oliver, a drug addict in rehab, in the film &quot;28 Days&quot;. In 2005, O&#x27;Malley appeared in the film &quot;The Perfect Man&quot;. In 2007, he had supporting roles in &quot;Leatherheads&quot; and &quot;Meet Dave&quot;.

O&#x27;Malley was interviewed in the film &quot;City of Champions: The Best of Boston Sports&quot;.

In 2009, O&#x27;Malley participated in the American documentary film &quot;The People Speak&quot;. In the film, he performed in a segment with political activist Staceyann Chin.

O&#x27;Malley&#x27;s feature work also includes roles in &quot;Eat Pray Love&quot;, &quot;Cedar Rapids&quot;, &quot;Concussion&quot; and &quot;Sully&quot;.

=== Writing and producing===
O&#x27;Malley is a playwright with two of his plays, &quot;Three Years from Thirty&quot; and &quot;Diverting Devotion&quot;, having been published and produced Off-Broadway. In 2003, a third play, &quot;Searching for Certainty&quot; was produced in Los Angeles.

He served as the director for the series finale episode of &quot;Yes, Dear&quot;, in which he starred.

He later wrote the screenplay for the film &quot;Certainty&quot;, which is based on &quot;Searching for Certainty&quot;. The film began production on May 24, 2010, directed by Peter Askin and produced by O&#x27;Malley, along with Will Battersby and Per Melita. &quot;Certainty&quot; premiered at the Boston Film Festival on September 16, 2011, where it won the Best Screenplay, Best Editing, and Best Ensemble Cast awards.

He was also a writer and consulting producer on the Showtime comedy-drama series &quot;Shameless&quot;.

O&#x27;Malley co-wrote the book for the musical &quot;Escape to Margaritaville&quot; featuring the songs of Jimmy Buffett with Greg Garcia. The show ran on Broadway from February to July 2018.

He created the Starz basketball comedy series &quot;Survivor&#x27;s Remorse&quot; and serves as the show&#x27;s writer and producer with his production company O&#x27;Malley Ink. He is also an executive producer as well as the showrunner for the series &quot;Heels&quot;, with a recurring role as Charlie Gully, a rival wrestling promoter.

=== Other media work ===
Along with Anthony Clark, his &quot;Yes, Dear&quot; co-star, he appeared in Alan Jackson&#x27;s 2005 music video for &quot;The Talkin&#x27; Song Repair Blues&quot;.

In 2007, O&#x27;Malley kept a blog on Yahoo! Sports, which followed the Boston Red Sox throughout their journey in the MLB playoffs, which was eventually capped off by their World Series title.

== Personal life ==
O&#x27;Malley resides in Los Angeles with his wife Lisa, who is a school psychologist. They have three children.

Kerry O&#x27;Malley, his younger sister, is an actress and Broadway veteran. The siblings co-starred in the first season of &quot;Snowpiercer&quot;.

A long time fan of Boston band Buffalo Tom, O&#x27;Malley is a close friend of lead singer Bill Janovitz. They have often supported causes together. O&#x27;Malley requested that the band create a title song for his own short-lived television show &quot;The Mike O&#x27;Malley Show&quot;, as well as for the sitcom &quot;Yes, Dear&quot; which he co-starred on. According to O&#x27;Malley, his love of the band was shared with his wife and was &quot;the glue&quot; that kept them together during their long-distance relationship.

O&#x27;Malley is a Boston Red Sox fan, and in May 2006, threw out the first pitch at a game in Fenway Park. He is also an avid fan of the NHL&#x27;s Boston Bruins and the NFL&#x27;s New England Patriots.

O&#x27;Malley returned to his graduating &quot;alma mater&quot; in 2006 to deliver the commencement speech to the university&#x27;s 136th graduating class. He also received an honorary degree.

== Acting credits ==
=== Film ===
=== Television ===
==Writing and producing credits==
===Film===
===Television===
===Theatre===
* &quot;Three Years from Thirty&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Diverting Devotion&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Searching for Certainty&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Escape to Margaritaville&quot; (2017)

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q703484" start="0" end="28" title="Mike O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Michael Edward O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="115" end="121" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="136" end="149" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554366" start="221" end="236" title="Get the Picture (game show)" label="Get the Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028377" start="253" end="269" title="Nickelodeon Guts" label="Nickelodeon Guts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="353" end="356" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751401" start="370" end="397" title="The Mike O&amp;#x27;Malley Show" label="The Mike O&amp;#x27;Malley Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q738447" start="460" end="469" title="Yes, Dear" label="Yes, Dear"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="479" end="482" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="545" end="555" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604808" start="572" end="583" title="Burt Hummel" label="Burt Hummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="591" end="594" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="608" end="612" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q34659" start="684" end="699" title="My Name Is Earl" label="My Name Is Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q34669" start="713" end="725" title="Raising Hope" label="Raising Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q218000" start="739" end="749" title="Parenthood (2010 TV series)" label="Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q218035" start="767" end="787" title="Parks and Recreation" label="Parks and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221098" start="837" end="844" title="28 Days (film)" label="28 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q49498" start="858" end="869" title="Deep Impact (film)" label="Deep Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q653974" start="883" end="895" title="Leatherheads" label="Leatherheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661615" start="909" end="924" title="Eat, Pray, Love" label="Eat, Pray, Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012553" start="938" end="946" title="R.I.P.D." label="R.I.P.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q18356955" start="960" end="970" title="Concussion (2015 film)" label="Concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062112" start="988" end="993" title="Sully (film)" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172576" start="1210" end="1221" title="Peter Askin" label="Peter Askin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065052" start="1240" end="1249" title="Certainty (film)" label="Certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947907" start="1280" end="1300" title="Boston Film Festival" label="Boston Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="1345" end="1353" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q23599" start="1380" end="1389" title="Shameless (American TV series)" label="Shameless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422698" start="1461" end="1466" title="Starz" label="Starz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18274244" start="1480" end="1503" title="Survivor&amp;#x27;s Remorse" label="Survivor&amp;#x27;s Remorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="1599" end="1602" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q60691083" start="1616" end="1627" title="Snowpiercer (TV series)" label="Snowpiercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1712" end="1733" title="Boston" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q48274" start="1749" end="1770" title="Nashua, New Hampshire" label="Nashua, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917572" start="1913" end="1939" title="Bishop Guertin High School" label="Bishop Guertin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="1987" end="2014" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367086" start="2073" end="2084" title="Kappa Sigma" label="Kappa Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="2197" end="2208" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554366" start="2241" end="2256" title="Get the Picture (game show)" label="Get the Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028377" start="2320" end="2336" title="Nickelodeon Guts" label="Nickelodeon Guts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418143" start="2413" end="2425" title="Marc Summers" label="Marc Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283396" start="2571" end="2586" title="Life with Roger" label="Life with Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751401" start="2684" end="2711" title="The Mike O&amp;#x27;Malley Show" label="The Mike O&amp;#x27;Malley Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="2853" end="2857" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q46996011" start="2914" end="2919" title="ESPN+" label="ESPN+"/>
<link wikidata="Q738447" start="3021" end="3030" title="Yes, Dear" label="Yes, Dear"/>
<link wikidata="Q34669" start="3094" end="3106" title="Raising Hope" label="Raising Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772274" start="3154" end="3167" title="Anthony Clark (actor)" label="Anthony Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q380927" start="3199" end="3211" title="Alan Jackson" label="Alan Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768036" start="3230" end="3264" title="The Talkin&amp;#x27; Song Repair Blues" label="The Talkin&amp;#x27; Song Repair Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="3323" end="3328" title="voice acting" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838215" start="3374" end="3384" title="Baby Blues (American TV series)" label="Baby Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q34659" start="3449" end="3464" title="My Name Is Earl" label="My Name Is Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q196174" start="3625" end="3643" title="My Own Worst Enemy (TV series)" label="My Own Worst Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885099" start="3700" end="3717" title="Time Warner Cable" label="Time Warner Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276046" start="3725" end="3738" title="digital cable" label="digital cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="3849" end="3853" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="3884" end="3904" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q211566" start="4051" end="4063" title="Chris Colfer" label="Chris Colfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260501" start="4091" end="4095" title="Kurt Hummel" label="Kurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q218000" start="4285" end="4295" title="Parenthood (2010 TV series)" label="Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q530923" start="4445" end="4509" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor – Comedy Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor – Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982551" start="4685" end="4702" title="2010 Teen Choice Awards" label="Teen Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468737" start="4790" end="4802" title="Glee (season 3)" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q49498" start="4875" end="4886" title="Deep Impact (film)" label="Deep Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q483771" start="4902" end="4913" title="Elijah Wood" label="Elijah Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339513" start="5000" end="5011" title="Pushing Tin" label="Pushing Tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378593" start="5051" end="5062" title="Substance dependence" label="drug addict"/>
<link wikidata="Q221098" start="5091" end="5098" title="28 Days (film)" label="28 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474655" start="5156" end="5171" title="The Perfect Man (2005 film)" label="The Perfect Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q653974" start="5221" end="5233" title="Leatherheads" label="Leatherheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q838381" start="5250" end="5259" title="Meet Dave" label="Meet Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756638" start="5444" end="5460" title="The People Speak (film)" label="The People Speak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133599" start="5531" end="5545" title="Staceyann Chin" label="Staceyann Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q304030" start="5611" end="5624" title="Eat Pray Love" label="Eat Pray Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862218" start="5638" end="5650" title="Cedar Rapids (film)" label="Cedar Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356955" start="5664" end="5674" title="Concussion (2015 film)" label="Concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062112" start="5691" end="5696" title="Sully (film)" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="5894" end="5906" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q738447" start="6062" end="6071" title="Yes, Dear" label="Yes, Dear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065052" start="6150" end="6159" title="Certainty (film)" label="Certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172576" start="6277" end="6288" title="Peter Askin" label="Peter Askin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947907" start="6401" end="6421" title="Boston Film Festival" label="Boston Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="6577" end="6585" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="6586" end="6598" title="comedy-drama" label="comedy-drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23599" start="6612" end="6621" title="Shameless (American TV series)" label="Shameless"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101512" start="6684" end="6708" title="Escape to Margaritaville" label="Escape to Margaritaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q726071" start="6738" end="6751" title="Jimmy Buffett" label="Jimmy Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q34677" start="6757" end="6768" title="Greg Garcia (producer)" label="Greg Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="6786" end="6794" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422698" start="6839" end="6844" title="Starz" label="Starz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18274244" start="6876" end="6899" title="Survivor&amp;#x27;s Remorse" label="Survivor&amp;#x27;s Remorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843266" start="7077" end="7094" title="Heels (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Heels&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772274" start="7201" end="7214" title="Anthony Clark (actor)" label="Anthony Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q738447" start="7226" end="7235" title="Yes, Dear" label="Yes, Dear"/>
<link wikidata="Q380927" start="7266" end="7278" title="Alan Jackson" label="Alan Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768036" start="7313" end="7347" title="The Talkin&amp;#x27; Song Repair Blues" label="The Talkin&amp;#x27; Song Repair Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151959" start="7394" end="7407" title="Yahoo! Sports" label="Yahoo! Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="7428" end="7442" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="7475" end="7478" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071224" start="7530" end="7542" title="2007 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419251" start="7685" end="7704" title="Kerry O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Kerry O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="7744" end="7752" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q60691083" start="7815" end="7826" title="Snowpiercer (TV series)" label="Snowpiercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002101" start="7866" end="7877" title="Buffalo Tom" label="Buffalo Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909597" start="7926" end="7939" title="Bill Janovitz" label="Bill Janovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751401" start="8088" end="8115" title="The Mike O&amp;#x27;Malley Show" label="The Mike O&amp;#x27;Malley Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q738447" start="8155" end="8164" title="Yes, Dear" label="Yes, Dear"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="8383" end="8397" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="8459" end="8470" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="8502" end="8505" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="8513" end="8526" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="8535" end="8538" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="8546" end="8566" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152362" start="8656" end="8675" title="commencement speech" label="commencement speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101512" start="9030" end="9054" title="Escape to Margaritaville" label="Escape to Margaritaville"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683740" wikidata="Q5328164" url="?curid=683740" title="East Compton">
<text>East Compton may refer to:
*East Compton, California, USA
*East Compton, Dorset, England
*East Compton, Somerset, England</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1277813" start="28" end="52" title="East Compton, California" label="East Compton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195693" start="59" end="79" title="East Compton, Dorset" label="East Compton, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613147" start="90" end="112" title="East Compton, Somerset" label="East Compton, Somerset"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683742" wikidata="Q468257" url="?curid=683742" title="The District">
<text>The District is an American crime drama and police procedural television series that aired on CBS from October 7, 2000, to May 1, 2004. The show followed the work and personal life of the chief of Washington, D.C.&#x27;s police department.

==Premise==
Former Newark, New Jersey Police Commissioner and New York Transit police officer Jack Mannion is hired as the chief of the bureaucracy-laden Washington, D.C. police force. Together with his detectives and allies, he must fight crime as well as internal corruption and the powers of Congress in order to reorganize and renovate the force.

==Production==
&quot;The District&quot; was inspired by the real-life experience of former New York City Deputy Police Commissioner Jack Maple. Along with Police Commissioner William Bratton, he had reorganized the NYPD, and one of the achievements was the CompStat program (comparative statistics), which has its own major role in the TV series. After the success in New York, the CompStat program has been adapted by other cities. However Jack Maple himself chose to publish his experiences—along with Chris Mitchell he wrote a book (&quot;The Crime Fighter&quot;, 2000), and along with Terry George he prepared a TV series concept. His impact on the storyline after season 1 was limited; he died of colon cancer on August 4, 2001.

Primary filming was in Los Angeles, with some location shooting in Washington, D.C.

==Episodes==

==Cast and characters==

===Main===
===Recurring===
* Jean Smart as Det. Sherry Regan
* Wayne Duvall as Sgt. Phil Brander
* Richard Fancy as U.S. Attorney Bruce Logan
* Segun Ajaga (season 1) and William Turner (seasons 2–3) as Ricky Alvarez
* Michelle Forbes as Helen York (season 1)
* John Amos as Mayor Ethan Baker (season 1)
* Kristen Wilson as Kendall Truman (seasons 1–2)
* Christopher B. Duncan as Sgt. Ray Cutter (seasons 2–4)
* Gregory Alan Williams as Clive Rodgers (seasons 2–4)
* Rita S. Jett as Ferris Gluck (seasons 2–4)
* Ving Rhames as Attorney General Troy Hatch (season 3)
* Kelly Rutherford as Melinda Lockhart (season 3)
* Carol Bodine as Carol Bodine (season 3)
* Joseph C. Phillips as Mayor Morgan Douglas (seasons 3–4)
* Jaclyn Smith as Vanessa Cavanaugh (seasons 3–4)
* Alexandra Barreto as Maria Rodriguez (seasons 3–4)
* Vanessa Bell Calloway as Gwen Hendrix (season 4)

;Notes
* In 2001, Jean Smart was nominated for an Emmy Award for &quot;Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series&quot; for her performance as &quot;Sherry Regan&quot;.
* On March 12, 2003, Thigpen died of a cerebral hemorrhage in her Marina del Rey, California, home. The show&#x27;s third-season finale had a tribute to her character.

==Ratings==
Note: Throughout &quot;The District&#x27;s&quot; entire run it was aired in a Saturday night timeslot and also it was the last U.S. scripted series to air on its Saturday night schedule until &quot;Ransom&quot; debuted in 2017.

==International broadcasts==
*In Australia, &quot;The District&quot; aired on the Nine Network in late night slots throughout its run.
*In Bulgaria, the first two seasons aired on Nova Television. The whole series was aired on AXN with subtitles and later on AXN Crime. Later Fox Crime repeated the first two seasons and the dub was rerecorded with the same actors. The third season started in October 2010.
*In Sweden, &quot;The District&quot; aired on TV4.
*In Poland, &quot;The District&quot; aired on the Universal Channel.
*In Germany, &quot;The District&quot; airs on VOX.
*In the United Kingdom, it aired on CBS Justice (formerly CBS Action) and was also previously broadcast in late night slots on ITV1.
*In Serbia, it aired on RTS.
*In Slovenia, it aired on the now defunct Prva TV, later it aired on Fox Life (Bulgaria &amp; Balkans region).
*In Jamaica, &quot;The District&quot; aired on CVM TV.
*In Romania it aired on TVR1 and TVR2.
*In Italy it aired on Rai 2 from November 29, 2004 to 2008.
*In France, &quot;The District&quot; aired on France 2 (as Washington Police)

==Syndication==
It ran for a time on USA Network as well as on The Biography Channel after cancellation. On February 7, 2020 it joined the day shift in the Friday slot on Heroes &amp; Icons. Without explanation as of Feb. 20, 2020 the program was pulled and Fridays reverted to NUMB3RS.
As of mid-2020 it was back on the Heroes and Icons TV schedule weekdays from 1AM to 3AM Eastern Standard Time. As of October 2023, it has been pulled from the Heroes and Icons TV schedule once again.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* USA Network site (Archived copy)
* CBS Network site (Archived copy)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="28" end="39" title="crime drama" label="crime drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321734" start="44" end="61" title="police procedural" label="police procedural"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="94" end="97" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825196" start="188" end="193" title="Chief of the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="197" end="213" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1350854" start="221" end="238" title="Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia" label="police department"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="260" end="278" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="444" end="454" title="Police detective" label="detectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="536" end="544" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="684" end="697" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q925556" start="725" end="735" title="Jack Maple" label="Jack Maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013160" start="768" end="783" title="William Bratton" label="William Bratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="808" end="812" title="NYPD" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383418" start="850" end="858" title="CompStat" label="CompStat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392079" start="1182" end="1194" title="Terry George" label="Terry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1351" end="1362" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q239069" start="1481" end="1491" title="Jean Smart" label="Jean Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9069104" start="1551" end="1564" title="Richard Fancy" label="Richard Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q239075" start="1671" end="1686" title="Michelle Forbes" label="Michelle Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q498820" start="1714" end="1723" title="John Amos" label="John Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q432979" start="1758" end="1772" title="Kristen Wilson" label="Kristen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111887" start="1807" end="1828" title="Christopher B. Duncan" label="Christopher B. Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q477819" start="1864" end="1885" title="Gregory Alan Williams" label="Gregory Alan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q310315" start="1964" end="1975" title="Ving Rhames" label="Ving Rhames"/>
<link wikidata="Q230615" start="2020" end="2036" title="Kelly Rutherford" label="Kelly Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810187" start="2112" end="2130" title="Joseph C. Phillips" label="Joseph C. Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q235278" start="2171" end="2183" title="Jaclyn Smith" label="Jaclyn Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720585" start="2221" end="2238" title="Alexandra Barreto" label="Alexandra Barreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q534352" start="2274" end="2295" title="Vanessa Bell Calloway" label="Vanessa Bell Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q239069" start="2342" end="2352" title="Jean Smart" label="Jean Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="2374" end="2384" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="2533" end="2552" title="cerebral hemorrhage" label="cerebral hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q988140" start="2560" end="2586" title="Marina del Rey, California" label="Marina del Rey, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209192" start="2873" end="2879" title="Ransom (TV series)" label="Ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="2986" end="2998" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="3043" end="3051" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q139886" start="3084" end="3099" title="Nova Television (Bulgaria)" label="Nova Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q300262" start="3131" end="3134" title="AXN" label="AXN"/>
<link wikidata="Q434617" start="3163" end="3172" title="AXN Crime" label="AXN Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118859" start="3180" end="3189" title="Fox Crime" label="Fox Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3316" end="3322" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466723" start="3358" end="3361" title="TV4 (Sweden)" label="TV4"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="3367" end="3373" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q262523" start="3413" end="3430" title="Universal Channel" label="Universal Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q684981" start="3478" end="3481" title="VOX (German TV channel)" label="VOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11689301" start="3519" end="3530" title="CBS Justice" label="CBS Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11689301" start="3541" end="3551" title="CBS Action" label="CBS Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="3620" end="3626" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q366507" start="3640" end="3643" title="Radio Television of Serbia" label="RTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="3649" end="3657" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743868" start="3687" end="3694" title="TV3 Slovenia" label="Prva TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q495107" start="3714" end="3722" title="Fox Life" label="Fox Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="3760" end="3767" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="3815" end="3822" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q682554" start="3835" end="3839" title="TVR1" label="TVR1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005406" start="3844" end="3848" title="TVR2" label="TVR2"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3854" end="3859" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q914349" start="3872" end="3877" title="Rai 2" label="Rai 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3914" end="3920" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q525894" start="3956" end="3964" title="France 2" label="France 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="4026" end="4037" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q622329" start="4052" end="4073" title="The Biography Channel" label="The Biography Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349263" start="4160" end="4178" title="Heroes &amp;amp; Icons" label="Heroes &amp;amp; Icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935" start="4267" end="4274" title="Numbers (TV series)" label="NUMB3RS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683744" wikidata="Q4856082" url="?curid=683744" title="Bank of Chettinad">
<text>Bank of Chettinad was a bank that originated in the Nattukottai Chettiar community.
* 1929: Two prominent Nattukottai Chettiar business family partnerships established the bank with its head office in Rangoon. They registered it as a private company in India and incorporated it under the Indian Companies Act of 1913. One of the families, from Kanadukathan, ran the firm. It was involved in many activities and was also closely associated with the Chettinad Corporation. In particular, it borrowed from Chartered Bank, Imperial Bank of India, First National City Bank, and Lloyds Bank for on-lending to Chettiar moneylenders.
* 1932: It opened an office in Colombo.
* In 1942, the Japanese Military Authority created the Peoples Bank of Burma as a joint venture between it, the Burma Executive Authority (the Burmese puppet regime), and the Yokohama Specie Bank. Bank of Chettinad at the time was Burma&#x27;s largest bank, the Peoples Bank of Burma took over Bank of Chettinad&#x27;s 45 branches, and established its own head office in the former Burmese headquarters of Central Bank of India.
* 1946: The Supreme Court of Ceylon ruled that the Bank of Chettinad was not a bank in that it primarily made loans on promissory notes and mortgages and did not take deposits.
* 1963: The Burmese government nationalized all foreign banks and essentially drove out the large population of people of Indian origin, among whom there were many Chettiars. Bank of Chettinad by then was no longer operating under that name and was not among the 24 foreign banks that the government nationalized.
* 1965: Bank of Chettinad was voluntarily wound up.

==See also==
* Indian banking

==Citations and references==
;Citations

;References
* Turnell, Sean (2009) &quot;Fiery Dragons: Banks, Moneylenders and Microfinnance in Burma&quot;. (NAIS Press). 
* Weerasooria, W. S. 1973. &quot;The Nattukottai Chettiar Merchant Bankers in Ceylon&quot;.(Delhiwala, Sri Lanka: Tisara Prakasakayo).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4856082" start="0" end="17" title="Bank of Chettinad" label="Bank of Chettinad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094202" start="52" end="72" title="Chettiar" label="Nattukottai Chettiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086790" start="504" end="518" title="Chartered Bank" label="Chartered Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637712" start="520" end="542" title="Imperial Bank of India" label="Imperial Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="544" end="568" title="Citibank" label="First National City Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="574" end="585" title="Lloyds Bank" label="Lloyds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671309" start="842" end="862" title="Yokohama Specie Bank" label="Yokohama Specie Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007090" start="1073" end="1094" title="Central Bank of India" label="Central Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094202" start="1437" end="1445" title="Chettiar" label="Chettiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q622334" start="1655" end="1669" title="Indian banking" label="Indian banking"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683748" wikidata="Q510836" url="?curid=683748" title="Capitol Corridor">
<text>The Capitol Corridor is a passenger train route in Northern California operated by Amtrak between San Jose, in the Bay Area, and Auburn, in the Sacramento Valley. The route is named after the two points most trains operate between, San Jose (which was the first state capital of California) and Sacramento (the current capital, with the State Capitol building). The route runs roughly parallel to I-880 and I-80. Some limited trips run between Oakland and San Jose. A single daily round trip runs between San Jose and Auburn, in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada. &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; trains started in 1991.

Like all regional trains in California, the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; is operated by a joint powers authority. The Capitol Corridor Joint Powers Authority (CCJPA) is governed by a board that includes two elected representatives from each of eight counties the train travels through. The CCJPA contracts with the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District to provide day-to-day management of the service, Amtrak to operate the trains, and Transit Services America to maintain the rolling stock (locomotives and passenger cars). The California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) provides the funding to operate the service and also owns the rolling stock.

== History ==
=== Former service ===
The First transcontinental railroad was completed to Oakland from the south in 1869. Following the completion of the California Pacific Railroad in 1879, most long-distance service of the Southern Pacific (SP) reached Oakland from the north. Long-distance service from the south ran to San Francisco via the Peninsula; some trains had Oakland sections. The Western Pacific Railroad (completed to Oakland in 1910) and Santa Fe Railroad (completed to Oakland in 1903 over the former California and Nevada Railroad track) ran primarily long-distance service with limited local stops. Commuter service around Oakland was largely provided by the electric interurban trains of the SP-owned East Bay Electric Lines (1911–1941) and Key System (1901–1958).

By the end of the 1930s, the SP operated five daily local round trips plus a number of long-distance trains between Oakland and Sacramento. The &quot;Oakland Lark&quot; and an unnamed local train (an Oakland connection for the &quot;Coast Daylight&quot;) provided local service between Oakland and San Jose on the Coast Line. The inland Niles Subdivision was served by a daily Oakland–Tracy local and a commute-timed Oakland–San Jose local (which ran via Centerville and part of the Coast Line on the northbound trip and Milpitas southbound).

The increasing prevalence of auto ownership and improvements in local roads meant that numerous commuters began to drive their own vehicles rather than take the train. The decline in ridership resulted in SP discontinuing the Oakland–San Jose trip on the Niles Subdivision on September 29, 1940, followed by ending the Oakland–Tracy trip in 1941. The two Oakland–San Jose trips on the Coast Line were discontinued on May 1, 1960. The last local service between Oakland and Sacramento was the &quot;Senator&quot;, discontinued by the SP on May 31, 1962 (though long-distance service continued).

=== &quot;Capitols&quot; ===

From the 1970s to the beginning of the 1990s, three Amtrak intercity trains operated in the Bay Area: the long-distance &quot;California Zephyr&quot; (Oakland/Emeryville–Chicago) and &quot;Coast Starlight&quot; (Los Angeles–Seattle), and the regional &quot;San Joaquins&quot; (Bakersfield–Oakland).

Of the three lines, only the &quot;Coast Starlight&quot; ran between San Jose and Sacramento—once a day in each direction, and at inconvenient times (southbound early in the morning, northbound in the evening). In 1977, Amtrak approved an additional Oakland–Sacramento round trip, the &quot;Sacramentan&quot;; the service was never operated.

In 1990, California voters passed two ballot propositions providing $105 million to expand service along the route. The new service, named Capitols, debuted on December 12, 1991, with three daily round trips between San Jose and Sacramento. Of these, a single round trip continued to Roseville, an eastern Sacramento suburb.

One of the ballot propositions, Proposition 116, provided the name &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot;—so named because it links the location of California&#x27;s first state capital, San Jose, with the current capital, Sacramento. State Capitol buildings were operated in each city. The service was known as the &quot;Capitols&quot; until April 29, 2001, when Amtrak renamed it the &quot;Capitol Corridor.&quot;

=== Service changes ===
The &quot;Capitols&quot; originally ran via the Coast Line from Elmhurst to Santa Clara, with no stops between Oakland and San Jose. In 1992, after the completion of track and signal work, the &quot;Capitols&quot; were rerouted onto the Niles Subdivision further inland between Elmhurst and Newark. The new route allowed the addition of infill stations at in 1993 and in 1997. The Oakland 16th Street station, which had been damaged by the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, was closed in 1994. It was replaced by new stations at in 1993 and in 1995. Additional infill stations were added at in 1993, Oakland Coliseum (with a close connection to BART) in 2005, the Caltrain station in in 2012, and in 2017.

After financial concerns in the mid-1990s, service was gradually increased from the original three daily round trips. A fourth round trip was added in April 1996, a fifth in November 1998, and a sixth in February 1999. One daily round trip was extended east to via and on January 26, 1998. The trip was cut back to Auburn (with the Rocklin stop retained) on February 27, 2000.

Installation of positive train control along the route was completed by November 2018. In response to low ridership as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; schedule was reduced to five daily trips on March 21, 2020, with discontinued Auburn service and many trips ending in Oakland. Three runs were added back on June 1 and Auburn service restored.

=== Proposed expansion ===
==== Infill stations ====
Infill stations have been proposed along the route at Hercules, Benicia, and Dixon.

==== Vision Plan and Realignment ====
The Capitol Corridor Vision Implementation Plan is a long-range outline of possible improvements to the service; several realignments along existing and new right-of-ways were considered and studied. Near-term suggested improvements include double tracking between San Jose and a realignment to the Coast Subdivision, and a new station at the Ardenwood Park-and-Ride, followed by track improvements between Emeryville and Richmond. Later goals include tunneling under Jack London Square to eliminate the street-running section there, rerouting freight traffic over another right-of-way between Sacramento and Martinez, and eventual electrification of the line.

The 2018 Senate Bill 1 allocated $93 million in funds for the Capitol Corridor, partially for planning the realignment to the Coast Subdivision. , the Draft Environmental Impact Report for the realignment (branded as South Bay Connect) is expected to be completed at the end of 2020, followed by the Final Environmental Impact Report a year later. Design is to take place in 2022–23, with construction beginning in 2024. The project is to have a single new station at the Ardenwood Park &amp; Ride in Fremont; stations at Hayward (at SR 92) and Newark Junction were considered but rejected.

==== Extensions ====
Two daily &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; round trips, along with some Caltrain service, were planned to be extended to as part of the Monterey County Rail Extension. Initial service will have intermediate stops at existing Caltrain stations at , , and ; future phases will add new stations at and .

A third track between Sacramento and Roseville is planned to start construction in 2021, which would allow an initial increase from one round trip per day to three, with plans for up to ten. Extension east to Reno, Nevada was deemed unlikely in the &quot;Vision Implementation Plan&quot; due to heavy freight traffic over Donner Pass and lack of funding, though plans for such an expansion were studied in 2022 with 83% of respondents indicating they would use the service if more frequent passenger rail were provided between Sacramento and Reno.

Extending service to downtown San Francisco by crossing the bay is being considered as part of a proposed second Transbay Tube. A study of a joint project providing a second crossing for BART began in 2019. San Francisco has not had direct intercity rail service since 1971.

== Frequency and ridership ==

During fiscal year 2017 the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; service carried 1,607,277 passengers, a 2.9% increase over FY2016. Revenue in FY2017 was $33,970,000, a 5.3% increase over FY2016, with a 57% farebox recovery ratio. It is the fourth busiest Amtrak route by ridership, surpassed only by the &quot;Northeast Regional&quot;, &quot;Acela Express&quot;, and &quot;Pacific Surfliner&quot;. In large part due to the route&#x27;s success, , is the busiest station on the route, the seventh busiest in the Amtrak system and the second busiest in California.

The &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; is used by commuters between the Sacramento area and the Bay Area as an alternative to driving on congested Interstate 80. Monthly passes and discounted trip tickets are available. Many politicians, lobbyists, and aides live in the Bay Area and commute to their jobs in Sacramento, including those connecting to the train via Amtrak Thruway from San Francisco, while workers in the Oakland, San Francisco, and Silicon Valley employment centers take the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; trains from their less expensive homes in Solano County and the Sacramento metropolitan area.

Starting on August 28, 2006, the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; had 16 weekday trains each way between Oakland and Sacramento, up from twelve in 2005 and three in 1992. (Seven of the sixteen ran to/from San Jose.) According to its management, ridership on the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; trains tripled between 1998 and 2005. On August 13, 2012, the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; dropped from 16 to 15 weekday round trips between Oakland and Sacramento; one round trip was discontinued due to high fuel costs, low ridership, and a new ability to store an extra train overnight in a Sacramento railyard.

As of October 2022, trains run as follows:
* Auburn – San Jose: 1 round trip daily
* Sacramento – San Jose: 6 round trips on weekdays, 7 round trips on weekends
* Sacramento – Oakland Jack London Square: 6 round trips on weekdays, 4 round trips on weekends

== Stations and connections ==
== Governance ==
The &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; is fully funded by the state through Caltrans Division of Rail and Mass Transportation (DRMT). Caltrans managed the line from its inception in 1991 to 1997, but in 1998 the administration of the route was transferred to Capitol Corridor Joint Powers Authority (CCJPA), formed by transit agencies of which the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; serves in order to have more local control, while still funded by Caltrans. CCJPA in turn contracted with BART for day-to-day management and staff support; also, CCJPA makes decisions on the service level of &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot;, capital improvements along the route, and passenger amenities aboard the trains.

The Capitol Corridor Joint Powers Authority is governed by a board of directors which consists of 16 representatives from its member agencies:
*Placer County Transportation Planning Agency (PCTPA)
*Solano Transportation Authority (STA)
*Yolo County Transportation District (YCTD)
*Sacramento Regional Transit District (SacRT)
*San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District (BART)
*Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA)

== Rolling stock ==
===Locomotives===
The &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; and &quot;San Joaquins&quot; share a combined fleet of 13 EMD F59PHI and ten Siemens Charger SC-44 locomotives. 

The Charger locomotives meet EPA Tier IV emission standards and are capable of operating at 125 mph in revenue service. Many of the F59PHI have been re-engined to meet more stringent EPA Tier II emission standards.

These locomotives are owned by Caltrans and carry its CDTX reporting marks. Amtrak-owned locomotives are also occasionally used on the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot;, including the P42DC.

===Passenger cars===
The &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; service is equipped with Amtrak California&#x27;s fleet of California Car bi-level, high-capacity passenger cars owned by the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). Each trainset typically consists of one or two coach cars, a coach/baggage car, a café (food service) car, and a cab/coach car. The cab/coach car is similar to other coaches but with an engineer&#x27;s operating cab and headlights on one end, allowing the train to be operated in push-pull mode, which eliminates the need to turn the train at each end-point.

Caltrans also owns several Surfliner bi-level cars that are used on some &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; trainsets. The newer cars look very similar to the California Car fleet but feature reclining seats, open overhead luggage racks, and a restroom on the upper level of each car.

The bi-level cars have doors that can operated remotely on either side of the train from a single point of control. This feature allows the operator to maximize passenger flow in boarding and alighting operations, and thereby minimizing station dwell time.

=== Maintenance ===
Daily inspections, cleaning, and maintenance of equipment are conducted in Oakland and Sacramento. Heavy maintenance is performed by Transit Services America in Stockton. Previously, all maintenance took place in Oakland, but both the &quot;Capitol Corridor&quot; and &quot;San Joaquins&quot; voted to shift to a new contractor in 2023, citing the contractor&#x27;s ability to adhere to high maintenance quality and cleanliness and be more agile with overhaul projects.

== References ==
== Notes ==
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1363599" start="26" end="41" title="passenger train" label="passenger train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="51" end="70" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="83" end="89" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="98" end="106" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="115" end="123" title="Bay Area" label="Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q758542" start="129" end="135" title="Auburn, California" label="Auburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686914" start="144" end="161" title="Sacramento Valley" label="Sacramento Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="279" end="289" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="295" end="305" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026860" start="337" end="359" title="California State Capitol" label="State Capitol building"/>
<link wikidata="Q400030" start="397" end="402" title="Interstate 880 (California)" label="I-880"/>
<link wikidata="Q270424" start="407" end="411" title="Interstate 80 in California" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="444" end="451" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="550" end="563" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q218438" start="628" end="657" title="Amtrak California" label="regional trains in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269326" start="709" end="731" title="joint powers authority" label="joint powers authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873922" start="934" end="979" title="Bay Area Rapid Transit District" label="San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414135" start="1104" end="1117" title="rolling stock" label="rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="1156" end="1195" title="California Department of Transportation" label="California Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753108" start="1326" end="1357" title="First transcontinental railroad" label="First transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020741" start="1439" end="1466" title="California Pacific Railroad" label="California Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="1510" end="1526" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239275" start="1679" end="1703" title="Western Pacific Railroad" label="Western Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="1739" end="1756" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad" label="Santa Fe Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021199" start="1803" end="1833" title="California and Nevada Railroad" label="California and Nevada Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327814" start="2006" end="2029" title="East Bay Electric Lines" label="East Bay Electric Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11298050" start="2046" end="2056" title="Key System" label="Key System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489552" start="2221" end="2233" title="Lark (train)" label="Oakland Lark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138091" start="2304" end="2318" title="Coast Daylight" label="Coast Daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138196" start="2385" end="2395" title="Coast Line (Union Pacific Railroad)" label="Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q66042980" start="2408" end="2425" title="Niles Subdivision" label="Niles Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q953409" start="2456" end="2461" title="Tracy, California" label="Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2526" end="2537" title="Fremont, California#Centerville District" label="Centerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q927510" start="2592" end="2600" title="Milpitas, California" label="Milpitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="3292" end="3298" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q373845" start="3366" end="3383" title="California Zephyr" label="California Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="3391" end="3398" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q499178" start="3399" end="3409" title="Emeryville, California" label="Emeryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3410" end="3417" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q225313" start="3429" end="3444" title="Coast Starlight" label="Coast Starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3452" end="3463" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="3464" end="3471" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q287167" start="3497" end="3509" title="San Joaquins" label="San Joaquins"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="3517" end="3528" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021202" start="3921" end="3940" title="California ballot proposition" label="ballot propositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q491340" start="4167" end="4176" title="Roseville, California" label="Roseville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138196" start="4688" end="4698" title="Coast Line (Union Pacific Railroad)" label="Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366751" start="4704" end="4712" title="Elmhurst, Oakland, California" label="Elmhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q159260" start="4716" end="4727" title="Santa Clara, California" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q850812" start="4931" end="4937" title="Newark, California" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11504311" start="4977" end="4991" title="infill station" label="infill station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552244" start="5021" end="5048" title="16th Street station (Oakland)" label="Oakland 16th Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053476" start="5080" end="5107" title="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake" label="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095511" start="5235" end="5251" title="Oakland Coliseum station" label="Oakland Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q166817" start="5299" end="5307" title="Caltrain" label="Caltrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105716" start="5736" end="5758" title="positive train control" label="positive train control"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5855" end="5872" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q948140" start="6208" end="6216" title="Hercules, California" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q817301" start="6218" end="6225" title="Benicia, California" label="Benicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986903" start="6231" end="6236" title="Dixon, California" label="Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138196" start="6576" end="6593" title="Coast Subdivision" label="Coast Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833634" start="6745" end="6763" title="Jack London Square" label="Jack London Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623056" start="6781" end="6795" title="street-running" label="street-running"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976599" start="6948" end="6961" title="Road Repair and Accountability Act" label="Senate Bill 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354340" start="7096" end="7123" title="Environmental Impact Report" label="Environmental Impact Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q97452921" start="7411" end="7436" title="Ardenwood Park &amp;amp; Ride" label="Ardenwood Park &amp;amp; Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q758001" start="7473" end="7478" title="California State Route 92" label="SR 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q166817" start="7620" end="7628" title="Caltrain" label="Caltrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q113962083" start="7684" end="7714" title="Monterey County Rail Extension" label="Monterey County Rail Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="8059" end="8071" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113165" start="8172" end="8183" title="Donner Pass" label="Donner Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688982" start="8512" end="8525" title="Transbay Tube" label="Transbay Tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="8713" end="8724" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="8852" end="8853" title="US dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453677" start="8905" end="8927" title="farebox recovery ratio" label="farebox recovery ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218597" start="9009" end="9027" title="Northeast Regional" label="Northeast Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q481759" start="9041" end="9054" title="Acela Express" label="Acela Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q847589" start="9072" end="9089" title="Pacific Surfliner" label="Pacific Surfliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="9622" end="9636" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563580" start="10464" end="10472" title="railyard" label="railyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="10851" end="10859" title="Caltrans" label="Caltrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q610120" start="11258" end="11262" title="Bay Area Rapid Transit" label="BART"/>
<link wikidata="Q156353" start="11616" end="11629" title="Placer County" label="Placer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108083" start="11670" end="11676" title="Solano County" label="Solano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779123" start="11709" end="11744" title="Yolo County Transportation District" label="Yolo County Transportation District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397015" start="11753" end="11789" title="Sacramento Regional Transit District" label="Sacramento Regional Transit District"/>
<link wikidata="Q610120" start="11799" end="11844" title="Bay Area Rapid Transit" label="San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456861" start="11853" end="11896" title="Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority" label="Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323410" start="12033" end="12043" title="EMD F59PHI" label="EMD F59PHI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148915" start="12052" end="12073" title="Siemens Charger" label="Siemens Charger SC-44"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121171" start="12364" end="12378" title="reporting mark" label="reporting mark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12484" end="12489" title="GE Genesis#P42DC" label="P42DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q218438" start="12571" end="12588" title="Amtrak California" label="Amtrak California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954922" start="12605" end="12619" title="California Car (railcar)" label="California Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q127743" start="12672" end="12711" title="California Department of Transportation" label="California Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q910157" start="12856" end="12869" title="cab car" label="cab/coach car"/>
<link wikidata="Q935330" start="13004" end="13018" title="Push-pull train" label="push-pull mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985180" start="13111" end="13120" title="Surfliner (railcar)" label="Surfliner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683755" wikidata="Q60426212" url="?curid=683755" title="Solar Plexus">
<text>The [[celiac plexus]] (or solar plexus) is a complex network of nerves located in the abdomen.

Solar plexus or Solar Plexus may also refer to:

*The solar plexus chakra in Hinduism, see Manipura

==Music==
*&quot;Solar Plexus&quot; (album), a 2012 compilation by Mavin Records
*&quot;Solar Plexus&quot;, a 2014 album by Thea Hjelmeland
*&quot;Solar Plexus&quot;, a 1972 album by the Swedish jazz-fusion-pop band Solar Plexus, with Tommy Körberg
*&quot;Volume 1: Solar Plexus&quot;, a 2011 EP by The Empire Shall Fall
*&quot;Solar Plexus&quot;, a 1997 song by BT from &quot;ESCM&quot;
*&quot;Solar Plexus&quot;, a 1971 album by Ian Carr with Nucleus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60426212" start="4" end="21" title="Solar Plexus" label="[[celiac plexus]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q60426212" start="26" end="38" title="Solar Plexus" label="solar plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60426212" start="112" end="124" title="Solar Plexus" label="Solar Plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937660" start="187" end="195" title="Manipura" label="Manipura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555936" start="208" end="240" title="Solar Plexus (album)" label="&amp;quot;Solar Plexus&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208779" start="321" end="336" title="Thea Hjelmeland" label="Thea Hjelmeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q920220" start="432" end="445" title="Tommy Körberg" label="Tommy Körberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294340" start="496" end="517" title="The Empire Shall Fall" label="The Empire Shall Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490289" start="574" end="578" title="ESCM (album)" label="ESCM"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683761" wikidata="Q538764" url="?curid=683761" title="East Bay (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[East Bay]] is a region of the San Francisco Bay Area in Northern California.

East Bay may also refer to:

==Places==
===Antarctica===
*East Bay (Antarctica), part of Prince Olav Harbor, South Georgia Island

===Canada===
*East Bay, Nova Scotia, a small town
*East Bay (Nova Scotia), the east arm of the Bras d&#x27;Or Lake
*East Bay (Nunavut), a waterway in the Kivalliq Region

===United Kingdom===
*East Bay (Argyll and Bute), a bay in Scotland

===United States===
*East Bay (Santa Rosa County, Florida), connected to Pensacola Bay
*East Bay (Bay County, Florida), off St. Andrews Bay in the Panama City area
*East Bay River, Florida
*East Bay Township, Michigan
*East Bay (Michigan), an arm of Grand Traverse Bay
*East Bay (Rhode Island)
*East Bay (Texas), part of Galveston Bay

==Other uses==
* California State University, East Bay
* Eastbay, a direct mail catalog and Internet apparel company
* &quot;East Bay Express&quot;, a weekly newspaper based in Oakland, California

==See also==
* East Bay Ray (born 1958), lead guitarist for the Dead Kennedys
* Eastern Bay, Maryland, an estuary of the Chesapeake Bay
* North Bay (disambiguation)
* South Bay (disambiguation)
* Tung Wan (disambiguation)
* West Bay (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q538764" start="4" end="16" title="East Bay (disambiguation)" label="[[East Bay]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q538764" start="84" end="92" title="East Bay (disambiguation)" label="East Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755244" start="142" end="163" title="East Bay (Antarctica)" label="East Bay (Antarctica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327800" start="229" end="250" title="East Bay, Nova Scotia" label="East Bay, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327802" start="266" end="288" title="East Bay (Nova Scotia)" label="East Bay (Nova Scotia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327803" start="331" end="349" title="East Bay (Nunavut)" label="East Bay (Nunavut)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="408" end="434" title="East Bay (Argyll and Bute)" label="East Bay (Argyll and Bute)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793080" start="438" end="453" title="List of bays of Scotland" label="bay in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327801" start="476" end="513" title="East Bay (Santa Rosa County, Florida)" label="East Bay (Santa Rosa County, Florida)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="543" end="573" title="East Bay (Bay County, Florida)" label="East Bay (Bay County, Florida)"/>
<link wikidata="Q852591" start="602" end="613" title="Panama City, Florida" label="Panama City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327828" start="620" end="634" title="East Bay River" label="East Bay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327830" start="645" end="672" title="East Bay Township, Michigan" label="East Bay Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595169" start="674" end="693" title="East Bay (Michigan)" label="East Bay (Michigan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327804" start="725" end="748" title="East Bay (Rhode Island)" label="East Bay (Rhode Island)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327805" start="750" end="766" title="East Bay (Texas)" label="East Bay (Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026916" start="808" end="845" title="California State University, East Bay" label="California State University, East Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329796" start="848" end="855" title="Eastbay" label="Eastbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327815" start="916" end="932" title="East Bay Express" label="East Bay Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046493" start="1004" end="1016" title="East Bay Ray" label="East Bay Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330010" start="1069" end="1080" title="Eastern Bay" label="Eastern Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211167" start="1127" end="1153" title="North Bay (disambiguation)" label="North Bay (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040469" start="1156" end="1182" title="South Bay (disambiguation)" label="South Bay (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872982" start="1185" end="1210" title="Tung Wan (disambiguation)" label="Tung Wan (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984399" start="1213" end="1238" title="West Bay (disambiguation)" label="West Bay (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683766" wikidata="Q950852" url="?curid=683766" title="Oculomotor nucleus">
<text>The fibers of the oculomotor nerve arise from a nucleus in the midbrain, which lies in the gray substance of the floor of the cerebral aqueduct and extends in front of the aqueduct for a short distance into the floor of the third ventricle. From this nucleus the fibers pass forward through the tegmentum, the red nucleus, and the medial part of the substantia nigra, forming a series of curves with a lateral convexity, and emerge from the oculomotor sulcus on the medial side of the cerebral peduncle.

The nucleus of the oculomotor nerve does not consist of a continuous column of cells, but is broken up into a number of smaller nuclei, which are arranged in two groups, anterior and posterior. Those of the posterior group are six in number, five of which are symmetrical on the two sides of the middle line, while the sixth is centrally placed and is common to the nerves of both sides. The anterior group consists of two nuclei, an antero-medial and an antero-lateral.

The nucleus of the oculomotor nerve, considered from a physiological standpoint, can be subdivided into several smaller groups of cells, each group controlling a particular muscle.

A nearby nucleus, the Edinger-Westphal nucleus lies dorsal to the main oculomotor nucleus. It is responsible for the autonomic functions of the oculomotor nerve, including pupillary constriction and lens accommodation.

==Additional images==

==External links==
* - &quot;Brainstem, Cranial Nerve Nuclei, Sagittal Section, Medial View&quot;
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223903" start="18" end="34" title="oculomotor nerve" label="oculomotor nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="63" end="71" title="midbrain" label="midbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q623016" start="126" end="143" title="cerebral aqueduct" label="cerebral aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q662322" start="224" end="239" title="third ventricle" label="third ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q943621" start="295" end="304" title="tegmentum" label="tegmentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751717" start="310" end="321" title="red nucleus" label="red nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="350" end="366" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q646944" start="485" end="502" title="cerebral peduncle" label="cerebral peduncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165312" start="1181" end="1205" title="Edinger-Westphal nucleus" label="Edinger-Westphal nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173318" start="1331" end="1336" title="pupil" label="pupil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683773" wikidata="Q358445" url="?curid=683773" title="Goldstein">
<text>Goldstein may refer to:

* Goldstein (surname), people with the surname &quot;Goldstein&quot;
* &quot;Goldstein (film)&quot;, a 1964 Philip Kaufman movie featuring actors from the Second City comedy troupe
* Goldstein &amp; Blair, a publishing company
* Division of Goldstein, an electoral division in the Australian state of Victoria
* The Leon M. Goldstein High School for the Sciences
* Goldstein College, a residential college at the University of New South Wales
* Goldstein (Frankfurt am Main), a housing area in Frankfurt am Main, Germany

== See also ==
* &quot;The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism&quot;, sometimes known as &quot;Goldstein&#x27;s book&quot;, a fictional book in the novel &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;
* Goldstone (disambiguation)
* Goldstine, a surname</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q358445" start="0" end="9" title="Goldstein" label="Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839807" start="27" end="46" title="Goldstein (surname)" label="Goldstein (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580346" start="102" end="118" title="Goldstein (film)" label="Goldstein (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580345" start="208" end="229" title="Goldstein &amp;amp; Blair" label="Goldstein &amp;amp; Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973625" start="254" end="275" title="Division of Goldstein" label="Division of Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746930" start="337" end="387" title="The Leon M. Goldstein High School for the Sciences" label="The Leon M. Goldstein High School for the Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580348" start="390" end="407" title="Goldstein College" label="Goldstein College"/>
<link wikidata="Q314381" start="470" end="499" title="Goldstein (Frankfurt am Main)" label="Goldstein (Frankfurt am Main)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274360" start="570" end="622" title="The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism" label="The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q408128" start="749" end="775" title="Goldstone (disambiguation)" label="Goldstone (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36958081" start="778" end="787" title="Goldstine" label="Goldstine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683781" wikidata="Q231858" url="?curid=683781" title="S1">
<text>S1, S01, S.I, S-1, S.1, Š-1 or S 1 may refer to:
==Biology and chemistry==
* S1 nuclease, an enzyme that digests singled-stranded DNA and RNA
* S1: Keep locked up, a safety phrase in chemistry
* Primary somatosensory cortex, also known as S1
* Tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil, also known as S-1, a chemotherapy medication

==Entertainment==
* S1 (Indian TV channel), a Hindi-language channel
* S1 (Swiss TV channel), a German-language channel
* S1 (producer), a hip hop producer, member of the group Strange Fruit Project
* S1 No. 1 Style, a Japanese adult video company
* Gibson S-1, a guitar made by the Gibson Guitar Corporation
* A member of the S1W (group) that later became part of the music group Public Enemy.

==Government==
* Bill S-1, a pro forma bill in Canadian Parliament
* Form S-1, a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filing
* S-1 Executive Committee, a United States government entity during World War II 
* S1 (military), an administrative position within military units

==Technology==
* ACPI S1 power state, in computing; see 
* Apple S1, integrated computer used in the Apple Watch
* Canon PowerShot S1 IS, a 2004 3.2 megapixel digital camera
* FinePix S1 Pro, a 2000 interchangeable lens digital single-lens reflex camera by Fujifilm
* Nikon Coolpix S1, a digital camera
* S1 Corporation, an American software development company
* S1 Core, a microprocessor-core
* S1 MP3 Player
* Samsung Galaxy S (2010 smartphone)
* Sendo S1, a Sendo mobile phone model
* Siemens S1, a Siemens mobile phone
* Sony BDP-S1, a first generation Blu-ray Disc (BD) Player
* S1, an EPC in an LTE/4G network

==Transportation==
===Routes===
====China====
* Line S1 (Beijing Subway)
* Line S1 (Nanjing Metro)
* Line S1 (Wenzhou Rail Transit)
* S1 Yingbin Expressway in Shanghai

====Germany====
* S1 (Berlin), an S-Bahn line
* S1 (Dresden), an S-Bahn line
* S1 (Munich), an S-Bahn line
* S1 (Nuremberg), an S-Bahn line
* S1 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn), an S-Bahn line
* S1 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn), an S-Bahn line
* S1 (Stuttgart), an S-Bahn line
* a planned Bremen S-Bahn line
* a Hamburg S-Bahn line
* a Hanover S-Bahn line
* a RheinNeckar S-Bahn line
* a Rostock S-Bahn line
* a Stadtbahn Karlsruhe line

====Spain====
* FGC line S1, a suburban train line in Barcelona Province
* S1a (Bologna metropolitan railway service)
* S1b (Bologna metropolitan railway service)

====Switzerland====
* S1 (Bern S-Bahn), an S-Bahn line in the canton of Bern
* S1 (RER Vaud), an S-Bahn line in the canton of Vaud
* S1 (St. Gallen S-Bahn), an S-Bahn line in the canton of St. Gallen
* S1 (ZVV), now subsumed by S24, a Zürich S-Bahn line

====United States====
* County Route S1 (California)
* S1 (Long Island bus)

====Other countries====
* S1 (Vienna), an S-Bahn line in Austria
* Line S1 (Milan suburban railway service), Italy
* S-1 Strategic Highway, Pakistan
* Expressway S1 (Poland)
* Stagecoach Gold bus route S1, in Oxfordshire, England, UK

===Vehicles===
====Aircraft====
* Blackburn Buccaneer S.1 jet naval strike aircraft
* Focke-Wulf S 1, a German 
* Fokker S.I, a 1919 Dutch primary trainer aircraft
* Hopfner S-1, a 
* Letov S-1, a 1920 Czechoslovak surveillance aircraft
* Loening S-1, a United States Army Air Service seaplane
* Loughead S-1 Sport 1920 US biplane
* Martinsyde S.1, a 1914 British biplane aircraft
* Pantsir-S1, a Russian anti-aircraft system
* Pitts S-1 aerobatic biplane
* S-1 Loening, a United States Army Air Service seaplane
* SSBS S1, a French experimental rocket
* Swift S-1, a 1991 Polish single seat aerobatic glider

====Cars====
* AS S1, a 1927 car manufactured in Poland 
* Audi S1, performance variant of Audi A1
* Invicta S1, a 2004 sports car
* Leapmotor S01, an all-electric car
* S1 Scout Car, an armoured car built in Australia during the Second World War
* Superformance S1 Roadster, a Lotus Seven Type replicar produced in South Africa 2001–2004
* Saleen S1, an American sports car

====Other vehicles====
* Alco S-1, a locomotive
* PRR S1, a duplex locomotive developed by the Pennsylvania Railroad
* LNER Class S1, a class of British steam locomotives 
* NER Class S1, a class of British steam locomotives 
* USS S-1 (SS-105), a 1918 United States Navy experimental submarine

==Other uses==
* S1 (classification), a disability swimming classification
* S postcode area covering Sheffield City Centre
* in human anatomy:
:* the first sacral vertebra
:* the sacral spinal nerve 1 of the vertebral column
:* the primary somatosensory cortex in the brain
* &quot;Senior 1&quot;, the First Year in the Scottish secondary education system
* Season (television) or series one
* Comet Ikeya-Seki, &quot;C/1965 S1&quot;
* Upplands regemente (signal), a 1902 Signal Regiment of the Swedish Armed Forces

==With superscripts and subscripts==
S1 may refer to :
* S1 (heart sound), a heart sound in cardiac auscultation
S1 may refer to :
* S1, the n-sphere in two dimensions i.e. a circle
* Inverse second (s−1), a unit of frequency

==S01==
S01 may refer to :
* Akai S01, an Akai synthesizer
* ATC code S01 &quot;Ophthalmologicals&quot;, a subgroup of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System
* HMS &quot;Porpoise&quot; (S01), a 1956 Porpoise-class submarine of the Royal Navy
* MULTI-S01, an encryption algorithm based on a pseudorandom number generator

==See also==
* 1S (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231858" start="0" end="2" title="S1" label="S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q231858" start="4" end="7" title="S1" label="S01"/>
<link wikidata="Q231858" start="9" end="12" title="S1" label="S.I"/>
<link wikidata="Q231858" start="14" end="17" title="S1" label="S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q231858" start="19" end="22" title="S1" label="S.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q231858" start="24" end="27" title="S1" label="Š-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q231858" start="31" end="34" title="S1" label="S 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807894" start="77" end="88" title="S1 nuclease" label="S1 nuclease"/>
<link wikidata="" start="144" end="162" title="S1: Keep locked up" label="S1: Keep locked up"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587611" start="195" end="223" title="Primary somatosensory cortex" label="Primary somatosensory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410179" start="244" end="270" title="Tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil" label="Tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388214" start="338" end="360" title="S1 (Indian TV channel)" label="S1 (Indian TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15079923" start="389" end="410" title="S1 (Swiss TV channel)" label="S1 (Swiss TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q194964" start="440" end="453" title="S1 (producer)" label="S1 (producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388219" start="519" end="533" title="S1 No. 1 Style" label="S1 No. 1 Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105378" start="568" end="578" title="Gibson S-1" label="Gibson S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="645" end="656" title="S1W (group)" label="S1W (group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912032" start="731" end="739" title="Bill S-1" label="Bill S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469919" start="783" end="791" title="Form S-1" label="Form S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985283" start="844" end="867" title="S-1 Executive Committee" label="S-1 Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="926" end="939" title="S1 (military)" label="S1 (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205149" start="1050" end="1058" title="Apple S1" label="Apple S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q420808" start="1106" end="1127" title="Canon PowerShot S1 IS" label="Canon PowerShot S1 IS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745669" start="1167" end="1181" title="FinePix S1 Pro" label="FinePix S1 Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341797" start="1259" end="1275" title="Nikon Coolpix S1" label="Nikon Coolpix S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388215" start="1296" end="1310" title="S1 Corporation" label="S1 Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258330" start="1355" end="1362" title="S1 Core" label="S1 Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143514" start="1388" end="1401" title="S1 MP3 Player" label="S1 MP3 Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q264059" start="1404" end="1438" title="Samsung Galaxy S (2010 smartphone)" label="Samsung Galaxy S (2010 smartphone)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1441" end="1449" title="Sendo S1" label="Sendo S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q390732" start="1453" end="1458" title="Sendo" label="Sendo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1480" end="1490" title="Siemens S1" label="Siemens S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q639440" start="1494" end="1508" title="Siemens mobile" label="Siemens mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562424" start="1517" end="1528" title="Sony BDP-S1" label="Sony BDP-S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099695" start="1583" end="1586" title="Evolved Packet Core" label="EPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881158" start="1657" end="1681" title="Line S1 (Beijing Subway)" label="Line S1 (Beijing Subway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10946118" start="1684" end="1707" title="Line S1 (Nanjing Metro)" label="Line S1 (Nanjing Metro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15910427" start="1710" end="1740" title="Line S1 (Wenzhou Rail Transit)" label="Line S1 (Wenzhou Rail Transit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383508" start="1743" end="1764" title="S1 Yingbin Expressway" label="S1 Yingbin Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579762" start="1796" end="1807" title="S1 (Berlin)" label="S1 (Berlin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q513745" start="1826" end="1838" title="S1 (Dresden)" label="S1 (Dresden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388207" start="1857" end="1868" title="S1 (Munich)" label="S1 (Munich)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388209" start="1887" end="1901" title="S1 (Nuremberg)" label="S1 (Nuremberg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q600891" start="1920" end="1942" title="S1 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn)" label="S1 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388210" start="1961" end="1983" title="S1 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn)" label="S1 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81001" start="2002" end="2016" title="S1 (Stuttgart)" label="S1 (Stuttgart)"/>
<link wikidata="Q449909" start="2045" end="2058" title="Bremen S-Bahn" label="Bremen S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q693956" start="2068" end="2082" title="Hamburg S-Bahn" label="Hamburg S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q481504" start="2092" end="2106" title="Hanover S-Bahn" label="Hanover S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q526319" start="2116" end="2134" title="RheinNeckar S-Bahn" label="RheinNeckar S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q481501" start="2144" end="2158" title="Rostock S-Bahn" label="Rostock S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q874436" start="2168" end="2187" title="Stadtbahn Karlsruhe" label="Stadtbahn Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316170" start="2210" end="2221" title="FGC line S1" label="FGC line S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958100" start="2269" end="2311" title="S1a (Bologna metropolitan railway service)" label="S1a (Bologna metropolitan railway service)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958100" start="2314" end="2356" title="S1b (Bologna metropolitan railway service)" label="S1b (Bologna metropolitan railway service)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115689931" start="2380" end="2396" title="S1 (Bern S-Bahn)" label="S1 (Bern S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110265543" start="2437" end="2450" title="S1 (RER Vaud)" label="S1 (RER Vaud)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106453739" start="2491" end="2513" title="S1 (St. Gallen S-Bahn)" label="S1 (St. Gallen S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388228" start="2560" end="2568" title="S1 (ZVV)" label="S1 (ZVV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q623753" start="2637" end="2665" title="County Route S1 (California)" label="County Route S1 (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608486" start="2668" end="2688" title="S1 (Long Island bus)" label="S1 (Long Island bus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101540" start="2716" end="2727" title="S1 (Vienna)" label="S1 (Vienna)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46365" start="2757" end="2797" title="Line S1 (Milan suburban railway service)" label="Line S1 (Milan suburban railway service)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345296" start="2807" end="2828" title="S-1 Strategic Highway" label="S-1 Strategic Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508159" start="2841" end="2863" title="Expressway S1 (Poland)" label="Expressway S1 (Poland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596847" start="2866" end="2894" title="Stagecoach Gold bus route S1" label="Stagecoach Gold bus route S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q804265" start="2959" end="2982" title="Blackburn Buccaneer S.1" label="Blackburn Buccaneer S.1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3011" end="3025" title="Focke-Wulf S 1" label="Focke-Wulf S 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405270" start="3039" end="3049" title="Fokker S.I" label="Fokker S.I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3091" end="3102" title="Hopfner S-1" label="Hopfner S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411488" start="3109" end="3118" title="Letov S-1" label="Letov S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666563" start="3164" end="3175" title="Loening S-1" label="Loening S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686185" start="3221" end="3239" title="Loughead S-1 Sport" label="Loughead S-1 Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q577239" start="3258" end="3272" title="Martinsyde S.1" label="Martinsyde S.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424781" start="3308" end="3318" title="Pantsir-S1" label="Pantsir-S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262007" start="3353" end="3362" title="Pitts S-1" label="Pitts S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666563" start="3383" end="3394" title="S-1 Loening" label="S-1 Loening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522849" start="3440" end="3447" title="SSBS S1" label="SSBS S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q824618" start="3480" end="3489" title="Swift S-1" label="Swift S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q163926" start="3550" end="3555" title="AS S1 and AS S2" label="AS S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15784342" start="3594" end="3601" title="Audi S1" label="Audi S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671809" start="3636" end="3646" title="Invicta S1" label="Invicta S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614626" start="3668" end="3681" title="Leapmotor S01" label="Leapmotor S01"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523407" start="3705" end="3717" title="S1 Scout Car" label="S1 Scout Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617134" start="3784" end="3809" title="Superformance S1 Roadster" label="Superformance S1 Roadster"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063090" start="3876" end="3885" title="Saleen S1" label="Saleen S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652300" start="3936" end="3944" title="Alco S-1" label="Alco S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q452277" start="3961" end="3967" title="PRR S1" label="PRR S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513028" start="4030" end="4043" title="LNER Class S1" label="LNER Class S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708317" start="4085" end="4097" title="NER Class S1" label="NER Class S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873616" start="4139" end="4155" title="USS S-1 (SS-105)" label="USS S-1 (SS-105)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388212" start="4224" end="4243" title="S1 (classification)" label="S1 (classification)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395395" start="4284" end="4299" title="S postcode area" label="S postcode area"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="4364" end="4379" title="Sacral vertebrae" label="sacral vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396923" start="4387" end="4408" title="sacral spinal nerve 1" label="sacral spinal nerve 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="4448" end="4468" title="somatosensory cortex" label="somatosensory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883551" start="4510" end="4520" title="First Year" label="First Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="4566" end="4585" title="Season (television)" label="Season (television)"/>
<link wikidata="Q872242" start="4602" end="4618" title="Comet Ikeya-Seki" label="Comet Ikeya-Seki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899153" start="4644" end="4671" title="Upplands regemente (signal)" label="Upplands regemente (signal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q967103" start="4782" end="4798" title="S1 (heart sound)" label="S1 (heart sound)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="4858" end="4860" title="Circle" label="S1"/>
<link wikidata="Q306610" start="4866" end="4874" title="n-sphere" label="n-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137407" start="4909" end="4923" title="Inverse second" label="Inverse second"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4981" end="4989" title="Akai S01" label="Akai S01"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4994" end="5010" title=":Category:Akai synthesizers" label="Akai synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q434298" start="5013" end="5025" title="ATC code S01" label="ATC code S01"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392840" start="5131" end="5161" title="HMS Porpoise (S01)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Porpoise&amp;quot; (S01)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719054" start="5215" end="5224" title="MULTI-S01" label="MULTI-S01"/>
<link wikidata="Q208972" start="5307" end="5326" title="1S (disambiguation)" label="1S (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683797" wikidata="Q1025062" url="?curid=683797" title="Human Events">
<text>Human Events is an American conservative political news and analysis website. Founded in 1944 as a print newspaper, &quot;Human Events&quot; became a digital-only publication in 2013.

&quot;Human Events&quot; takes its name from the first sentence of the United States Declaration of Independence: &quot;When in the course of human events...&quot;. The magazine was published in Washington, D.C., most recently by Eagle Publishing, the owner of Regnery Publishing, a subsidiary of Phillips Publishing. Thomas S. Winter was editor-in-chief and Cathy Taylor was editorial director of the print edition. As of 2021, the website is co-published by Jeff Webb and Will Chamberlain.

==History==

&quot;Human Events&quot; was founded in 1944 by Felix Morley, William Henry Chamberlin, Frank Hanighen, and Henry Regnery. Morley was previously editor of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; from 1933 to 1940. Regnery formerly worked for the Resettlement Administration, a New Deal-era federal agency. In its early years, &quot;Human Events&quot; was &quot;a small-circulation weekly news sheet concentrating on foreign policy,&quot; wrote George H. Nash in &quot;The Conservative Intellectual Movement in American Since 1945&quot;. &quot;Human Events&quot; had only 127 subscribers in its first year.

Returning from a trip to Europe in 1949, Morley criticized the Cold War, leading to disagreements with Hanighen and Regnery about combating Communism. After Hanighen and Regnery denied his proposal for sole editorial control of the magazine, Morley resigned as &quot;Human Events&quot; editor in 1950, a move that Nash recounted as &quot;[a]nother product of the friction between Old Right and New Right.&quot; In 1951, Frank Chodorov, former director of the Henry George School of Social Science in New York, replaced Morley as editor, merging his newsletter, &quot;analysis&quot;, into &quot;Human Events&quot;.

By the early 1960s, Allan Ryskind (son of Morrie Ryskind) and Thomas Winter had acquired the publication. Contributors to &quot;Human Events&quot; from the 1960s to the 1980s included Spiro Agnew, James L. Buckley, Peter Gemma, Pat Buchanan, Ralph de Toledano, Russell Kirk, Phyllis Schlafly, Murray Rothbard and Henry Hazlitt. By 1964, the circulation of &quot;Human Events&quot; surpassed 100,000 copies. During the presidency of Richard Nixon, &quot;Human Events&quot; became &quot;perhaps the most influential conservative journal in the Washington political community,&quot; wrote Nash. Other regular writers included Robert Novak, Ann Coulter, Terence P. Jeffrey, and John Gizzi, its chief political editor. Contributors have included Sean Hannity, Newt Gingrich, Paul Craig Roberts, Cliff Kincaid, and Pat Sajak. &quot;Newsweek&quot; reported that although &quot;Human Events&quot; did not have a large readership outside the Washington D.C. area, &quot;the tough little tabloid enjoys an impact out of all proportion to its circulation&quot;.

&quot;Human Events&quot; backed US military intervention in the Vietnam War; after the war ended, the publication blamed American liberals for the collapse of South Vietnam.

In July 1985, &quot;Human Events&quot; gave qualified support to Apartheid South Africa, describing the country as &quot;a pro-Western bulwark that provides more in the way of freedom and wealth to its blacks than the vast majority of black African states&quot;. &quot;Human Events&quot; also described Nelson Mandela as the main obstacle to peace in South Africa: &quot;While President Botha is moving at a fast and furious pace to end the apartheid system, Mandela remains as adamant a revolutionary as ever. He&#x27;s still a Marxist, still a man of violence, still a supporter of the Communist-run ANC&quot;. It was not without sympathy for the plight of blacks under the system however, giving black power activist Steve Biko a thoughtful obituary. The perspective offered throughout was that Marxist rule in South Africa was the worst option, however bad others might be.

Eagle Publishing placed the magazine up for sale in February 2013, when it announced that it would close the publication if no buyer could be found. On February 27, 2013, &quot;Human Events&quot; announced that, after 69 years, it would halt publication of the print edition but would continue to maintain the websites HumanEvents.com and RedState with original reporting. Eagle Publishing, which acquired the magazine in 1993, said that it had been subsidizing the publication for several years but could no longer afford to do so: &quot;the realities of the 24-hour news cycle and the brutal economics of a weekly print publication have become insurmountable.&quot;

&quot;Human Events&quot; printed 40,000 copies per week and had a staff of 15 full-time employees. A &quot;restructuring&quot; plan that involved layoffs had already been attempted but was insufficient to allow continuation of the print edition.

In January 2014, Eagle Publishing was acquired by Salem Media Group.

In March 2019, political writer Raheem Kassam and lawyer Will Chamberlain purchased &quot;Human Events&quot; from Salem Media Group for $300,000 with a view of returning &quot;Human Events&quot; to regular online publication. On May 1, 2019, &quot;Human Events&quot; was re-launched under the management of Kassam as Global editor-in-chief and Chamberlain as publisher. On August 8, 2019, &quot;Human Events&quot; announced that Kassam was leaving the outlet, and the Editor-in-Chief responsibilities would be taken over by Chamberlain.

In December 2020, &quot;Human Events&quot; announced that Jeff Webb, founder of Varsity Spirit, had been appointed as co-publisher and senior news editor, and that Webb and his team would build a daily news platform.

In May 2021, &quot;Human Events&quot; announced that conspiracy theorist Jack Posobiec had been hired as senior editor. In May 2022, &quot;Human Events&quot; announced that it had acquired &quot;The Post Millennial&quot;, a Canadian conservative online news magazine.

==Influence on Ronald Reagan==
Biographer Richard Reeves wrote in 2005 that &quot;Human Events&quot; was former U.S. President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s &quot;favorite reading for years&quot;. A loyal subscriber since 1961, Reagan said it “helped me stop being a liberal Democrat,” calling it &quot;must reading for conservatives who want to know what is really going on in Washington, D.C.&quot; Reagan contributed some articles to &quot;Human Events&quot; in the 1970s. During the 1980 presidential campaign, Democrats released a document entitled &quot;Ronald Reagan, Extremist Collaborator — An Exposé,&quot; in which, according to biographer Lee Edwards, &quot;[a]mong the proofs of Reagan&#x27;s extremism was that he read the conservative weekly &quot;Human Events&quot;.&quot; After Reagan&#x27;s landslide win in the election, Reagan would occasionally write or call Winter or Ryskind.

&quot;&quot;Human Events&quot;, however, was no favorite of the new men around Reagan,&quot; writes Reeves. &quot;Baker and Darman, and Deaver too, did their best each week to keep it out of the reading material they gave the President.&quot; &quot;When he discovered White House aides were blocking its delivery, President Reagan arranged for multiple copies to be sent to the White House residence every weekend,&quot; writes Edwards, who adds that Reagan took care &quot;marking and clipping articles and passing them along to his assistants.&quot;

Just before his 1982 tax hike, Reagan met with what he called &quot;some of my old friends from &quot;Human Events&quot;&quot; (he mentioned Ryskind and M. Stanton Evans), who warned him about &quot;disloyal&quot; White House staff (in particular James Baker) who favored making a deal on taxes with the Democratic Congress. (Reagan subsequently made such a deal, in which for each $1 in higher taxes Congress promised $3 in spending cuts. Ultimately, both taxes and spending increased.)

At the 1986 Reykjavík Summit, Reagan told General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Mikhail Gorbachev that he could not give up the Strategic Defense Initiative because of &quot;&#x27;the people who were the most outspoken critics of the Soviet Union over the years’—he mentioned his favorite paper, &quot;Human Events&quot;,&quot; according to Reeves, &quot;‘They’re kicking my brains out’.&quot;

==References==
;Sources

;Notes
==External links==
* HumanEvents.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="19" end="40" title="American conservative" label="American conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="256" end="297" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="380" end="396" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3579498" start="446" end="464" title="Regnery Publishing" label="Regnery Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793745" start="503" end="519" title="Thomas Winter (newspaperman)" label="Thomas S. Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="524" end="539" title="editor-in-chief" label="editor-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q68758064" start="645" end="654" title="Jeff Webb (entrepreneur)" label="Jeff Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442280" start="739" end="751" title="Felix Morley" label="Felix Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845842" start="753" end="777" title="William Henry Chamberlin" label="William Henry Chamberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487091" start="779" end="793" title="Frank Hanighen" label="Frank Hanighen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727475" start="799" end="812" title="Henry Regnery" label="Henry Regnery"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="852" end="871" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315356" start="929" end="956" title="Resettlement Administration" label="Resettlement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="960" end="968" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1353" end="1361" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084844" start="1670" end="1679" title="Old Right (United States)" label="Old Right"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1684" end="1693" title="New Right#First New Right" label="New Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081269" start="1710" end="1724" title="Frank Chodorov" label="Frank Chodorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q355245" start="1749" end="1761" title="Henry George" label="Henry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1790" end="1798" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q323516" start="1947" end="1961" title="Morrie Ryskind" label="Morrie Ryskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="2089" end="2100" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244777" start="2102" end="2118" title="James L. Buckley" label="James L. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q149127" start="2133" end="2145" title="Pat Buchanan" label="Pat Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288327" start="2147" end="2164" title="Ralph de Toledano" label="Ralph de Toledano"/>
<link wikidata="Q158997" start="2166" end="2178" title="Russell Kirk" label="Russell Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q434669" start="2180" end="2196" title="Phyllis Schlafly" label="Phyllis Schlafly"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="2198" end="2213" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q685787" start="2218" end="2231" title="Henry Hazlitt" label="Henry Hazlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="2323" end="2350" title="presidency of Richard Nixon" label="presidency of Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954907" start="2528" end="2540" title="Robert Novak" label="Robert Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q266611" start="2542" end="2553" title="Ann Coulter" label="Ann Coulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q557730" start="2646" end="2658" title="Sean Hannity" label="Sean Hannity"/>
<link wikidata="Q182788" start="2660" end="2673" title="Newt Gingrich" label="Newt Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987836" start="2675" end="2693" title="Paul Craig Roberts" label="Paul Craig Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q21551514" start="2695" end="2708" title="Cliff Kincaid" label="Cliff Kincaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q705419" start="2714" end="2723" title="Pat Sajak" label="Pat Sajak"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="2731" end="2739" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3021" end="3032" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q98114006" start="3071" end="3095" title="Vietnam stab-in-the-back myth" label="blamed American liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="3116" end="3129" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="3197" end="3206" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="3259" end="3266" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="3435" end="3449" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q212286" start="3509" end="3524" title="P. W. Botha" label="President Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="3734" end="3737" title="African National Congress" label="ANC"/>
<link wikidata="Q214473" start="3852" end="3862" title="Steve Biko" label="Steve Biko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303570" start="4350" end="4358" title="RedState" label="RedState"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631739" start="4571" end="4589" title="24-hour news cycle" label="24-hour news cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431118" start="4977" end="4994" title="Salem Media Group" label="Salem Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q27898570" start="5029" end="5042" title="Raheem Kassam" label="Raheem Kassam"/>
<link wikidata="Q68758064" start="5593" end="5602" title="Jeff Webb (entrepreneur)" label="Jeff Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916160" start="5615" end="5629" title="Varsity Spirit" label="Varsity Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="5806" end="5825" title="conspiracy theorist" label="conspiracy theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323688" start="5826" end="5839" title="Jack Posobiec" label="Jack Posobiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409546" start="5948" end="5967" title="The Post Millennial" label="The Post Millennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328634" start="6064" end="6078" title="Richard Reeves (American writer)" label="Richard Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="6134" end="6148" title="U.S. President" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="6149" end="6162" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365209" start="6500" end="6526" title="Ronald Reagan 1980 presidential campaign" label="1980 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513521" start="6664" end="6675" title="Lee Edwards" label="Lee Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713167" start="7619" end="7635" title="M. Stanton Evans" label="M. Stanton Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="7680" end="7691" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q223151" start="7713" end="7724" title="James Baker" label="James Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036702" start="7967" end="7983" title="Reykjavík Summit" label="Reykjavík Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="7997" end="8057" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="8058" end="8075" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="8106" end="8134" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8212" end="8224" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683800" wikidata="Q5327955" url="?curid=683800" title="East Brookfield">
<text>East Brookfield is the name of the following places in the United States:

*East Brookfield, Massachusetts, a New England town
**East Brookfield (CDP), Massachusetts, the main village in the town
*East Brookfield, Vermont
*East Brookfield River in Massachusetts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2534054" start="76" end="106" title="East Brookfield, Massachusetts" label="East Brookfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327956" start="129" end="165" title="East Brookfield (CDP), Massachusetts" label="East Brookfield (CDP), Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068923" start="197" end="221" title="East Brookfield, Vermont" label="East Brookfield, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327957" start="223" end="244" title="East Brookfield River" label="East Brookfield River"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683806" wikidata="Q1174520" url="?curid=683806" title="East Brooklyn">
<text>East Brooklyn is the name of the following places in the United States.

*East Brooklyn, Connecticut
*East Brooklyn, Illinois</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="57" end="70" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q754129" start="74" end="100" title="East Brooklyn, Connecticut" label="East Brooklyn, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578603" start="102" end="125" title="East Brooklyn, Illinois" label="East Brooklyn, Illinois"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683811" wikidata="Q4933798" url="?curid=683811" title="Bob Rivers">
<text>Robert Rivers (born July 7, 1956) is a retired American rock and roll radio on-air personality in the Pacific Northwest, as well as a prolific producer and songwriter of parody songs, most famous for his Christmas song parodies. His album &quot;Twisted Christmas&quot; was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America.

Rivers&#x27; last regular radio program, &quot;The Bob Rivers Show with Bob, Spike and Joe&quot;, was broadcast on Seattle oldies station KJR-FM until August 8, 2014, ending a 25-year run in the Seattle market.

Rivers played keyboards for a cover band affiliated with the show, Spike and the Impalers, until 2015.

== Early life ==
Rivers was born in Branford, Connecticut, on July 7, 1956, and raised as a Catholic. On the air, he occasionally referred to the work ethic and competitive streak he learned from his parents. (His father was the head of a utility company.) He is the eldest of seven children in his family.

He knew from an early age that he wanted to be on radio. At the age of 15, he released a bootleg AM broadcast from the basement of his family&#x27;s home (a prank which his mother put a stop to). He also started a high-school radio show. He got his first paying radio job when he was 16, but reputedly was fired for playing too much Led Zeppelin.

== On the air in Connecticut ==
Rivers got his start as disc jockey in Connecticut, where he was heard on WAVZ, WNHC, WCDQ, WELI, WFIF, WCCC-FM, WWCO, and WLIS.

== WAAF &quot;Bob and Zip&quot; ==

Bob Rivers spent almost six years at WAAF in Worcester, Massachusetts (in the Boston market), as part of their successful &quot;Bob and Zip&quot; morning show with fellow on-air personality Peter &quot;Zip&quot; Zipfel.

During his tenure with WAAF, Rivers started producing parody and novelty songs, both for the station and for the KATZ/Newcity &quot;American Comedy Network&quot;, a radio syndication service that provided comedy material to local U.S. and Canadian radio stations. One of the first parodies he produced was &quot;Breakin&#x27; Up Is Hard On You&quot;, about the lawsuit and the resulting Bell System divestiture, the court ordered split up of U.S. telecommunications company AT&amp;T&#x27;s Bell System. The song was sung to the tune of Neil Sedaka&#x27;s #1 1962 hit &quot;Breaking Up Is Hard To Do&quot; and peaked at #70 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 pop music chart. He followed it up with &quot;Just a Big Ego,&quot; a parody of David Lee Roth&#x27;s version of &quot;Just a Gigolo&quot;. It went on to be included on Volume 2 of &quot;The Rhino Brothers Present the World&#x27;s Worst Records&quot; and had a music video produced by Steve Rotfeld for &quot;Bob Uecker&#x27;s Wacky World of Sports&quot;.

In 1987, Rivers released &quot;Twisted Christmas&quot;, which contained the Christmas music radio hit &quot;Twelve Pains of Christmas&quot;, a parody of the holiday standard &quot;The Twelve Days of Christmas&quot;. &quot;Twisted Christmas&quot; was certified a gold record.

== WIYY &quot;98 Rock&quot; ==
In the spring of 1988, at Baltimore radio station &quot;98 Rock&quot; WIYY-FM, as a lead morning show personality between 1987 and 1989, Bob Rivers gained national attention for an 11-day, on-the-air marathon during a Baltimore Orioles losing streak. He vowed to remain on the air until the Orioles won a game. He kept his vow and became a local celebrity among Orioles fans for his pledge. During the marathon, he took naps only during songs and started to develop health complications from the lack of sleep.

During his time at 98 Rock, he and WIYY radio collaborated with Sheffield Recording Studios to continue his campaign of &quot;Twisted Tunes&quot;.

In just under two years after joining WIYY, Rivers increased the station&#x27;s morning show&#x27;s ratings by about 65 percent.

A few weeks before Rivers was fired from WIYY, he met James (later &quot;Spike&quot;) O&#x27;Neill, who was working at a used car dealership. O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s father owned the dealership and advertised on the show, so Spike objected to Rivers&#x27;s song &quot;Hyundai, Hyundai (Can&#x27;t Trust That Car),&quot; a parody of &quot;Monday, Monday&quot; by The Mamas &amp; the Papas. Rivers met Spike to test-drive a Hyundai, and Spike either &quot;talked his way&quot; into an unpaid internship on the show or, in his own words, &quot;[Rivers] had taken them [WIYY] from worst to first and they offered him an insulting pay increase to renew. He went public with their insult and at that point they took him off the air for the rest of his term. He met me and invited me in as an intern. When he left, he thought enough of me to ask me to join him.&quot;

== KISW &quot;Twisted Radio&quot; ==

Arriving at Active Rock radio station KISW-FM in Seattle in 1989, Rivers debuted a morning show with fellow radio host Sean Donahue, also from Baltimore. Their chief rival was the station KXRX. Rivers brought Spike O&#x27;Neill with him; Spike served as sportscaster, writer, and impressionist. They spent &quot;six weeks of 14-hour days doing production and brainstorming and writing&quot; before their first show on air.

Rivers released a second album of humorous holiday-themed music in 1993 entitled &quot;I Am Santa Claus&quot; (the title track was a parody of Black Sabbath&#x27;s song &quot;Iron Man&quot;). Later, three other Christmas-themed albums were released: &quot;More Twisted Christmas&quot; (1997); &quot;Chipmunks Roasting On an Open Fire&quot; (2000); and &quot;White Trash Christmas&quot; (2002).

Bob Rivers and his &quot;Twisted Radio&quot; show also produced many non-holiday parodies covering such topics as pop culture, politicians, and the various sports teams and players in the Seattle area. These &quot;Twisted Tunes&quot; could be heard for free on his website. CD compilation albums are also available.

Rivers claims that more Twisted Tunes were written about the 1994 O. J. Simpson murder case than about any other individual; an example is the Twisted Tune &quot;White Ford Bronco&quot; (based on the 1955 song &quot;Hot Rod Lincoln&quot;, &quot;Bronco&quot; appears on the &quot;Twisted Christmas Boxed Set&quot;). Rivers has said that there might have been more Twisted Tunes sung about the Seattle Seahawks and Super Bowl XL. Rivers and his colleagues have guessed that his most famous Twisted Tune based on a pop song is &quot;What if God Smoked Cannabis?&quot;, based on the 1995 Joan Osborne hit &quot;One of Us&quot;. (This Rivers parody is often incorrectly attributed to &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic.)

In 1999, Rivers wrote a &quot;twisted tune&quot; song called &quot;Kosovo&quot;, a parody of the Beach Boys hit song &quot;Kokomo&quot;, about the Kosovo War. While earning many fans, the song also gained international attention and some controversy when it was used in 2005 by some Norwegian peacekeepers in Kosovo to make a music video.

In late 1999, the &quot;Seattle Post-Intelligencer&quot; noted that, after 10 years at the station, Rivers had the longest tenure of any radio personality in the local market.

Rivers and his cast sat out a year&#x27;s non-compete period when their contract with KISW ran out.

== KZOK &quot;The Bob Rivers Show&quot; ==
In September 2001, the cast and show moved to KZOK, where it played through September 30, 2010. O&#x27;Neill was added to the show for a slate of talents that include vocal impersonations (as of Rush Limbaugh, Bill Clinton, and William Shatner, for example) and improvisation. The producer was Mike Jones; Arik Korman, a 2001 Visionary Award winner, joined the show as director in 2002; news and comedic commentary were provided by Maura Gallucci and, for a few years, Kaci Aitchison (who also is a singer with Spike and the Impalers).

&quot;The Bob Rivers Show&quot; was simulcast on Portland, Oregon&#x27;s &quot;1980s Rock Hits&quot; radio station KVMX (now KXJM) &quot;Mix 107.5&quot; from March 20, 2006, until October 5, 2006, when the station dropped the morning show and switched to a Rhythmic Adult Contemporary format under the new branding &quot;Movin&#x27; 107.5&quot;.

The cast would occasionally perform on-air skits, such as a famous parody of &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; in which Dorothy and the Wizard (the latter voiced by Spike) are trying to bring Brian Bosworth (a former Seattle Seahawks linebacker nicknamed &quot;The Boz&quot;) back &quot;home&quot; to Seattle.

Another favorite was a contest between two callers-in to speak the roles of Scarlett O&#x27;Hara and Rhett Butler in the last lines of &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot;, beginning with the line &quot;I&#x27;m leaving you, my dear. All you need now is a divorce and your dreams of Ashley can come true.&quot; Caller-in Kim played Scarlett to Spike&#x27;s Rhett, and then caller-in Robert played Rhett to Spike&#x27;s Scarlett. (Both contestants spoke with true Southern accents.) Spike ad-libbed many lines. For example, when Kim as Scarlett exclaimed, &quot;Rhett! Rhett, where are you going?&quot; Spike as Rhett replied, not the film&#x27;s actual line, &quot;I&#x27;m going back to Charleston, back where I belong,&quot; but: &quot;I&#x27;m going to Rick&#x27;s in Federal Way! Where I belong.&quot; (Rick&#x27;s was a strip club.) When contestant Robert played Rhett and delivered the line, &quot;Here, take my handkerchief,&quot; Spike as Scarlett used the handkerchief in a noisy and unladylike way. Listeners who called in got to vote on the better contestant, and Kim won the prize, probably in part because of her tearful, yearning cries of &quot;Rhett! Rhett!&quot; (Spike said in awe to her, &quot;Seriously, did you just lose a puppy or something?&quot;) The prize was Fandango movie tickets.

In 2007, Spike O&#x27;Neill, in charge of sports news, persuaded former Seattle Seahawk placekicker Norm Johnson into an extended interview about Johnson&#x27;s having saved the life of a woman, Virginia Sayson, who was trapped in an overturned car in a ditch in Silverdale, Washington. Rivers&#x27;s and O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s admiring and humorous interview, and Johnson&#x27;s modest replies, turned the local-interest story into national news.

KZOK gained world renown when they partnered with World Vision International for what was to be a one-day &quot;radiothon&quot; to sponsor 400 children in poor nations. (Rivers credits director Arik Korman for &quot;getting me started&quot; with World Vision.) By the count of listeners who called or wrote to the station, they soon found sponsors for more than 3,000 children in Senegal, Ethiopia, the Dominican Republic, and other Third World countries.

Toward the end of this decade, the station added television cameras to the studio; streaming videos of interviews and musical performances could be seen on station websites. Mike Jones left the show when cameras were introduced.

Rivers&#x27;s show left KZOK when he could not reach a contract deal with CBS, the owner of the station.

During December 2010, when the show members sat out their non-compete period from KZOK, Bob and his wife Lisa traveled to Bangladesh, where they spent the holiday helping to build schools for the poor in Dhaka.

== KJR-FM &quot;The Bob Rivers Show with Bob, Spike and Joe&quot; ==
The Bob Rivers Show ran on KJR-FM from April 1, 2011, to August 8, 2014, ending on the twenty-five year anniversary of Bob&#x27;s first day on air in Seattle.

The Bob Rivers Show cast at 95.7 FM included Spike O&#x27;Neill, Joel &quot;Downtown Joe&quot; Bryant, newswoman Jodi Brothers, director Arik Korman, and producers Luciana Bosio and Pedro Bartes, a married couple who also contributed news and jokes on air.

=== Content ===
The Show provided a mix of classic rock music, comedy, discussion of current movies, sports news, local news (everything from bikini baristas to suburb-invading raccoons), celebrity news, and national news. Rivers, O&#x27;Neill and Bryant interviewed musicians, actors, comedians, authors, and, infrequently, local politicians. A friend of the show, attorney Shawn Alexander, frequently called in or was consulted upon all sorts of legal issues. O&#x27;Neill, Rivers, and Brothers provided running comedic commentary to the news stories.

Over the years, between the news and music segments, show members frequently discussed the lives of their families, with emphasis on the pleasures and perils of parenthood. Rivers and his wife, Lisa (whose one-time relationship with Steven Tyler sometimes provided conversational fodder), have two sons: Keith, a film-maker, and Andrew, a stand-up comedian; Andrew occasionally appeared on the show to discuss his career and to talk about growing up with his parents. Spike talked about how he and his wife, Melissa, steered their daughter Riann (pronounced Ryan) through her teenage years until she was hand-picked to become manager of a clothing/fashion store in New York, and about their much younger daughter, Darby. For years, Joe Bryant provoked laughter from callers-in by discussing how he and his wife, Kelli, allowed their school-age daughter, Emily-Jo, to eat whatever she wanted for dinner (chiefly chicken nuggets), while dealing with his own preference for overeating and drinking; when she was in high school, Joe spoke about Emily-Jo&#x27;s interest in singing and her trip to Europe to sing in a choir.

In 2014, Joe, Bob and Spike provided almost daily news about a diet on which they all lost weight.

Downtown Joe was a favorite among listeners, and in 2014 he was given the role of hosting &quot;The Warm-Up Show,&quot; a half-hour of chat (before Bob Rivers arrived) among Joe, Spike O&#x27;Neill, and Jodi Brothers, with guests ranging from their young radio interns to special guests including famous fishing guru Bill Herzog. Joe is locally known as an expert in fishing and other out-door activities.

Arik Korman and his wife Monique adopted a Korean boy, A.J., and Arik was frequently consulted for facts and science explanations. Luciana Bosio and Pedro Bartes provided another side of Americana by discussing their ongoing attempts to earn legal citizenship and Pedro&#x27;s disinclination to drive; in early 2014, they both earned their permanent residence status with green cards.

The cast also occasionally discussed the children they sponsor through the aegis of World Vision International and had an annual drive to get listeners to sponsor children.

The show invited listeners to call in or text the show, in order to guess the answers to questions or to provide autobiographical anecdotes illustrative of a given topic, usually a topic in the news. (On May 8, 2013, an example of the latter was, &quot;Have you ever participated in a practical joke that went wrong?&quot;) These segments were prefaced with a musical sting and the lyric &quot;Is there anybody out there?&quot; (from the Pink Floyd song of the same name). Prizes, such as tickets to upcoming musical events or Spike and the Impalers CDs, were given to callers-in who correctly guessed an answer (for example, &quot;Which flavor of ice cream is more popular nationally, chocolate or vanilla?&quot;).

Show members also read aired advertisements for businesses local to the Seattle-Tacoma area.

Bob Rivers announced on July 28, 2014, that after 42 years on radio (33 years in morning zoo format for drive time listeners and 25 years in Seattle), the legendary host was stepping away from morning radio to pursue other projects. The finale on Friday, August 8, was attended by many family members and featured local musicians playing music one last time on the show. With the end of the show, Bob ended KJR&#x27;s &quot;Oldies&quot; format; the station switched formats to a new show called &quot;95.7 The Jet, Seattle&#x27;s Variety From the 70&#x27;s, 80&#x27;s and More&quot;.

== Personal life ==
Rivers lived for many years in North Bend, Washington, with his wife, Lisa, where he gardened, tended to his bees and chickens, hiked, and recorded and played music in his home studio. To fight his fear of flying, he learned to fly a plane, eventually bought his own, and Rivers became a private pilot.

He talked freely on the air about his hard-partying days, which ended when he entered rehab to treat his alcoholism in 1989, shortly after he moved to Washington.

Rivers was featured in an interview about his enjoyment of hiking in a 2014 summer issue of &quot;Washington Trails Magazine&quot; (a publication of the Washington Trails Association). The article was accompanied by five photographs of Rivers in the wilderness.

In November, 2015, Seattle&#x27;s KING-TV ran a story about Rivers&#x27;s decision to sell his mansion, an estate that Rivers called &quot;like something out of a fairy tale,&quot; for $2.3 million. He told the interviewer that he and wife Lisa plan to spend their time traveling and hiking: &quot;It would be really nice to wander and explore a little bit.&quot;

===Children===

Bob and Lisa Rivers have two sons. The elder, Keith Rivers (born February 2, 1983, in Worcester, Massachusetts) is a film-maker. Their younger son, Andrew J. Rivers, is a stand-up comedian.

Rivers&#x27; granddaughter, Hazel Rivers, Keith Rivers&#x27; daughter, was born on August 8, 2014, the same day on which Rivers ended his radio show.

===Plane theft===
In 2009, Bob Rivers&#x27; Cessna 182 was stolen from the airport at which it was based by Colton Harris-Moore, who flew it to Yakima, Washington, landed the plane excessively hard and then fled the scene. The Cessna was declared a write-off by Rivers&#x27; insurance company. Rivers publicly condemned the theft and decried Harris-Moore&#x27;s legend status, telling a news reporter, &quot;I&#x27;m not a fan of the media frenzy because I don&#x27;t like the whole cult hero thing, but if keeping it alive helps solve it, then I think it&#x27;s worth it.&quot; He said on the radio, &quot;I don&#x27;t buy this folk-hero stuff. I was furious that something like this could happen. I really want him caught.&quot;

== Discography ==

=== Studio albums ===
=== Compilations ===
== Film appearances ==
* Bob Rivers, who is a science fiction fan, appeared as an extra in two &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot; episodes. The first was &quot;Zero Hour&quot;, in which he acted as a lieutenant. It was filmed April 29, 2004. The other episode was the series finale in 2005, &quot;These Are the Voyages...&quot;, in which he appeared along with a KZOK contest winner, Amy Ulen; they both played Engineers.
* Rivers executive-produced a 7-minute documentary, &quot;Senegal, Africa: Through My Eyes&quot;, in 2009. It was directed by his son, Keith Rivers, and was made with the cooperation of World Vision International, whose efforts Rivers supports through occasional on-air broadcasts and by traveling, with some members of the Show, to countries such as Senegal, Malawi, and Bangladesh.

== Awards and honors ==

Rivers was twice voted Radio &amp; Records&#x27; major market Rock Personality of the Year and has been &quot;Billboard&quot;&#x27;s Radio Personality of the Week. At the Puget Sound Radio Broadcasters Association&#x27;s annual awards banquet, he has won three People&#x27;s Choice Awards for the Best Minute of the Year in Seattle Radio.

As an honor to celebrate his retirement from the show, the Seattle Mariners invited Rivers to throw the opening pitch at a game shortly after the show ended. Rivers insisted that Spike O&#x27;Neill and Joe Bryant be allowed to join him, as the three had worked together for so long.

== Critical acclaim for &quot;The Bob Rivers Show&quot; ==
The &quot;Seattle Post-Intelligencer&quot; wrote in 2005, &quot;The mixture of talk (with such long-running cast members as Spike O&#x27;Neill and Joe Bryant), interviews and song parodies has consistently been one of the top-rated morning shows in the Seattle market.&quot; A &quot;Kitsap Sun&quot; columnist agreed: &quot;As much as I treasure the information I can get from a couple of hours of NPR, I&#x27;ve found it&#x27;s hard to pass up the mix of pop-culture info, topical news, off-the-wall humor and wealth of interviews I can get from Bob, Spike and Joe.&quot; KING-TV called Rivers &quot;one of the Northwest&#x27;s most popular personalities.&quot; Cynde Slater, a radio talent scout who hired Rivers to work at WAAF in 1985, said of Rivers&#x27;s talent for making comedy out of topical subjects, &quot;Bob has the ability to seize the opportunity. He does that better than anybody I&#x27;ve ever met.&quot;

A lengthy 2012 article in &quot;The Seattle Times&quot; praised Rivers for his wit and philosophy of perseverance.
The radio business is changing: Fewer stations, fewer jobs, fewer personalities. But for nearly 23 years, Seattle has been listening to lovable misfits Bob, Spike and &quot;Downtown&quot; Joe Bryant. Since April 1, 2011, after adding Seattle radio veteran Jodi Brothers to the mix, they&#x27;ve been cracking wise from 6 to 10 a.m. weekdays on KJR. The show is consistently one of the top three in its time period with the all-important 25-to-54 age group, along with &quot;The BJ Shea Morning Experience&quot; on KISW and &quot;Morning Edition&quot; on KUOW. It&#x27;s the last remaining local talk/entertainment program on Seattle morning radio — others play music between gabbing, or focus on news...Everything&#x27;s rainbows and great ratings now, but the incredible longevity, the easy chemistry and current success of these radio survivors has been hard-earned. Their long, strange trip has included failed contract negotiations, cast changes, rehab, a lot of work and a recent health scare. But as the show and its players have evolved, there has also been laughter, love, support and family. Always, family — on and off the air.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Bob Rivers / Twisted Tunes website
* 95.7 FM website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4933798" start="0" end="13" title="Bob Rivers" label="Robert Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="56" end="69" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="70" end="75" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="76" end="94" title="disc jockey" label="on-air personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="102" end="119" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="143" end="151" title="Record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="156" end="166" title="songwriter" label="songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="170" end="176" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="204" end="218" title="Christmas song" label="Christmas song"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053171" start="245" end="262" title="Twisted Christmas" label="Twisted Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="283" end="287" title="Music recording sales certification" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="295" end="336" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="454" end="461" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852647" start="462" end="468" title="oldies" label="oldies"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="469" end="476" title="radio station" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331597" start="477" end="483" title="KJEB" label="KJR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q181847" start="581" end="591" title="cover band" label="cover band"/>
<link wikidata="Q898484" start="691" end="712" title="Branford, Connecticut" label="Branford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426207" start="801" end="811" title="work ethic" label="work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q476300" start="816" end="834" title="Competition" label="competitive streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="894" end="901" title="Public utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="1296" end="1308" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="1367" end="1378" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946848" start="1417" end="1421" title="WAVZ" label="WAVZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954811" start="1429" end="1433" title="WATX (AM)" label="WCDQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948920" start="1435" end="1439" title="WELI" label="WELI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715142" start="1441" end="1445" title="WFIF" label="WFIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947647" start="1447" end="1454" title="WCCC (FM)" label="WCCC-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957143" start="1456" end="1460" title="WWCO" label="WWCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952265" start="1466" end="1470" title="WLIS" label="WLIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946254" start="1546" end="1550" title="WKVB (FM)" label="WAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="1554" end="1578" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151663" start="1795" end="1807" title="novelty song" label="novelty song"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1862" end="1885" title="American Comedy Network" label="American Comedy Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="1895" end="1912" title="radio syndication" label="radio syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1969" end="1977" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="2091" end="2098" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959692" start="2117" end="2140" title="Bell System divestiture" label="Bell System divestiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q696617" start="2146" end="2157" title="court order" label="court order"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="2177" end="2195" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="2204" end="2212" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="2220" end="2231" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q312743" start="2266" end="2277" title="Neil Sedaka" label="Neil Sedaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434522" start="2303" end="2328" title="Breaking Up Is Hard To Do" label="Breaking Up Is Hard To Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="2360" end="2389" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="2390" end="2399" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q313992" start="2470" end="2484" title="David Lee Roth" label="David Lee Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405817" start="2509" end="2522" title="Just a Gigolo (song)" label="Just a Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760607" start="2577" end="2634" title="The Rhino Brothers Present the World&amp;#x27;s Worst Records" label="The Rhino Brothers Present the World&amp;#x27;s Worst Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613807" start="2675" end="2688" title="Steve Rotfeld" label="Steve Rotfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747297" start="2699" end="2738" title="The Lighter Side of Sports" label="Bob Uecker&amp;#x27;s Wacky World of Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053171" start="2778" end="2795" title="Twisted Christmas" label="Twisted Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="2823" end="2838" title="Christmas music" label="Christmas music"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053171" start="2855" end="2880" title="Twelve Pains of Christmas" label="Twelve Pains of Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q112577" start="2927" end="2955" title="The Twelve Days of Christmas (song)" label="The Twelve Days of Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="3009" end="3020" title="gold album" label="gold record"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="3080" end="3089" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951029" start="3124" end="3131" title="WIYY (FM)" label="WIYY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="3272" end="3289" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639216" start="4178" end="4192" title="Monday, Monday" label="Monday, Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q211277" start="4202" end="4227" title="The Mamas &amp;amp; the Papas" label="The Mamas &amp;amp; the Papas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677584" start="4752" end="4763" title="Active Rock" label="Active Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812047" start="4778" end="4785" title="KISW-FM" label="KISW-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341538" start="4928" end="4932" title="KXRX" label="KXRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148872" start="5020" end="5033" title="Impressionist (entertainment)" label="impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976051" start="5251" end="5267" title="I Am Santa Claus" label="I Am Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="5307" end="5320" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q910905" start="5339" end="5347" title="Iron Man (song)" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026362" start="5420" end="5442" title="More Twisted Christmas" label="More Twisted Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101622" start="5463" end="5497" title="Chipmunks Roasting On an Open Fire" label="Chipmunks Roasting On an Open Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995487" start="5522" end="5543" title="White Trash Christmas" label="White Trash Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="5673" end="5684" title="popular culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="5686" end="5696" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="5715" end="5720" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="5833" end="5835" title="Compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="5836" end="5853" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669947" start="5942" end="5967" title="O. J. Simpson murder case" label="O. J. Simpson murder case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910315" start="6092" end="6107" title="Hot Rod Lincoln" label="Hot Rod Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="6268" end="6284" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q904928" start="6289" end="6302" title="Super Bowl XL" label="Super Bowl XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q232193" start="6460" end="6472" title="Joan Osborne" label="Joan Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469978" start="6483" end="6492" title="One of Us (Joan Osborne song)" label="One of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="6555" end="6584" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433359" start="6655" end="6661" title="Kosovo (song)" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="6671" end="6677" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="6685" end="6695" title="Beach Boys" label="Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742084" start="6711" end="6717" title="Kokomo (song)" label="Kokomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="6735" end="6745" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="6881" end="6893" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="6897" end="6903" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="6914" end="6925" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q286261" start="6952" end="6978" title="Seattle Post-Intelligencer" label="Seattle Post-Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q562444" start="7147" end="7158" title="Non-compete clause" label="non-compete"/>
<link wikidata="Q6342548" start="7295" end="7299" title="KZOK" label="KZOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q319072" start="7444" end="7457" title="Rush Limbaugh" label="Rush Limbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="7459" end="7471" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="7477" end="7492" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7718" end="7732" title="Kaci Aitchison" label="Kaci Aitchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="7822" end="7831" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="7835" end="7851" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341247" start="7901" end="7916" title="KXJM" label="KVMX (now KXJM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321976" start="8043" end="8070" title="Rhythmic Adult Contemporary" label="Rhythmic Adult Contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="8176" end="8181" title="Sketch comedy" label="skits"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="8216" end="8232" title="The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q911914" start="8320" end="8334" title="Brian Bosworth" label="Brian Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="8345" end="8361" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="8362" end="8372" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649955" start="8515" end="8535" title="Scarlett O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Scarlett O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362299" start="8540" end="8552" title="Rhett Butler" label="Rhett Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="8580" end="8598" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q310735" start="8921" end="8930" title="Ad libitum" label="ad-libbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q821112" start="9204" end="9215" title="Federal Way, Washington" label="Federal Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586445" start="9258" end="9268" title="strip club" label="strip club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433722" start="9717" end="9725" title="Fandango (ticket service)" label="Fandango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638113" start="9830" end="9841" title="placekicker" label="placekicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051501" start="9842" end="9854" title="Norm Johnson" label="Norm Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515408" start="10005" end="10027" title="Silverdale, Washington" label="Silverdale, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594001" start="10238" end="10264" title="World Vision International" label="World Vision International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619206" start="10294" end="10315" title="Telethon" label="&amp;quot;radiothon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708912" start="10319" end="10326" title="Child sponsorship" label="sponsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="10568" end="10575" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="10577" end="10585" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="10591" end="10609" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="10621" end="10632" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="10949" end="10952" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="11103" end="11113" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="11185" end="11190" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907411" start="11822" end="11836" title="bikini barista" label="bikini barista"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="11857" end="11864" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="12468" end="12480" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="12574" end="12591" title="Stand-up comedy" label="stand-up comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072190" start="13146" end="13160" title="chicken nugget" label="chicken nugget"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500754" start="13705" end="13724" title="Internship" label="young radio interns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676995" start="14203" end="14246" title="Permanent residence (United States)" label="permanent residence status with green cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594001" start="14333" end="14359" title="World Vision International" label="World Vision International"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="14464" end="14468" title="Text messaging" label="text"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079047" start="14783" end="14796" title="Sting (musical phrase)" label="musical sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="14861" end="14871" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013199" start="15109" end="15118" title="Chocolate ice cream" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071938" start="15122" end="15129" title="Vanilla ice cream" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912943" start="15315" end="15326" title="morning zoo" label="morning zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="15338" end="15348" title="drive time" label="drive time"/>
<link wikidata="Q301889" start="15870" end="15892" title="North Bend, Washington" label="North Bend, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972493" start="16460" end="16489" title="Washington Trails Association" label="Washington Trails Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191412" start="16604" end="16611" title="KING-TV" label="KING-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q686708" start="17337" end="17347" title="Cessna 182" label="Cessna 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q934833" start="17368" end="17375" title="Orcas Island Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q925930" start="17401" end="17420" title="Colton Harris-Moore" label="Colton Harris-Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q499203" start="17437" end="17443" title="Yakima" label="Yakima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="17445" end="17455" title="Washington state" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18188" end="18209" title="Star Trek: Enterprise" label="Star Trek: Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069524" start="18246" end="18255" title="Zero Hour (Enterprise episode)" label="Zero Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469115" start="18383" end="18407" title="These Are the Voyages... (Enterprise episode)" label="These Are the Voyages..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="18859" end="18866" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="18868" end="18874" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="19028" end="19037" title="Billboard magazine" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="19317" end="19333" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063937" start="19362" end="19375" title="Pitch (baseball)" label="opening pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q286261" start="19611" end="19637" title="Seattle Post-Intelligencer" label="Seattle Post-Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418320" start="19884" end="19894" title="Kitsap Sun" label="Kitsap Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191412" start="20174" end="20181" title="KING-TV" label="KING-TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21063" end="21095" title="Demographics#Generational cohorts" label="all-important 25-to-54 age group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715150" start="21114" end="21144" title="The BJ Shea Morning Experience" label="The BJ Shea Morning Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812047" start="21154" end="21158" title="KISW" label="KISW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339679" start="21194" end="21198" title="KUOW-FM" label="KUOW"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683822" wikidata="Q39989" url="?curid=683822" title="Ronny Cox">
<text>Daniel Ronald Cox (born July 23, 1938) is an American actor, singer and songwriter. He is best known for his acting work, appearing in numerous films and television series since his 1972 debut in &quot;Deliverance&quot;. Cox is also active as a musician, performing over 100 times per year at festivals and theaters each year as of 2012.

==Personal life==
Daniel Ronald Cox was born on July 23, 1938 in the mountain town of Cloudcroft, New Mexico, the third of five children to Lounette (née Rucker) and Bob P. Cox, a carpenter who also worked at a dairy. He grew up in Portales, New Mexico. Cox met his wife Mary when she was 11 and he was 14. They began dating when she was 15 and he was 18. They married in 1960 and had two sons. Cox graduated from Eastern New Mexico University in 1963 with a double major in theater and speech correction. Mary died in 2006, 50 years to the day of their first date. Cox often talks about her during his music performances.

==Acting career==
As an actor, Cox made his debut in the 1972 film &quot;Deliverance&quot;. In one scene, he plays the instrumental &quot;Dueling Banjos&quot; on his guitar with a banjo-playing mountain boy, played by child actor Billy Redden. He was hired for the role because he could play the guitar. Cox published his autobiography in 2012, recounting his experiences making the film.

In 1974–1975, Cox starred in the short-lived family-oriented series entitled &quot;Apple&#x27;s Way&quot;, created by Earl Hamner, creator of &quot;The Waltons&quot;. He also appeared as Mr. Webb in a television production of &quot;Our Town&quot;. In 1977, he appeared in the episode &quot;Devil Pack&quot; from the series &quot;Quinn Martin&#x27;s Tales of the Unexpected&quot;. In 1984, 12 years after &quot;Deliverance&quot;, Cox again played a member of a small group of men who are lost, this time in the Nevada desert, and being chased by bloodthirsty locals in the low-budget film &quot;Courage&quot;. One of Cox&#x27;s roles was that of Dr. John Gideon during the final season of the television medical drama &quot;St. Elsewhere&quot;. His character was mooned by Dr. Donald Westphall (Ed Flanders) at the end of the third episode of season six. Cox&#x27;s first role in a big-budget film came in 1984 as Lt. Andrew Bogomil in &quot;Beverly Hills Cop&quot;, and he returned to the role in &quot;Beverly Hills Cop II&quot; in 1987. That same year, Cox appeared in the Paul Verhoeven film &quot;RoboCop&quot; as corporate arch-villain Dick Jones. In 1986, Cox played the mayor in season 3, episodes 1 and 2, &quot;Death Stalks the Big Top&quot;, of the TV series &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot;.

In 1990, Cox co-starred as Los Angeles Police Chief Roger Kendrick in the short-lived &quot;Cop Rock&quot;, presenting a striking physical resemblance to the real-world incumbent Chief Daryl Gates. He also appeared as the antagonistic Mars Administrator Vilos Cohaagen in &quot;Total Recall&quot; the same year. Cox had a guest role on &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; as Captain Edward Jellico in the two-part episode &quot;Chain of Command&quot;. He also played Henry Mason, the father of Bree Van de Kamp (Marcia Cross) on &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot;. In 1997, Cox portrayed the fictional President of the United States Jack Neil in the movie &quot;Murder at 1600&quot;. Cox also portrayed John Ramsey in the 2000 TV film &quot;Perfect Murder, Perfect Town&quot; and Senator/Vice President Robert Kinsey in &quot;Stargate SG-1&quot;.

Cox had a role in &quot;The Starter Wife&quot;. He played Pappy McCallister, the husband of Molly Kagan&#x27;s best friend Joan. He occasionally has done animation work, lending his voice to the Tyrusian deserter Doc in &quot;Invasion America&quot; and Senator McMillan in &quot;Todd McFarlane&#x27;s Spawn&quot;. Cox guest-starred in an episode of Matthew Perry&#x27;s 2011 series &quot;Mr. Sunshine&quot;.

Cox played Walter Kenney in &quot;Dexter&quot;, season six, episode three (&quot;Smokey and the Bandit&quot;). His character was a serial killer known as &quot;The Tooth Fairy&quot;, whom Dexter had idolized while growing up. He guest-starred in an episode of &quot;&quot; entitled &quot;The Pressure to Murder&quot;, episode 9, season three. Cox played Gideon Claybourne on season 6 of &quot;Nashville&quot; in 2018.

Starting in 2022, Cox reprised his role as now-Admiral Edward Jellico in several episodes of &quot;Star Trek: Prodigy&quot;.

==Music career==

Despite having a successful acting career, Cox said that music now comes first in his life. He turns down about 90% of the acting jobs he is offered to play over 100 shows at festivals and theaters each year. He is accompanied by his band. Cox also leads a musical tour to Ireland each year.

On November 2, 2019, Cox was inducted into the New Mexico Music Hall of Fame.

On July 25, 2021, Cox won the New Mexico Music Awards with the Norman Petty Producers Award going to Tom (Panda) Ryan for his recording of Ronny Cox&#x27;s &quot;Live at the Kitchen Sink&quot; featuring the 2021 Best Folk Music Award with his song, &quot;Portales&quot;. &quot;Live at the Kitchen Sink&quot; was recorded at The Kitchen Sink Recording Studio in Santa Fe, New Mexico.

==Filmography==

* 1972 &quot;Deliverance&quot; as Drew Ballinger
* 1972 &quot;The Mind Snatchers&quot; as Sergeant Boford Miles
* 1972 &quot;Bonanza&quot;, episode &quot;New Man&quot; as Lucas
* 1974 &quot;A Case of Rape&quot; as David Harrod
* 1975 &quot;Who Is the Black Dahlia?&quot; as Sergeant Finis Brown
* 1976 &quot;Bound for Glory&quot; as Ozark Bule
* 1977 &quot;Quinn Martin&#x27;s Tales of the Unexpected&quot;, episode &quot;Devil Pack&quot; (TV) as Jerry Colby
* 1977 &quot;The Car&quot; as Deputy Luke Johnson
* 1977 &quot;The Girl Called Hatter Fox&quot; (TV) as Dr. Teague Summer
* 1978 &quot;Gray Lady Down&quot; as Commander David Samuelson
* 1978 &quot;Fantasy Island&quot; (TV) episode &quot;Reunion&quot; / &quot;Anniversary&quot; as Tom Elgin
* 1978 &quot;Harper Valley PTA&quot; as Willis Newton
* 1979 &quot;The Onion Field&quot; as Sergeant Pierce R. Brooks
* 1980 &quot;The Courage of Kavik the Wolf Dog&quot; as Kurt Evans
* 1980 &quot;&quot; (TV) as Bernard Coy
* 1981 &quot;Taps&quot; as Colonel Kerby
* 1981 &quot;Fallen Angel&quot; (TV film) as Frank Dawson
* 1982 &quot;The Beast Within&quot; as Eli MacCleary
* 1982 &quot;Tangiers&quot; as Bob Steele
* 1982 &quot;Two of a Kind&quot; as Ted Hahn
* 1982 &quot;Some Kind of Hero&quot; as Colonel Powers
* 1984 &quot;The Jesse Owens Story&quot; (TV) as Coach Larry Snyder
* 1984 &quot;Beverly Hills Cop&quot; as Lieutenant Andrew Bogomil
* 1984 &quot;Raw Courage&quot; (also writer and producer) as Pete Canfield
* 1984-1985 &quot;Spencer&quot; as George Winger
* 1985 &quot;Vision Quest&quot; as Louden&#x27;s Dad
* 1986 &quot;Hollywood Vice Squad&quot; as Captain Jensen
* 1987 &quot;Steele Justice&quot; as Bennett
* 1987 &quot;Beverly Hills Cop II&quot; as Captain / Chief Andrew Bogomil
* 1987 &quot;RoboCop&quot; as Dick Jones
* 1987-1988 &quot;St. Elsewhere&quot; as Dr. John Gideon
* 1987 &quot;Amazon Women on the Moon&quot; as General Balentine (segment &quot;The Unknown Soldier&quot;) (uncredited)
* 1988 &quot;In the Line of Duty: The F.B.I. Murders&quot; as FBI Special Agent Ben Grogan
* 1989 &quot;One Man Force&quot; as McCoy
* 1989 &quot;Martians Go Home&quot; as The President
* 1990 &quot;Loose Cannons&quot; as Bob Smiley
* 1990 &quot;Total Recall&quot; as Chancellor Vilos Cohaagen
* 1990 &quot;Captain America&quot; as President Tom Kimball
* 1990 &quot;Cop Rock&quot; as Chief Roger Kendrick
* 1991 &quot;Scissors&quot; as Dr. Stephan Carter
* 1992 &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; (two episodes) as Captain Edward Jellico
* 1992 &quot;Perry Mason: The Case of the Heartbroken Bride&quot; as Mr. Parrish
* 1993 &quot;L.A. Law&quot; as Mason Paine 
* 1997 &quot;Murder at 1600&quot; as President Jack Neil
* 1998-2005 &quot;Stargate SG-1&quot; (11 episodes) as Senator Robert Kinsey / Vice President Robert Kinsey
* 1998 &quot;Puraido: Unmei no Toki&quot; as Chief Justice Sir William Webb
* 1998 &quot;Frog and Wombat&quot; as Principal Larry Struble
* 1999 &quot;Forces of Nature&quot; as Hadley
* 1999 &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;, episode &quot;Deja Vu&quot; as Lieutenant Colonel Lester Glade
* 1999 &quot;Deep Blue Sea&quot; as Franklin&#x27;s Boss (uncredited)
* 1999 &quot;FreeSpace 2&quot; as Admiral Aken Bosch (voice)
* 2000 &quot;Perfect Murder, Perfect Town&quot; as John Ramsey
* 2001 &quot;The Agency&quot; (2001) as Director Alex Pierce III
* 2001 &quot;The Boys of Sunset Ridge&quot; as Ben Thorpe
* 2001 &quot;American Outlaws&quot; as Doc Mimms, Zee&#x27;s Dad
* 2001 &quot;Losing Grace&quot; as Dave Reed
* 2002 &quot;Crazy As Hell&quot; as Delazo
* 2004 &quot;Killzone&quot; (Video Game) as Stuart Adams (voice)
* 2004 &quot;Angel in the Family&quot; as Buddy
* 2005 &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot; as Dr. McManus
* 2005 &quot;The L.A. Riot Spectacular&quot; as The Chief
* 2006 &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot; (TV Series) as Henry Mason
* 2006 &quot;Commander in Chief&quot; as Senator Joe Peck
* 2007 &quot;Tell Me You Love Me&quot; as John
* 2008 &quot;Cold Case&quot; as Daniel Patterson &#x27;08
* 2009 &quot;Imagine That&quot; as Tom Stevens
* 2011 &quot;Dexter&quot; as Walter Kenney
* 2012 &quot;Leverage&quot; as Peter McSweeten 
* 2013 &quot;Age of Dinosaurs&quot; as Justin
* 2014 &quot;Beyond the Reach&quot; as Sheriff Robb
* 2018 &quot;Nashville&quot; as Gideon Claybourne
* 2019 &quot;The Car: Road to Revenge&quot; as The Mechanic
* 2021 &quot;Being the Ricardos&quot; as Older Bob Carroll 
* 2022-2024 &quot;Star Trek Prodigy&quot; as Admiral Edward Jellico (voice)
==Discography==
==Books==
* Cox, Ronny. &quot;Dueling Banjos: The Deliverance of Drew&quot;. Decent Hill, 2012. (paperback); 9781936085590 (hardcover); 9781936085606 (eBook)

==Further reading==

* Voisin, Scott &quot;Character Kings: Hollywood&#x27;s Familiar Faces Discuss the Art &amp; Business of Acting&quot;. BearManor Media, 2009. 
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Ronny Cox Interview at NAMM Oral History Library (2017)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39989" start="0" end="17" title="Ronny Cox" label="Daniel Ronald Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q814778" start="202" end="213" title="Deliverance" label="Deliverance"/>
<link wikidata="Q432556" start="425" end="447" title="Cloudcroft, New Mexico" label="Cloudcroft, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q988821" start="571" end="591" title="Portales, New Mexico" label="Portales, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854154" start="753" end="782" title="Eastern New Mexico University" label="Eastern New Mexico University"/>
<link wikidata="Q814778" start="1036" end="1047" title="Deliverance" label="Deliverance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312200" start="1101" end="1115" title="Dueling Banjos" label="Dueling Banjos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913218" start="1193" end="1205" title="Billy Redden" label="Billy Redden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="1285" end="1298" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q948870" start="1471" end="1482" title="Earl Hamner" label="Earl Hamner"/>
<link wikidata="Q48777" start="1501" end="1512" title="The Waltons" label="The Waltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755219" start="1585" end="1593" title="Our Town" label="Our Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607041" start="1682" end="1725" title="Quinn Martin&amp;#x27;s Tales of the Unexpected" label="Quinn Martin&amp;#x27;s Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068952" start="2076" end="2089" title="St. Elsewhere" label="St. Elsewhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322151" start="2115" end="2121" title="mooning" label="mooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282344" start="2147" end="2158" title="Ed Flanders" label="Ed Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q722267" start="2294" end="2311" title="Beverly Hills Cop" label="Beverly Hills Cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q525860" start="2356" end="2376" title="Beverly Hills Cop II" label="Beverly Hills Cop II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129079" start="2428" end="2442" title="Paul Verhoeven" label="Paul Verhoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="2454" end="2461" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2539" end="2547" title="List of Murder, She Wrote episodes#Season 3 (1986–87)" label="season 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="2628" end="2645" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996695" start="2746" end="2754" title="Cop Rock" label="Cop Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356165" start="2839" end="2850" title="Daryl Gates" label="Daryl Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q222018" start="2932" end="2944" title="Total Recall (1990 film)" label="Total Recall"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2996" end="3026" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3089" end="3105" title="Chain of Command (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="Chain of Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q601836" start="3155" end="3171" title="Bree Van de Kamp" label="Bree Van de Kamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q189547" start="3173" end="3185" title="Marcia Cross" label="Marcia Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="3196" end="3216" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="3261" end="3291" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971748" start="3321" end="3335" title="Murder at 1600" label="Murder at 1600"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221573" start="3362" end="3373" title="John Bennett Ramsey" label="John Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168017" start="3400" end="3428" title="Perfect Murder, Perfect Town" label="Perfect Murder, Perfect Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3439" end="3475" title="List of recurring Earth characters in Stargate SG-1#Robert Kinsey" label="Senator/Vice President Robert Kinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q187462" start="3485" end="3498" title="Stargate SG-1" label="Stargate SG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962866" start="3531" end="3547" title="The Starter Wife (TV series)" label="The Starter Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269591" start="3733" end="3749" title="Invasion America" label="Invasion America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106852" start="3786" end="3813" title="Todd McFarlane&amp;#x27;s Spawn" label="Todd McFarlane&amp;#x27;s Spawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q171758" start="3856" end="3869" title="Matthew Perry" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508139" start="3895" end="3907" title="Mr. Sunshine (2011 TV series)" label="Mr. Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23577" start="3950" end="3956" title="Dexter (TV series)" label="Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210676" start="4309" end="4318" title="Nashville (2012 TV series)" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4434" end="4452" title="Star Trek: Prodigy" label="Star Trek: Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q814778" start="5265" end="5276" title="Deliverance" label="Deliverance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738798" start="5314" end="5332" title="The Mind Snatchers" label="The Mind Snatchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="5377" end="5384" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655756" start="5442" end="5456" title="A Case of Rape" label="A Case of Rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q112939456" start="5492" end="5516" title="Who Is the Black Dahlia?" label="Who Is the Black Dahlia?"/>
<link wikidata="Q533585" start="5560" end="5575" title="Bound for Glory (1976 film)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607041" start="5609" end="5652" title="Quinn Martin&amp;#x27;s Tales of the Unexpected" label="Quinn Martin&amp;#x27;s Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197355" start="5724" end="5731" title="The Car (1977 film)" label="The Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277368" start="5774" end="5800" title="The Girl Called Hatter Fox" label="The Girl Called Hatter Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688374" start="5846" end="5860" title="Gray Lady Down" label="Gray Lady Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395913" start="5909" end="5923" title="Fantasy Island" label="Fantasy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124706" start="6015" end="6032" title="Harper Valley PTA (film)" label="Harper Valley PTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138900" start="6069" end="6084" title="The Onion Field (film)" label="The Onion Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727819" start="6133" end="6166" title="The Courage of Kavik the Wolf Dog" label="The Courage of Kavik the Wolf Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213746" start="6240" end="6244" title="Taps (film)" label="Taps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432219" start="6281" end="6293" title="Fallen Angel (1981 film)" label="Fallen Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232455" start="6339" end="6355" title="The Beast Within (1982 film)" label="The Beast Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682977" start="6392" end="6400" title="Tangiers (1982 film)" label="Tangiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914938" start="6434" end="6447" title="Two of a Kind (1982 film)" label="Two of a Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559429" start="6479" end="6496" title="Some Kind of Hero" label="Some Kind of Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743138" start="6534" end="6555" title="The Jesse Owens Story" label="The Jesse Owens Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q722267" start="6602" end="6619" title="Beverly Hills Cop" label="Beverly Hills Cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381240" start="6748" end="6755" title="Spencer (TV series)" label="Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139277" start="6792" end="6804" title="Vision Quest (film)" label="Vision Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370229" start="6845" end="6865" title="Hollywood Vice Squad" label="Hollywood Vice Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605800" start="6903" end="6917" title="Steele Justice" label="Steele Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q525860" start="6948" end="6968" title="Beverly Hills Cop II" label="Beverly Hills Cop II"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="7022" end="7029" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068952" start="7068" end="7081" title="St. Elsewhere" label="St. Elsewhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q456467" start="7120" end="7144" title="Amazon Women on the Moon" label="Amazon Women on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7240" end="7279" title="In the Line of Duty: The F.B.I. Murders" label="In the Line of Duty: The F.B.I. Murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q941606" start="7307" end="7317" title="Ben Grogan" label="Ben Grogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620336" start="7373" end="7389" title="Martians Go Home (film)" label="Martians Go Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194122" start="7426" end="7439" title="Loose Cannons (1990 film)" label="Loose Cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q222018" start="7473" end="7485" title="Total Recall (1990 film)" label="Total Recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035093" start="7534" end="7549" title="Captain America (1990 film)" label="Captain America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996695" start="7594" end="7602" title="Cop Rock" label="Cop Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q258712" start="7646" end="7654" title="Scissors (film)" label="Scissors"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7696" end="7726" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798748" start="7787" end="7833" title="Perry Mason (TV film series)" label="Perry Mason: The Case of the Heartbroken Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247212" start="7868" end="7876" title="L.A. Law" label="L.A. Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971748" start="7912" end="7926" title="Murder at 1600" label="Murder at 1600"/>
<link wikidata="Q187462" start="7974" end="7987" title="Stargate SG-1" label="Stargate SG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11335347" start="8077" end="8099" title="Pride (1998 film)" label="Puraido: Unmei no Toki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505230" start="8153" end="8168" title="Frog and Wombat" label="Frog and Wombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40182" start="8215" end="8231" title="Forces of Nature (1999 film)" label="Forces of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621450" start="8261" end="8277" title="The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545617" start="8299" end="8306" title="Deja Vu (The Outer Limits)" label="Deja Vu"/>
<link wikidata="Q599095" start="8361" end="8374" title="Deep Blue Sea (1999 film)" label="Deep Blue Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354428" start="8431" end="8442" title="FreeSpace 2" label="FreeSpace 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168017" start="8492" end="8520" title="Perfect Murder, Perfect Town" label="Perfect Murder, Perfect Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221573" start="8530" end="8541" title="John Bennett Ramsey" label="John Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q932652" start="8555" end="8565" title="The Agency (2001 TV series)" label="The Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q466008" start="8678" end="8694" title="American Outlaws (2001 film)" label="American Outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183279" start="8788" end="8801" title="Crazy As Hell" label="Crazy As Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402918" start="8831" end="8839" title="Killzone" label="Killzone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8944" end="8981" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745020" start="9016" end="9041" title="The L.A. Riot Spectacular" label="The L.A. Riot Spectacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="9074" end="9094" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q697031" start="9141" end="9159" title="Commander in Chief (TV Series)" label="Commander in Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885824" start="9199" end="9218" title="Tell Me You Love Me (TV series)" label="Tell Me You Love Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q733960" start="9246" end="9255" title="Cold Case" label="Cold Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q228585" start="9304" end="9316" title="Imagine That (film)" label="Imagine That"/>
<link wikidata="Q23577" start="9351" end="9357" title="Dexter (TV Series)" label="Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q868835" start="9394" end="9402" title="Leverage (American TV series)" label="Leverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16830289" start="9442" end="9458" title="Age of Dinosaurs" label="Age of Dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155077" start="9488" end="9504" title="Beyond the Reach" label="Beyond the Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q210676" start="9540" end="9549" title="Nashville (2012 TV series)" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q105907125" start="9650" end="9668" title="Being the Ricardos" label="Being the Ricardos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932022" start="9684" end="9695" title="Bob Carroll Jr." label="Bob Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q65250765" start="9715" end="9732" title="Star Trek Prodigy" label="Star Trek Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091115" start="10174" end="10199" title="NAMM Oral History Program" label="NAMM Oral History Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683823" wikidata="Q1288617" url="?curid=683823" title="Rob Conway">
<text>Robert Thomas Conway Jr. (born November 28, 1972), is an American retired professional wrestler. He is best known for his work with World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE). Conway is also known for his work with the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA), where he is a former two-time NWA World Heavyweight Champion.

He is also a seven-time Tag Team Champion, becoming a three-time World Tag Team Champion with Sylvain Grenier as part of La Resistance in the WWE and four-time NWA World Tag Team Champion once as part of The IronGodz with Jax Dane and three-times as part of The Iron Empire with Matt Riviera in the NWA. He is currently the only wrestler to have held the NWA World Heavyweight and NWA World Tag Team Championships simultaneously.

==Professional wrestling career==
===Ohio Valley Wrestling (1997–2000)===
Rob Conway began his career in Memphis Championship Wrestling (MCW) and Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), teaming with Nick Dinsmore under the names Limited Edition (MCW), the Borkcin Brothers, and the Lords of the Ring (OVW). While in OVW, he and Dinsmore were also members of Kenny Bolin&#x27;s Bolin Services along with The Prototype, Bull Buchanan, and Mark Henry. As the Lords of the Ring, Conway and Dinsmore won the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship on 10 occasions and captured the MCW North American Tag Team Championship once. On April 28, 1999, Rob Conway defeated his partner Nick Dinsmore to win the OVW Heavyweight Championship, but lost it back to him the next week. Conway won the OVW Heavyweight Championship a second time on August 17, 1999, pinning Damaja. He lost the title to Rico Constantino on November 10, regaining it on September 6, 2000, with another victory over Dinsmore.

===World Wrestling Federation/Entertainment===
====Early appearances (2000–2003)====
Conway had dark matches previously with Kurt Angle and Headbanger Mosh, then known as Beaver Cleavage. Conway&#x27;s TV debut in the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) was on the May 20, 2000, episode of &quot;Jakked&quot;, where he was defeated by Bull Buchanan. Over the next three years, Conway appeared in tryout matches on &quot;Velocity&quot; and &quot;Sunday Night Heat&quot;, losing to wrestlers such as A-Train, Randy Orton, and The Hurricane.

In a match taped for the July 17, 2003 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, Rob Conway and Nick Dinsmore appeared under masks as &quot;Los Conquistadores&quot;, losing to Rey Mysterio and Billy Kidman. On July 27, at Vengeance, Conway once again competed as the masked Conquistador, this time with Johnny Jeter as his partner, as part of the APA Bar Room Brawl.

====La Résistance (2003–2005)====

Conway made his proper debut for the company on the August 18, 2003, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, planted in the audience dressed as an American airman. After Conway was &quot;harassed&quot; by the heel tag team La Résistance (Sylvain Grenier and René Duprée), he was invited into the ring by The Dudley Boyz, who were then feuding with La Résistance. While &quot;celebrating&quot; with the Dudley Boyz and waving the American flag, Conway suddenly hit them both with the flagpole, revealing himself to be a member of La Résistance. The trio feuded with several tag teams, including the Dudley Boyz, Hurricane and Rosey, and Garrison Cade and Mark Jindrak. When Grenier suffered a back injury in October 2003, Dupree and Conway held the group together until the March 15, 2004 edition of &quot;Raw&quot; when Grenier returned. The trio did not last long after that, however, as Dupree was drafted to SmackDown! on March 22, 2004, during the Draft Lottery.
Grenier and Conway, however, continued to team together as La Résistance on &quot;Raw&quot;. With American-Franco hostility subsiding, the WWE ceased billing the team as being from France and instead promoted them as being haughty French Canadians who carried the flag of Quebec to the ring, with Grenier often singing the Canadian national anthem and Conway becoming known as Robért Conway, the French version of his name. The team held the World Tag Team Championship three times. Their first title reign came when they defeated Chris Benoit and Edge on the May 31, 2004 edition of &quot;Raw&quot; in Grenier&#x27;s home town of Montreal, Quebec. The team dropped the belts to the same team of Benoit and Edge at Taboo Tuesday on October 19 when, even though Edge walked out on Benoit, Benoit was able to defeat La Résistance by himself. It was not long before La Résistance reclaimed the tag team gold for the second time on the November 1 edition of &quot;Raw&quot;, defeating Chris Benoit after Edge walked out on Benoit again. This time La Résistance did not hold the title as long as their last reign; they lost the belts two weeks later on &quot;Raw&quot; when they faced the team of William Regal and Eugene as well as Tajiri and Rhyno.

In a 3-Way Elimination match, they dropped the title to Regal and Eugene. Their third, and final, Tag Team Title reign began at a Raw brand house show on January 16, 2005, in Winnipeg, Manitoba when they defeated Regal and Jonathan Coachman—Regal&#x27;s actual partner, Eugene, had been injured and Coachman was selected to be his fill in partner, though Regal never tagged him in—to win the belts. La Résistance dropped the belts again a few weeks later on the February 7, edition of &quot;Raw&quot;, from Tokyo, Japan, to William Regal and his new tag team partner Tajiri.

La Résistance repeatedly attempted to regain the gold (mainly on &quot;Heat&quot;) from Regal and Tajiri in a number of different matches but fell just short each time. During their &quot;last shot&quot; the team thought they had won back the title only to have the decision reversed by referee Mike Chioda due to La Résistance not pinning the legal man. The match was restarted but La Résistance lost the match and their last chance against Regal and Tajiri in a normal tag team contest. The team was given one more chance at Regal and Tajiri, only this time during a Tag Team Turmoil match including five teams—La Résistance, Regal and Tajiri, The Heart Throbs (Romeo Roselli and Antonio Thomas), Simon Dean and Maven, and Rosey and The Hurricane, at Backlash. During the match La Résistance managed to eliminate the champions, but were defeated by the last remaining team (and winners of the match) Hurricane and Rosey.

====Singles competition (2005–2006)====
The team split in mid-May after repeatedly quarreling over which of them was the superior wrestler. Grenier and Conway went into singles competition with announcers claiming that the members of La Résistance were trying to &quot;one up&quot; each other in singles matches without the other man in their corner. This saw Conway defeat a jobber and Val Venis, while Grenier was defeated by both Venis and Chris Jericho. Both men competed in a triple threat match against Intercontinental Champion Shelton Benjamin for the title; Benjamin won the match not long after the La Résistance members began to argue and fight with each other. This altercation led to a main event match for the June 12 &quot;Heat&quot; (taped on June 6) in which Rob Conway portrayed the heel, and defeated Grenier. On June 30, 2005, Grenier was a last minute trade in the 2005 WWE Draft, sending him to SmackDown! while Conway stayed on the Raw brand. Conway then began wrestling in singles competition on both &quot;Heat&quot; and &quot;Raw&quot;.
On the July 17, 2005 edition of &quot;Heat&quot; Conway brought back his original identity of Rob Conway, making his new gimmick a narcissistic heel and developing a new appearance (similar to Buff Bagwell) including a biker hat, sunglasses, a mustache, see through tights, and a new haircut. He began referring to himself as &quot;The Con-Man&quot; Rob Conway. During the &quot;WWE Homecoming&quot; edition of &quot;Raw&quot;, Conway interrupted a segment involving a number of WWE Legends. After disrespecting the legends, they assaulted him. Conway, seeking retaliation, then went on to have matches against a number of legends, picking up wins over Doink the Clown, Greg Valentine (by disqualification), and Koko B. Ware.

During this time he would go on to begin feuding with Eugene, a big fan of the legends who stuck up for them. At the Taboo Tuesday pay-per-view, Conway teamed with Tomko to face Eugene and a legend (as voted for by the fans). Jimmy Snuka beat out Kamala and Jim Duggan in the voting to become Eugene&#x27;s partner and picked up the win after a Superfly Splash ending Conway&#x27;s winning streak. On the next &quot;Raw&quot;, Conway attempted to take the Intercontinental Championship from Ric Flair, but came up short when he was locked in Flair&#x27;s figure four leglock.

After losing to Flair, Conway went on a long losing streak, losing almost every match he was in through the rest of the 2005 and the start of 2006. Conway went back to competing on &quot;Sunday Night Heat&quot; making few appearances on &quot;Raw&quot; and losing on every occasion. On the April 10, 2006 edition of &quot;Raw&quot;, Conway debuted a slightly changed look, including longer hair, no mustache, and blonde highlighted hair, in a loss to Rob Van Dam. Conway finally broke his losing streak for one night only on the May 12, 2006 edition of &quot;Heat&quot; when he won a mixed tag team match with Victoria against the team of Viscera and Torrie Wilson. It was short lived, however, as the next week he was defeated by Jim Duggan, restarting his losing streak but starting a short program with Duggan and his protege Eugene. At the start of August, Conway dropped the Con-Man Gimmick as he stopped wearing sunglasses and his ego dropped. From this point on, Conway was used as a tweener who was desperate to pick up a victory over anyone possible but failed every time he tried.

====Return to OVW and Raw (2006–2007)====
On the November 15 edition of Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), Conway made a surprise appearance, teaming with Sylvain Grenier to reform their old stable, La Résistance. The reformed team defeated Cody Runnels and Shawn Spears to earn a shot at the OVW Southern Tag Team Titles. The team, however, lost the title match.

After months of losing, Conway appeared on the January 1, 2007 edition of &quot;Raw&quot;. Conway proceeded to make a New Year&#x27;s resolution and vowed that he would not lose another match and if he did he would quit &quot;Raw&quot;. His opponent was the Intercontinental Champion Jeff Hardy, but he was pinned after 21 seconds. After WWE Chairman Vince McMahon entered the ring and (instead of letting him quit Monday Night Raw) fired him. On May 11, 2007, WWE officially announced that Conway was released from his WWE contract.

===Juggalo Championship Wrestling (2011)===
Conway debuted in Juggalo Championship Wrestling at the event Hardcore Hell. Per storyline, he announced that he was a master of submissions and a wrestler for hire. That night, Conway submitted three different opponents to showcase his skills. Two weeks later, he was hired by Breyer Wellington to face JCW Heavyweight Champion Corporal Robinson, but was defeated. Conway then participated in Juggalo Championship Wrestling&#x27;s first internet pay-per-view Hatchet Attacks, where he submitted Sal the Man of a Thousand Gimmicks. At Up in Smoke, Conway was hired by Sabu&#x27;s manager Charlie Brown to attack 2 Tuff Tony. After Rhino scared off Sabu and Conway, a tag team match was scheduled between the two and Rhino and Tony at St. Andrews Brawl.

===National Wrestling Alliance===
====NWA World Heavyweight Champion (2013–2015)====

On March 16, 2013, Conway defeated Kahagas to win the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA) World Heavyweight Championship. Through NWA&#x27;s working relationship with New Japan Pro-Wrestling, Conway appeared via video at New Japan&#x27;s March 23 event announcing that he would be taking part in the promotion&#x27;s April 7 Invasion Attack event. He was then challenged to a match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship by Satoshi Kojima. Conway made his debut appearance for New Japan on April 5, when he, accompanied by NWA president Bruce Tharpe, had an in-ring confrontation with Kojima. Two days later, Conway defeated Kojima, following interference from Tharpe and fellow NWA wrestler Jax Dane, to retain the NWA World Heavyweight Championship. On April 20, Conway successfully defended the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Chris Masters in Houston, Texas, after which he was presented a new title belt. On June 22, Conway returned to New Japan at Dominion 6.22, where he successfully defended the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Manabu Nakanishi.

Conway would show up in a video on September 5, 2013, at NJPW IPPV at the Korauken Hall to challenge Jyushin Thunder Liger to a future title match. Liger came out after the video and accepted the challenge. On September 29 at Destruction, Conway defeated Liger to retain the NWA World Heavyweight Championship.

On November 9, Conway returned to NJPW at Power Struggle, where he and Jax Dane defeated K.E.S. (Davey Boy Smith Jr. and Lance Archer) and Tencozy (Hiroyoshi Tenzan and Satoshi Kojima) in the first fall of a two-fall three-way match to win the NWA World Tag Team Championship, making Conway a double champion and the first wrestler to simultaneously hold both the World Heavyweight and World Tag Team Championships. From November 23 to December 7, Dane and Conway took part in New Japan&#x27;s 2013 World Tag League, where they finished with a record of three wins and three losses, failing to advance to the semifinals. Conway was pinned in only one of his team&#x27;s three losses, which led to his defeater, Satoshi Kojima, challenging him to a rematch for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship.

On January 4, 2014, at Wrestle Kingdom 8 in Tokyo Dome, Conway lost the NWA World Heavyweight Championship to Kojima.

The following day, Conway pinned Kojima following a distraction from Bruce Tharpe and a low blow, when he and Dane successfully defended the NWA World Tag Team Championship against Tencozy. Conway and Dane returned to New Japan on April 6 at Invasion Attack 2014, where they lost the NWA World Tag Team Championship to Tencozy. On April 12, Conway received a rematch for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship during New Japan&#x27;s trip to Taiwan, but he was again defeated by Kojima. The following day, Conway and Dane also failed in their attempt to regain the NWA World Tag Team Championship from Tencozy. Conway also failed to regain the title alongside Wes Brisco on May 25 at Back to the Yokohama Arena. On June 2, Conway defeated Satoshi Kojima in Las Vegas to regain the NWA World Heavyweight Championship. Conway and Dane returned to New Japan in November to take part in the 2014 World Tag League. The team finished second to last in their block with a record of three wins and four losses. Conway returned to NJPW on February 11, 2015, at The New Beginning in Osaka, where he and Chase Owens defeated Jyushin Thunder Liger and Hiroyoshi Tenzan in a tag team match. Three days later at The New Beginning in Sendai, Conway lost the NWA World Heavyweight Championship to Tenzan. Conway&#x27;s profile has been removed from NJPW&#x27;s official website.

====Championship pursuits (2014–2017)====
On February 22, 2014, Conway pinned Eric Draven in Madison, Indiana to win the NWA Supreme Heavyweight Championship. He would hold this title until May 9, 2014, when he was defeated by Draven in a rematch at Hanover College in Hanover, Indiana. On February 22, 2015, in Seymour Indiana Rob Conway defeated Eric Draven for the NWA Supreme Heavyweight Championship. On June 20, 2015, Conway defeated both Tim Storm and All That Alan Steele to become the NWA Mid-South Unified Heavyweight Champion.

On October 10, 2015, Conway was defeated by Greg Anthony in a double title match losing the NWA Mid-South Unified Heavyweight Championship. On December 4, 2015, Conway teamed with Matt Riviera teaming under the name The Iron Empire defeating The Heatseekers (Elliot Russell and Sigmon) to win the NWA World Tag Team Championships. On March 3, 2016, Rob Conway defeated Texas Outlaw to begin Conway&#x27;s second reign as NWA Supreme Champion.

On September 9, 2016, The Iron Empire were defeated by The Heatseekers (Elliot Russell and Sigmon) losing the NWA World Tag Team Championships. The next day, on September 10, 2016, The Iron Empire regained to championship to become two time NWA World Tag Team Champions defeating The Heatseekers. They lost the title to Kazushi Miyamoto and Rob Terry in Tokyo, Japan on February 23, 2017. On May 12, 2017, Rob Conway defeated Josh Lewis (wrestler) to win his first NWA United States Championship in Hanover, Indiana at NWA Supreme Rebelution 2017. On May 27, 2017, Rob would lose the United States title to Josh Lewis in Madison Indiana.

On June 17, Rob Conway pinned Johnny Knockout in a 3 way Dance in West Harrison, Indiana. This victory made Conway the first ever &quot;BOTB&quot; Heavyweight Champion.

On July 14, Rob teamed up with Josh Lewis to win the NWA Mid-America Tag Team Championships from Custom Made (Eric Draven and Roger Malcolm) at NWA Supreme in Madison, Indiana. On August 18, 2017, Rob Conway and Josh Lewis lost the NWA Mid America tag team championship to Custom Made. When Eric Draven struck Josh Lewis with a chain.

=== Return to WWE (2018) ===
In September 2018, Conway started working at the WWE Performance Center as a guest trainer. His friendship with fellow OVW graduate Randy Orton helped get him the job.

=== Independent circuit (2017–2020) ===
In 2020, he has wrestled significantly less than he has in past years. He has wrestled matches for AWA Supreme Wrestling and New Focus Wrestling.

Conway along with Sylvain Grenier are currently FWE Tag Team Champions. FWE is based in Raleigh NC.

==Personal life==
Rob graduated from Indiana&#x27;s New Albany High School in 1990 where he was a standout basketball player. He later played basketball at the now defunct Graceland College in New Albany. Following college, Rob sold fitness equipment and worked as a personal trainer in the Southern Indiana/Louisville area. He broke into wrestling after driving past the old Danny Davis arena in Jeffersonville, Indiana in 1997. After walking in and watching what he considered out of shape guys wrestle, he thought he would give it a try. Rob stated in a 2004 Indianapolis Monthly article that within five minutes of being in the ring, he knew this was what he wanted to do. Based on the appearance of the local wrestlers, he thought it would only take six months to make it to the WWE (then WWF); it eventually took him six years.

==Other media==
Rob Conway appears as a playable character in &quot;WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw 2006&quot;.

==Championships and accomplishments==

*All Star Wrestling
**ASW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
*All Star Wrestling Alliance
**AWA Central States Championship (3 times)
**AWA United States Championship (1 time)
*Battle on the Border
**BOTB Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
*Hoosier Pro Wrestling
**HPW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with TJ Kemp 
*Indianapolis Championship Wrestling
**ICW World Heavyweight Championship (1 time, current)
*Music City Wrestling
**MCW North American Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Nick Dinsmore
*Northern Championship Wrestling
**NCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Sylvain Grenier
*National Wrestling Alliance
**NWA World Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
**NWA World Tag Team Championship (4 times) – with Jax Dane (1) and Matt Riviera (3)
*NWA Mid-America
**NWA Mid-America Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Josh Lewis 
*NWA Circle City Wrestling
**NWA CCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Sean Casey
*NWA Mid-South
**NWA Mid-South Unified Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
*NWA Supreme Wrestling
**NWA Supreme Heavyweight Championship (3 time)
**NWA United States Championship (1 time)
**NWA Tri-State Television Championship (1 time)
**NWA Supreme Tag Team Championships (1 time) – with Josh Lewis
*New Focus Wrestling
**NFW World Heavyweight championship
**NFW World Tag Team Championship (1 time, current) – with Josh Lewis
*Ohio Valley Wrestling
**OVW Heavyweight Championship (5 times)
**OVW Southern Tag Team Championship (11 times) – with Nick Dinsmore (10) and Pat Buck (1)
*Pro Wrestling Illustrated
**Ranked No. 45 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2004
*Supreme Wrestling
**Supreme Heavyweight Champion (2 times, current) 
**Supreme Central States Heavyweight Championship (1 time) 
**Supreme Mid America Heavyweight Championship (1 Time)
*Top of the World Wrestling
**TOW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Sylvain Grenier
*Universal Championship Wrestling
**UCW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
*World Wrestling Entertainment
**World Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Sylvain Grenier
*Wild Championship Wrestling Outlaws
**WCWO Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Josh Lewis

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1288617" start="0" end="24" title="Rob Conway" label="Robert Thomas Conway Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="74" end="95" title="Professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="132" end="161" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="212" end="239" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="277" end="307" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="375" end="398" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="World Tag Team Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189475" start="404" end="419" title="Sylvain Grenier" label="Sylvain Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q528182" start="431" end="444" title="La Resistance (professional wrestling)" label="La Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961703" start="470" end="497" title="NWA World Tag Team Championship" label="NWA World Tag Team Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902021" start="514" end="526" title="The IronGodz" label="The IronGodz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15211125" start="532" end="540" title="Jax Dane" label="Jax Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25935968" start="589" end="601" title="Matt Riviera" label="Matt Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q865940" start="846" end="876" title="Memphis Championship Wrestling" label="Memphis Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q862021" start="887" end="908" title="Ohio Valley Wrestling" label="Ohio Valley Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="916" end="923" title="Tag team" label="teaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q951033" start="929" end="942" title="Eugene (wrestler)" label="Nick Dinsmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="1133" end="1146" title="John Cena" label="The Prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189386" start="1148" end="1161" title="Bull Buchanan" label="Bull Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310073" start="1167" end="1177" title="Mark Henry" label="Mark Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136852" start="1233" end="1267" title="OVW Southern Tag Team Championship" label="OVW Southern Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136861" start="1424" end="1452" title="OVW Heavyweight Championship" label="OVW Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q127568" start="1579" end="1585" title="Daniel Hollie" label="Damaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539259" start="1608" end="1624" title="Rico Constantino" label="Rico Constantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="1838" end="1848" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298697" start="1853" end="1868" title="Mosh (wrestler)" label="Headbanger Mosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957201" start="2006" end="2012" title="WWE Jakked/Metal" label="Jakked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315674" start="2130" end="2138" title="WWE Velocity" label="Velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363314" start="2155" end="2172" title="WWE Heat" label="Sunday Night Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q349030" start="2208" end="2215" title="Matt Bloom" label="A-Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="2217" end="2228" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q352884" start="2234" end="2247" title="Gregory Helms" label="The Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="2306" end="2316" title="WWE SmackDown" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="2368" end="2373" title="Lucha libre" label="masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682648" start="2383" end="2401" title="Los Conquistadores" label="Los Conquistadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q44152" start="2419" end="2431" title="Rey Mysterio" label="Rey Mysterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q707915" start="2436" end="2448" title="Billy Kidman" label="Billy Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q744476" start="2465" end="2474" title="Vengeance (2003)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472830" start="2546" end="2558" title="Johnny Jeter" label="Johnny Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447529" start="2590" end="2593" title="Acolytes Protection Agency" label="APA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2594" end="2608" title="Professional wrestling match types#Backstage Brawl" label="Bar Room Brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="2732" end="2735" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2743" end="2750" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Plant" label="planted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2781" end="2796" title="United States Air Force" label="American airman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="2843" end="2847" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="2848" end="2856" title="tag team" label="tag team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189475" start="2872" end="2887" title="Sylvain Grenier" label="Sylvain Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q659592" start="2892" end="2903" title="René Duprée" label="René Duprée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190952" start="2938" end="2953" title="Dudley Boyz" label="The Dudley Boyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q847506" start="2969" end="2976" title="Feud (professional wrestling)" label="feuding"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="3063" end="3076" title="Flag of the United States" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517555" start="3245" end="3264" title="Hurricane and Rosey" label="Hurricane and Rosey"/>
<link wikidata="Q459930" start="3270" end="3283" title="Lance Cade" label="Garrison Cade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893719" start="3288" end="3300" title="Mark Jindrak" label="Mark Jindrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797348" start="3545" end="3555" title="SmackDown (WWE brand)" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3586" end="3599" title="WWE Brand Extension#March 2004 (Draft Lottery)" label="Draft Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427834" start="3699" end="3724" title="Anti-French sentiment in the United States" label="American-Franco hostility"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="3832" end="3847" title="French Canadian" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q392167" start="3865" end="3879" title="flag of Quebec" label="flag of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q93359" start="3924" end="3948" title="O Canada" label="Canadian national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="4043" end="4070" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="4132" end="4144" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="4149" end="4153" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271664" start="4316" end="4329" title="Taboo Tuesday (2004)" label="Taboo Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q316938" start="4793" end="4806" title="William Regal" label="William Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q549808" start="4829" end="4835" title="Yoshihiro Tajiri" label="Tajiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q471865" start="4840" end="4845" title="Rhyno" label="Rhyno"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797029" start="4978" end="4981" title="Raw (WWE brand)" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140048" start="4988" end="4998" title="house show" label="house show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333033" start="5071" end="5088" title="Jonathan Coachman" label="Jonathan Coachman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5690" end="5707" title="glossary of professional wrestling terms#Dusty finish" label="decision reversed"/>
<link wikidata="Q924934" start="5719" end="5730" title="Mike Chioda" label="Mike Chioda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5846" end="5857" title="professional wrestling match types#Last Chance Match" label="last chance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5993" end="6015" title="Professional wrestling match types#Gauntlet match" label="Tag Team Turmoil match"/>
<link wikidata="Q942469" start="6070" end="6086" title="The Heart Throbs" label="The Heart Throbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108686" start="6088" end="6101" title="Romeo Roselli" label="Romeo Roselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249866" start="6106" end="6120" title="Tom Matera" label="Antonio Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q604094" start="6123" end="6133" title="Mike Bucci" label="Simon Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421478" start="6138" end="6143" title="Maven Huffman" label="Maven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579128" start="6177" end="6185" title="Backlash (2005)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6724" end="6730" title="Job (professional wrestling)#Jobbers" label="jobber"/>
<link wikidata="Q555510" start="6735" end="6744" title="Val Venis" label="Val Venis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="6791" end="6804" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6829" end="6848" title="Professional wrestling match types#Basic non-elimination matches" label="triple threat match"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="6857" end="6882" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q299570" start="6883" end="6899" title="Shelton Benjamin" label="Shelton Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7532" end="7539" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Gimmick" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q186529" start="7542" end="7554" title="Narcissism" label="narcissistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001910" start="7604" end="7616" title="Buff Bagwell" label="Buff Bagwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q646459" start="8064" end="8079" title="Doink the Clown" label="Doink the Clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335828" start="8081" end="8095" title="Greg Valentine" label="Greg Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028020" start="8123" end="8135" title="James Ware (wrestler)" label="Koko B. Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326581" start="8255" end="8268" title="Taboo Tuesday (2005)" label="Taboo Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q378452" start="8302" end="8307" title="Travis Tomko" label="Tomko"/>
<link wikidata="Q361703" start="8364" end="8375" title="Jimmy Snuka" label="Jimmy Snuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q983418" start="8385" end="8391" title="Kamala (wrestler)" label="Kamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q164260" start="8396" end="8406" title="Jim Duggan" label="Jim Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8483" end="8498" title="Professional wrestling aerial techniques#Splash" label="Superfly Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="8629" end="8638" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8693" end="8712" title="Professional wrestling holds#Figure-four leglock" label="figure four leglock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44628" start="9166" end="9177" title="Rob Van Dam" label="Rob Van Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q237314" start="9325" end="9333" title="Lisa Marie Varon" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q317374" start="9354" end="9361" title="Viscera (wrestler)" label="Viscera"/>
<link wikidata="Q231173" start="9366" end="9379" title="Torrie Wilson" label="Torrie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9706" end="9713" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Tweener" label="tweener"/>
<link wikidata="Q862021" start="9879" end="9900" title="Ohio Valley Wrestling" label="Ohio Valley Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q299222" start="10042" end="10054" title="Cody Rhodes" label="Cody Runnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572084" start="10059" end="10071" title="Tye Dillinger" label="Shawn Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136852" start="10094" end="10122" title="OVW Southern Tag Team Championship" label="OVW Southern Tag Team Titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155091" start="10284" end="10310" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s resolution" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s resolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10372" end="10385" title="Professional wrestling match types#Loser Leaves Town match" label="he would quit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="10450" end="10460" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="10517" end="10530" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270095" start="10763" end="10793" title="Juggalo Championship Wrestling" label="Juggalo Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966227" start="10826" end="10835" title="narrative thread" label="storyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999695" start="10874" end="10885" title="Submission wrestling" label="submissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="10892" end="10909" title="mercenary" label="wrestler for hire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107900" start="11049" end="11073" title="JCW Heavyweight Championship" label="JCW Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613786" start="11074" end="11091" title="Steve Robinson (wrestler)" label="Corporal Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="11183" end="11191" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="11192" end="11204" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681094" start="11205" end="11220" title="Hatchet Attacks (2011)" label="Hatchet Attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795557" start="11241" end="11275" title="Thomaselli Brothers" label="Sal the Man of a Thousand Gimmicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q445365" start="11313" end="11317" title="Sabu (wrestler)" label="Sabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633396" start="11357" end="11368" title="2 Tuff Tony" label="2 Tuff Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586927" start="11479" end="11496" title="St. Andrews Brawl" label="St. Andrews Brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346752" start="11620" end="11627" title="Kahagas" label="Kahagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="11639" end="11666" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="11673" end="11703" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="11750" end="11773" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151097" start="11908" end="11923" title="Invasion Attack (2013)" label="Invasion Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473982" start="12011" end="12025" title="Satoshi Kojima" label="Satoshi Kojima"/>
<link wikidata="Q15211125" start="12279" end="12287" title="Jax Dane" label="Jax Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q314837" start="12428" end="12441" title="Chris Masters" label="Chris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="12445" end="12459" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149415" start="12552" end="12565" title="Dominion 6.22" label="Dominion 6.22"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746572" start="12645" end="12661" title="Manabu Nakanishi" label="Manabu Nakanishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395975" start="12765" end="12786" title="Jyushin Thunder Liger" label="Jyushin Thunder Liger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149891" start="12890" end="12901" title="Destruction (2013)" label="Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154978" start="13018" end="13032" title="Power Struggle (2013)" label="Power Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11227357" start="13065" end="13071" title="Killer Elite Squad" label="K.E.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q379471" start="13073" end="13092" title="David Hart Smith" label="Davey Boy Smith Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1143627" start="13097" end="13109" title="Lance Hoyt" label="Lance Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699105" start="13115" end="13122" title="Tencozy" label="Tencozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136391" start="13124" end="13140" title="Hiroyoshi Tenzan" label="Hiroyoshi Tenzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961703" start="13220" end="13251" title="NWA World Tag Team Championship" label="NWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13470" end="13491" title="G1 Tag League#2013" label="2013 World Tag League"/>
<link wikidata="Q30915397" start="13800" end="13831" title="Wrestle Kingdom 8 in Tokyo Dome" label="Wrestle Kingdom 8 in Tokyo Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151103" start="14138" end="14158" title="Invasion Attack 2014" label="Invasion Attack 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="14338" end="14344" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q606022" start="14556" end="14566" title="Wes Brisco" label="Wes Brisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949949" start="14580" end="14606" title="Back to the Yokohama Arena" label="Back to the Yokohama Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="14653" end="14662" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14783" end="14804" title="G1 Tag League#2014" label="2014 World Tag League"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647904" start="14948" end="14974" title="The New Beginning in Osaka (2015)" label="The New Beginning in Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157606" start="14989" end="15000" title="Chase Owens" label="Chase Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647912" start="15094" end="15121" title="The New Beginning in Sendai" label="The New Beginning in Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q25935968" start="15979" end="15991" title="Matt Riviera" label="Matt Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961703" start="16096" end="16127" title="NWA World Tag Team Championship" label="NWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961703" start="16353" end="16384" title="NWA World Tag Team Championship" label="NWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q372819" start="16563" end="16579" title="Kazushi Miyamoto" label="Kazushi Miyamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q725567" start="16584" end="16593" title="Rob Terry" label="Rob Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955819" start="17105" end="17142" title="NWA Mid-America Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Mid-America Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q14848230" start="17466" end="17488" title="WWE Performance Center" label="WWE Performance Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="17549" end="17560" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688674" start="17911" end="17948" title="New Albany High School (Indiana)" label="Indiana&amp;#x27;s New Albany High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570033" start="18165" end="18181" title="Southern Indiana" label="Southern Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="18182" end="18192" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033908" start="18250" end="18261" title="Daniel Briley" label="Danny Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q977206" start="18271" end="18294" title="Jeffersonville, Indiana" label="Jeffersonville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023890" start="18436" end="18456" title="Indianapolis Monthly" label="Indianapolis Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="18658" end="18661" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q577532" start="18777" end="18804" title="WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw 2006" label="WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869703" start="19282" end="19322" title="NWA North American Tag Team Championship" label="MCW North American Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19324" end="19330" title="NWA North American Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q951033" start="19339" end="19352" title="Nick Dinsmore" label="Nick Dinsmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344206" start="19354" end="19385" title="Northern Championship Wrestling" label="Northern Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189475" start="19430" end="19445" title="Sylvain Grenier" label="Sylvain Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="19447" end="19474" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="19477" end="19511" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591235" start="19513" end="19520" title="List of NWA World Heavyweight Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961703" start="19524" end="19555" title="NWA World Tag Team Championship" label="NWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591237" start="19557" end="19564" title="List of NWA World Tag Team Champions" label="4 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q15211125" start="19573" end="19581" title="Jax Dane" label="Jax Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25935968" start="19590" end="19602" title="Matt Riviera" label="Matt Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903501" start="19608" end="19623" title="NWA Mid-America" label="NWA Mid-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955819" start="19626" end="19663" title="NWA Mid-America Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Mid-America Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953561" start="19767" end="19777" title="Sean Casey (wrestler)" label="Sean Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q862021" start="20206" end="20227" title="Ohio Valley Wrestling" label="Ohio Valley Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136861" start="20230" end="20258" title="OVW Heavyweight Championship" label="OVW Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20260" end="20267" title="OVW Heavyweight Championship#Title history" label="5 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136852" start="20271" end="20305" title="OVW Southern Tag Team Championship" label="OVW Southern Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20307" end="20315" title="OVW Southern Tag Team Championship#Title histor" label="11 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143251" start="20347" end="20355" title="Pat Buck" label="Pat Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="20361" end="20386" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20443" end="20450" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated#PWI 500" label="PWI 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="20808" end="20837" title="World Wrestling Entertainment" label="World Wrestling Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="20840" end="20867" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823152" start="20869" end="20876" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189475" start="20885" end="20900" title="Sylvain Grenier" label="Sylvain Grenier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683824" wikidata="Q358297" url="?curid=683824" title="East Fork">
<text>East Fork is the name of the following places in the United States of America:

*East Fork, Alaska
*East Fork, Arizona
*East Fork, California
*East Fork Township, Montgomery County, Illinois
*East Fork Township, Clinton County, Illinois
*East Fork, Kentucky
*East Fork Township, Benson County, North Dakota
*East Fork Township, Williams County, North Dakota
*East Fork State Park, Ohio
*East Fork, Pennsylvania

==Computing==
*East Fork was an early name for the Intel Viiv initiative

== See also ==
*East Fork Township (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q358297" start="0" end="9" title="East Fork" label="East Fork"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81" end="98" title="East Fork, Alaska" label="East Fork, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277865" start="100" end="118" title="East Fork, Arizona" label="East Fork, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="120" end="141" title="East Fork, California" label="East Fork, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328379" start="143" end="190" title="East Fork Township, Montgomery County, Illinois" label="East Fork Township, Montgomery County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328377" start="192" end="236" title="East Fork Township, Clinton County, Illinois" label="East Fork Township, Clinton County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="238" end="257" title="East Fork, Kentucky" label="East Fork, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328376" start="259" end="306" title="East Fork Township, Benson County, North Dakota" label="East Fork Township, Benson County, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="308" end="357" title="East Fork Township, Williams County, North Dakota" label="East Fork Township, Williams County, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328373" start="359" end="379" title="East Fork State Park" label="East Fork State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328362" start="387" end="410" title="East Fork, Pennsylvania" label="East Fork, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331576" start="463" end="473" title="Intel Viiv" label="Intel Viiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277856" start="502" end="537" title="East Fork Township (disambiguation)" label="East Fork Township (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683828" wikidata="Q108502471" url="?curid=683828" title="Results of the 2000 Canadian federal election by riding">
<text>This is a seat by seat list of candidates in the 2000 Canadian election.

For more information about the election see 2000 Canadian federal election.

==Abbreviations guide==
*Alliance – Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance
*BQ – Bloc Québécois
*CAP – Canadian Action Party
*Comm. – Communist Party of Canada
*Green – Green Party of Canada
*Ind. – Independent
*Liberal – Liberal Party of Canada
*Mar. – Marijuana Party
*M-L – Marxist-Leninist Party of Canada
*NA – Nil
*NLP – Natural Law Party
*NDP – New Democratic Party
*PC – Progressive Conservative Party of Canada

===Markup===
*Names in boldface type represent party leaders and cabinet ministers.
*† represents that the incumbent chose not to run again.
*§ represents that the incumbent was defeated for nomination.

NOTE: All candidate names are those on the official list of confirmed candidates; names in media or on party websites may differ slightly.

==Newfoundland and Labrador==
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Bonavista—Trinity—Conception
|Brian Tobin22,096&quot;54.38%&quot;
|Randy Wayne Dawe1,051&quot;2.59%&quot;
|Fraser March6,473&quot;15.93%&quot;
|Jim Morgan11,009&quot;27.10%&quot;
|
|Fred Mifflin†
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Burin—St. George&#x27;s
|Bill Matthews14,603&quot;47.52%&quot;
|Peter Fenwick1,511&quot;4.92%&quot;
|David Sullivan924&quot;3.01%&quot;
|Fred Pottle5,798&quot;18.87%&quot;
|Sam Synard (NA)7,891&quot;25.68%&quot;
|Bill Matthews
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Gander—Grand Falls
|George Baker15,874&quot;55.02%&quot;
|Orville Penney1,912&quot;6.63%&quot;
|Bill Broderick2,876&quot;9.97%&quot;
|Roger K. Pike8,191&quot;28.39%&quot;
|
|George Baker
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Humber—St. Barbe—Baie Verte
|Gerry Byrne15,405&quot;48.53%&quot;
|Murdock Cole1,702&quot;5.36%&quot;
|Trevor Taylor8,297&quot;26.14%&quot;
|Peter McBreairty6,340&quot;19.97%&quot;
|
|Gerry Byrne
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Labrador
|Lawrence O&#x27;Brien7,153&quot;68.99%&quot;
|Eugene Burt677&quot;6.53%&quot;
|Amanda Will1,284&quot;12.38%&quot;
|Hayward Broomfield1,254&quot;12.09%&quot;
|
|Lawrence O&#x27;Brien
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |St. John&#x27;s East
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Peter Miller13,835&quot;31.19%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Garry Hartle1,144&quot;2.58%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Carol Cantwell5,395&quot;12.16%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 | Norman E. Doyle23,606&quot;53.22%&quot;
|Judy Day (Ind.)254 &quot;0.57%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Norman Doyle
|
|Michael Rayment (NLP)122 &quot;0.28%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |St. John&#x27;s West
|Chuck Furey14,137&quot;33.01%&quot;
|Eldon Drost840&quot;1.96%&quot;
|Dave Curtis4,744&quot;11.08%&quot;
|Loyola Hearn22,959&quot;53.62%&quot;
|Michael Rendell (NLP)141&quot;0.33%&quot;
|Loyola Hearn
==Prince Edward Island==
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Cardigan
|Lawrence MacAulay8,545&quot;48.06%&quot;
|Darrell Hickox500&quot;2.81%&quot;
|Deborah Kelly Hawkes465&quot;2.62%&quot;
|Kevin MacAdam8,269&quot;46.51%&quot;
|
|Lawrence MacAulay
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Egmont
|Joe McGuire9,227&quot;50.05%&quot;
|Jeff Sullivan952&quot;5.16%&quot;
|Nancy Wallace1,139&quot;6.18%&quot;
|John Griffin7,116&quot;38.60%&quot;
|
|Joe McGuire
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Hillsborough
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Shawn Murphy8,277&quot;41.81%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gerry Stewart1,005&quot;5.08%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dody Crane4,328&quot;21.86%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Darren W. Peters6,039&quot;30.50%&quot;
|Peter Cameron (NLP)92 &quot;0.46%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |George Proud†
|
|Baird Judson (NA)58 &quot;0.29%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Malpeque
|Wayne Easter8,972&quot;48.62%&quot;
|Chris Wall1,262&quot;6.84%&quot;
|Ken Bingham782&quot;4.24%&quot;
|Jim Gorman7,186&quot;38.94%&quot;
|Jeremy Stiles (Green)250&quot;1.35%&quot;
|Wayne Easter

==Nova Scotia==
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Bras d&#x27;Or—Cape Breton
|Rodger Cuzner20,815&quot;54.85%&quot;
|John M. Currie1,483&quot;3.91%&quot;
|Michelle Dockrill7,537&quot;19.86%&quot;
|Alfie MacLeod8,114&quot;21.38%&quot;
|
|Michelle Dockrill
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Cumberland—Colchester
|Dianne Brushett10,271&quot;26.61%&quot;
|Bryden Ryan4,981&quot;12.91%&quot;
|James Arthur Harpell4,629&quot;11.99%&quot;
|Bill Casey18,716&quot;48.49%&quot;
|
|Bill Casey
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Dartmouth
|Bernie Boudreau12,408&quot;33.14%&quot;
|Jordi Morgan3,282&quot;8.76%&quot;
|Wendy Lill13,585&quot;36.28%&quot;
|Tom McInnis8,085&quot;21.59%&quot;
|Charles Spurr (M-L)86&quot;0.23%&quot;
|Wendy Lill
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Halifax
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Kevin Little13,539&quot;32.99%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Amery Boyer2,348&quot;5.72%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Alexa McDonough16,563&quot;40.36%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Paul Fitzgibbons7,255&quot;17.68%&quot;
|Kevin Dumont Corkill (M-L)113 &quot;0.28%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Alexa McDonough
|
|Michael G. Oddy (Green)590 &quot;1.44%&quot;
|
|Mike Patriquen (Mar.)627 &quot;1.53%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Halifax West
|Geoff Regan18,327&quot;39.21%&quot;
|Hilda Stevens4,531&quot;9.70%&quot;
|Gordon Earle14,016&quot;29.99%&quot;
|Charles Cirtwill9,701&quot;20.76%&quot;
|Tony Seed (M-L)160&quot;0.34%&quot;
|Gordon Earle
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kings—Hants
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Claude O&#x27;Hara13,213&quot;30.23%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Gerry Fulton4,618&quot;10.56%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Kaye Johnson7,244&quot;16.57%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Scott Brison17,612&quot;40.29%&quot;
|Richard Hennigar (NLP)133 &quot;0.30%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Joe Clark‡
|
|Jim King (Mar.)669 &quot;1.53%&quot;
|
|Graham Jake MacDonald (Comm.)85 &quot;0.19%&quot;
|
|Kenneth MacEachern (Ind.)140 &quot;0.32%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Pictou—Antigonish—Guysborough
|Raymond Mason12,585&quot;31.57%&quot;
|Harvey Henderson2,930&quot;7.35%&quot;
|Wendy Panagopoulos4,498&quot;11.28%&quot;
|Peter G. MacKay19,298&quot;48.41%&quot;
|Darryl Gallivan (Ind.)552&quot;1.38%&quot;
|Peter MacKay
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Sackville—Musquodoboit Valley—Eastern Shore
|Bruce Stephen12,864&quot;32.56%&quot;
|Bill Stevens4,773&quot;12.08%&quot;
|Peter Stoffer13,619&quot;34.48%&quot;
|Wade Marshall7,589&quot;19.21%&quot;
|Melanie Patriquen (Mar.)658&quot;1.67%&quot;
|Peter Stoffer
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |South Shore
|Derek Wells12,677&quot;35.12%&quot;
|Evan Walters4,697&quot;13.01%&quot;
|Bill Zimmerman4,394&quot;12.17%&quot;
|Gerald Keddy14,328&quot;39.69%&quot;
|
|Gerald Keddy
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Sydney—Victoria
|Mark Eyking19,388&quot;49.83%&quot;
|Rod A. M. Farrell1,528&quot;3.93%&quot;
|Peter Mancini14,216&quot;36.53%&quot;
|Anna Curtis-Steele3,779&quot;9.71%&quot;
|
|Peter Mancini
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |West Nova
|Robert Thibault12,783&quot;36.09%&quot;
|Mike Donaldson6,581&quot;18.58%&quot;
|Phil Roberts3,976&quot;11.23%&quot;
|Mark Muise12,080&quot;34.11%&quot;
|
|Mark Muise

==New Brunswick==
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Acadie—Bathurst
|Bernard Thériault20,362&quot;40.27%&quot;
|Jean Gauvin2,314&quot;4.58%&quot;
|Yvon Godin23,568&quot;46.61%&quot;
|Alcide Leger4,321&quot;8.55%&quot;
|
|Yvon Godin
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Beausejour—Petitcodiac
|Dominic LeBlanc21,465&quot;47.10%&quot;
|Tom Taylor6,256&quot;13.73%&quot;
|Inka Milewski3,217&quot;7.06%&quot;
|Angela Vautour18,716&quot;32.11%&quot;
|
|Angela Vautour
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Fredericton
|Andy Scott14,175&quot;38.60%&quot;
|Allan D. Neill8,814&quot;24.00%&quot;
|Michael Dunn2,584&quot;7.04%&quot;
|Raj Venugopal10,919&quot;29.73%&quot;
|William H. Parker (NLP)233&quot;0.63%&quot;
|Andy Scott
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Fundy—Royal
|John King11,422&quot;30.28%&quot;
|Rob Moore8,392&quot;22.25%&quot;
|John Calder2,628&quot;6.97%&quot;
|John Herron15,279&quot;40.51%&quot;
|
|John Herron
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Madawaska—Restigouche
|Jeannot Castonguay19,913&quot;52.27%&quot;
|Scott Chedore1,958&quot;5.14%&quot;
|Claude J. Albert1,811&quot;4.75%&quot;
|Jean F. Dubé14,417&quot;37.84%&quot;
|
|Jean F. Dubé
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Miramichi
|Charles Hubbard17,047&quot;51.44%&quot;
|Ken Clark5,298&quot;15.99%&quot;
|Allan Goodfellow2,453&quot;7.40%&quot;
|David Kelly8,341&quot;25.17%&quot;
|
|Charles Hubbard
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Moncton—Riverview—Dieppe
|Claudette Bradshaw26,545&quot;58.74%&quot;
|Kathryn M. Barnes8,130&quot;17.99%&quot;
|Hélène Lapointe3,139&quot;6.95%&quot;
|Serge Landry7,082&quot;15.67%&quot;
|Laurent Maltais (NLP)297&quot;0.66%&quot;
|Claudette Bradshaw
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |New Brunswick Southwest
|Winston Gamblin8,442&quot;27.53%&quot;
|John Erbs6,562&quot;21.40%&quot;
|Habib Kilisli1,173&quot;3.83%&quot;
|Greg Thompson14,489&quot;47.25%&quot;
|
|Greg Thompson
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint John
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Paul Zed9,535&quot;28.98%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Peter Touchbourne2,980&quot;9.06%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Rod Hill2,989&quot;9.09%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Elsie Wayne16,751&quot;50.92%&quot;
|Miville Couture (NLP)52 &quot;0.16%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Elsie Wayne
|
|Vern M. Garnett (Green)131 &quot;0.40%&quot;
|
|Jim Wood (Mar.)461 &quot;1.40%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Tobique—Mactaquac
|Andy Savoy10,897&quot;33.60%&quot;
|Adam Richardson9,573&quot;29.51%&quot;
|Carolyn Van Dine1,216&quot;3.75%&quot;
|Gilles Bernier10,750&quot;33.14%&quot;
|
|Gilles Bernier

==Quebec==

===Eastern Quebec===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Bellechasse—Etchemins—Montmagny—L&#x27;Islet
|François Langlois14,973&quot;37.44%&quot;
|Gilbert Normand19,163&quot;47.91%&quot;
|Jean-Claude Roy4,224&quot;10.56%&quot;
|
|Suzanne Lafond1,636&quot;4.09%&quot;
|
|Gilbert Normand
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Bonaventure—Gaspé—Îles-de-la-Madeleine—Pabok
|Raynald Blais15,532&quot;43.00%&quot;
|Georges Farrah19,213&quot;53.19%&quot;
|Linda Fournier764&quot;2.12%&quot;
|Fred Kraenzel613&quot;1.70%&quot;
|
|
|Yvan Bernier
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kamouraska—Rivière-du-Loup—Témiscouata—Les Basques
|Paul Crête23,319&quot;59.99%&quot;
|Helen Ouellet11,794&quot;30.34%&quot;
|René Théberge1,373&quot;3.53%&quot;
|Elaine Côté836&quot;2.15%&quot;
|André Pacquet1,382&quot;3.56%&quot;
|Normand Fournier (M-L)170&quot;0.44%&quot;
|Paul Crête
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Lévis-et-Chutes-de-la-Chaudière
|Antoine Dubé26,398&quot;41.85%&quot;
|Shirley Baril21,522&quot;34.12%&quot;
|Jacques Bergeron9,152&quot;14.51%&quot;
|France Michaud1,411&quot;2.24%&quot;
|Réal St-Laurent4,222&quot;6.69%&quot;
|André Cloutier (Comm.)374&quot;0.59%&quot;
|Antoine Dubé
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Matapédia—Matane
|Jean-Yves Roy14,678&quot;46.64%&quot;
|Marc Bélanger14,402&quot;45.76%&quot;
|
|Karine Paquet-Gauthier935&quot;2.97%&quot;
|Germain Dumas1,456&quot;4.63%&quot;
|
|René Canuel
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Rimouski—Neigette-et-La-Mitis
|Suzanne Tremblay19,759&quot;59.55%&quot;
|Réal Marmen9,795&quot;29.52%&quot;
|Gerard Gosselin1,280&quot;3.86%&quot;
|René Lemieux525&quot;1.58%&quot;
|Réal Blais1,150&quot;3.47%&quot;
|Lyse Beauchemin (NLP)673&quot;2.03%&quot;
|Suzanne Tremblay
|}

===Côte-Nord and Saguenay===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Beauport—Montmorency—Côte-de-Beaupré—Île-d&#x27;Orléans
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Michel Guimond21,341&quot;41.55%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Chantal Plante18,714&quot;36.43%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Robert Giroux5,878&quot;11.44%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Eric Hébert869&quot;1.69%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Lise Bernier2,916&quot;5.68%&quot;
|Jean Bédard (M-L)283 &quot;0.55%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Michel Guimond
|
|Mathieu Giroux (Mar.)1,364 &quot;2.66%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Charlevoix
|Gérard Asselin20,479&quot;61.44%&quot;
|Marjolaine Gagnon9,308&quot;27.93%&quot;
|Pierre Paradis1,905&quot;5.72%&quot;
|Joss Duhaime484&quot;1.45%&quot;
|Doris Grondin1,154&quot;3.46%&quot;
|
|Gérard Asselin
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Chicoutimi—Le Fjord
|Noel Tremblay15,073&quot;36.17%&quot;
|André Harvey20,105&quot;48.24%&quot;
|Douglas Schroeder-Tabah2,001&quot;4.80%&quot;
|Alain Ranger698&quot;1.67%&quot;
|
|Mauril Desbiens (Ind.)3,797&quot;9.11%&quot;
|André Harvey
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Jonquière
|Jocelyne Girard-Bujold16,189&quot;50.07%&quot;
|Jean-Guy Boily11,574&quot;35.80%&quot;
|Sylvaine Néron3,428&quot;10.60%&quot;
|Michel Deraiche1,139&quot;3.52%&quot;
|
|
|Jocelyne Girard-Bujold
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Lac-Saint-Jean—Saguenay
|Stéphan Tremblay21,391&quot;66.17%&quot;
|Jérôme Tremblay7,536&quot;23.31%&quot;
|Yannick Caron1,536&quot;4.75%&quot;
|Linda Proulx417&quot;1.29%&quot;
|Claude Gagnon535&quot;1.65%&quot;
|Gilles Lavoie (Ind.)912&quot;2.82%&quot;
|Stéphan Tremblay
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Manicouagan
|Ghislain Fournier11,595&quot;53.24%&quot;
|Robert Labadie7,770&quot;35.68%&quot;
|Laurette de Champlain1,197&quot;5.50%&quot;
|Normand Caplette386&quot;1.77%&quot;
|Gaby-Gabriel Robert830&quot;3.81%&quot;
|
|Ghislain Fournier
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Roberval
|Michel Gauthier16,928&quot;55.06%&quot;
|Jean-Pierre Boivin10,680&quot;34.74%&quot;
|Raymond A. Brideau1,830&quot;5.95%&quot;
|Alain Giguère437&quot;1.42%&quot;
|Marie-Christine Huot870&quot;2.83%&quot;
|
|Michel Gauthier
|}

===Quebec City===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Charlesbourg—Jacques-Cartier
|Richard Marceau21,867&quot;38.29%&quot;
|Isabelle Thiverge21,045&quot;36.85%&quot;
|Gérard Latulippe8,801&quot;15.41%&quot;
|Françoise Dicaire1,000&quot;1.75%&quot;
|Dann Murray3,256&quot;5.70%&quot;
|
|Samuel Moisan-Domm (Green)1,136&quot;1.99%&quot;
|Richard Marceau
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Louis-Hébert
|Hélène Alarie21,240&quot;36.88%&quot;
|Hélène Scherrer23,695&quot;41.14%&quot;
|Léonce-E. Roy5,887&quot;10.22%&quot;
|Karl Adomeit1,200&quot;2.08%&quot;
|Clermont Gauthier5,189&quot;9.01%&quot;
|Gisèle Desrochers382&quot;0.66%&quot;
|
|Hélène Alarie
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Quebec
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Christiane Gagnon22,793&quot;43.43%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Claudette Tessier-Couture18,619&quot;35.48%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Michel Rivard3,980&quot;7.58%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jean-Marie Fiset1,714&quot;3.25%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marc Jalbert3,171&quot;6.04%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Claude Moreau255&quot;0.49%&quot;
|Pierre-E. Paradis (Mar.)1,480 &quot;2.82%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Christiane Gagnon
|
|Gilles Rochette (NLP)482 &quot;0.92%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Quebec East
|Jean-Paul Marchand21,166&quot;37.47%&quot;
|Jean Guy Carignan21,813&quot;38.61%&quot;
|Robert Martel8,594&quot;15.21%&quot;
|Majella Desmeules1,192&quot;2.11%&quot;
|Richard Joncas3,727&quot;6.60%&quot;
|
|
|Jean-Paul Marchand

===Central Quebec===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Bas-Richelieu—Nicolet—Bécancour
|Louis Plamondon25,266&quot;56.92%&quot;
|Roland Paradis13,781&quot;31.04%&quot;
|Frédéric Lajoie2,078&quot;4.68%&quot;
|Raymond Dorion421&quot;0.95%&quot;
|Gabriel Rousseau1,944&quot;4.38%&quot;
|Black D. Blackburn (Mar.)901&quot;2.03%&quot;
|Louis Plamondon
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Berthier—Montcalm
|Michel Bellehumeur31,647&quot;57.06%&quot;
|Jean-Carle Hudon16,669&quot;30.05%&quot;
|Réal Naud2,851&quot;5.14%&quot;
|Jean-Pierre De Billy823&quot;1.48%&quot;
|Paul Lavigne2,011&quot;3.63%&quot;
|Sébastien Hénault (Mar.)1,464&quot;2.64%&quot;
|Michel Bellehumeur
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Champlain
|Marcel Gagnon20,423&quot;45.26%&quot;
|Julie Boulet20,408&quot;45.23%&quot;
|Eric Labranche2,599&quot;5.76%&quot;
|Philippe Toone672&quot;1.49%&quot;
|
|Paul Giroux (Mar.)1,020&quot;2.26%&quot;
|Réjean Lefebvre†
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Joliette
|Pierre Paquette23,615&quot;52.20%&quot;
|Robert Malo14,820&quot;32.76%&quot;
|Clément Lévesque2,432&quot;5.38%&quot;
|François Rivest1,085&quot;2.40%&quot;
|Eric Champagne2,730&quot;6.03%&quot;
|Bob Aubin (Comm.)560&quot;1.24%&quot;
|René Laurin†
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Lotbinière—L&#x27;Érable
|Odina Desrochers15,351&quot;45.64%&quot;
|Luc Dastous12,563&quot;37.35%&quot;
|Pierre Allard2,827&quot;8.40%&quot;
|Dominique Vaillancourt538&quot;1.60%&quot;
|Jean Landry2,357&quot;7.01%&quot;
|
|Odina Desrochers
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Portneuf
|Patrice Dallaire15,444&quot;35.23%&quot;
|Claude Duplain17,877&quot;40.78%&quot;
|Howard Bruce6,699&quot;15.28%&quot;
|
|François Dion3,819&quot;8.71%&quot;
|
|Pierre de Savoye†
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Repentigny
|Benoît Sauvageau33,627&quot;57.80%&quot;
|David Veillette15,635&quot;26.88%&quot;
|Michel Paulette2,964&quot;5.09%&quot;
|Pierre Péclet831&quot;1.43%&quot;
|Michel Carignan3,122&quot;5.37%&quot;
|Lise Dufour (Mar.)1,997&quot;3.43%&quot;
|Benoît Sauvageau
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint-Maurice
|François Marchand16,821&quot;38.96%&quot;
|Jean Chrétien23,345&quot;54.07%&quot;
|Jean-Guy Mercier1,461&quot;3.38%&quot;
|Raymond Chase359&quot;0.83%&quot;
|Pierre Blais966&quot;2.24%&quot;
|Sylvain Archambault (Comm.)223&quot;0.52%&quot;
|Jean Chrétien
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Trois-Rivières
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Yves Rocheleau22,405&quot;46.67%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Denis Normandin20,606&quot;42.92%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Luc Legaré2,161&quot;4.50%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Horlock512&quot;1.07%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Scott Healy1,599&quot;3.33%&quot;
|Alexandre Deschênes (M-L)184 &quot;0.38%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Yves Rocheleau
|
|Gilles Raymond (NLP)538 &quot;1.12%&quot;

===Eastern Townships===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Beauce
|Gary Morin12,323&quot;26.51%&quot;
|Claude Drouin26,033&quot;56.01%&quot;
|Alain Guay5,452&quot;11.73%&quot;
|Pierre Malano436&quot;0.94%&quot;
|Gérard Parent1,628&quot;3.50%&quot;
|Louis Girard (NLP)611&quot;1.31%&quot;
|Claude Drouin
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Brome—Missisquoi
|André Leroux13,363&quot;31.17%&quot;
|Denis Paradis21,545&quot;50.26%&quot;
|Jacques Loyer1,977&quot;4.61%&quot;
|Jeff Itcush480&quot;1.12%&quot;
|Heward Grafftey5,502&quot;12.84%&quot;
|
|Denis Paradis
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Compton—Stanstead
|Gaston Leroux14,808&quot;38.89%&quot;
|David Price17,729&quot;46.56%&quot;
|Marc Carrier2,061&quot;5.41%&quot;
|Christine Moore580&quot;1.52%&quot;
|Mary Ann Dewey-Plante2,422&quot;6.36%&quot;
|Marc Roy (NLP)476&quot;1.25%&quot;
|David Price
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Drummond
|Pauline Picard18,970&quot;45.27%&quot;
|André Béliveau14,335&quot;34.21%&quot;
|Jacques Laurin1,621&quot;3.87%&quot;
|Julie Philion423&quot;1.01%&quot;
|Lyne Boisvert6,559&quot;15.65%&quot;
|
|Pauline Picard
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Frontenac—Mégantic
|Jean-Guy Chrétien15,703&quot;42.27%&quot;
|Gérard Binet17,069&quot;45.95%&quot;
|Stéphane Musial1,751&quot;4.71%&quot;
|Olivier Chalifoux427&quot;1.15%&quot;
|Nicole Massicotte1,497&quot;4.03%&quot;
|Pierre Luc Fournier (Mar.)698&quot;1.88%&quot;
|Jean-Guy Chrétien
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Richmond—Arthabaska
|André Bellavance18,067&quot;36.47%&quot;
|Aldéi Beaudoin10,416&quot;21.03%&quot;
|Philippe Ardilliez1,930&quot;3.90%&quot;
|Vincent Bernier319&quot;0.64%&quot;
|André Bachand18,430&quot;37.20%&quot;
|Christian Simard (NLP)375&quot;0.76%&quot;
|André Bachand
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint-Hyacinthe—Bagot
|Yvan Loubier25,916&quot;55.41%&quot;
|Michel Gaudette16,265&quot;34.77%&quot;
|Jacques Bousquet2,161&quot;4.62%&quot;
|Rachel Dicaire499&quot;1.07%&quot;
|Frédéric Mantha1,932&quot;4.13%&quot;
|
|Yvan Loubier
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Shefford
|Michel Benoit19,816&quot;43.95%&quot;
|Diane St-Jacques20,707&quot;45.93%&quot;
|Jean-Jacques Treyvaud1,867&quot;4.14%&quot;
|Elizabeth Morey380&quot;0.84%&quot;
|Audrey Castonguay1,498&quot;3.32%&quot;
|Nicholas Cousineau (Mar.)819&quot;1.82%&quot;
|Diane St-Jacques
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Sherbrooke
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Serge Cardin23,559&quot;46.53%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jean-François Rouleau21,182&quot;41.84%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Mark Quinlan2,284&quot;4.51%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Craig Wright677&quot;1.34%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Eric L&#x27;Heureux1,955&quot;3.86%&quot;
|Joseph Adrien Serge Bourassa-Lacombe (Ind.)294 &quot;0.58%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Serge Cardin
|
|Daniel Jolicoeur (NLP)495 &quot;0.98%&quot;
|
|Serge Lachapelle (M-L)186 &quot;0.37%&quot;
|}

===Montérégie===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Beauharnois—Salaberry
|Daniel Turp20,938&quot;42.39%&quot;
|Serge Marcil23,834&quot;48.26%&quot;
|Stephane Renaud1,782&quot;3.61%&quot;
|Elizabeth Clark703&quot;1.42%&quot;
|Roma Myre2,133&quot;4.32%&quot;
|
|Daniel Turp
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Brossard—La Prairie
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Nicolas Tétrault16,758&quot;32.94%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jacques Saada26,806&quot;52.69%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Richard Bélisle2,973&quot;5.84%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Clémence Provencher852&quot;1.67%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sylvain St-Louis2,783&quot;5.47%&quot;
|Normand Chouinard (M-L)172 &quot;0.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jacques Saada
|
|Sylvia Larrass (NLP)528 &quot;1.04%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Chambly
|Ghislain Lebel26,084&quot;49.94%&quot;
|Denis Caron17,400&quot;33.31%&quot;
|Gaétan Paquette2,780&quot;5.32%&quot;
|Darren O&#x27;Toole769&quot;1.47%&quot;
|Jacques Parenteau3,448&quot;6.60%&quot;
|Sébastien Duclos (Mar.)1,751&quot;3.35%&quot;
|Ghislain Lebel
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Châteauguay
|Robert Lanctôt26,284&quot;47.12%&quot;
|Carole Marcil22,972&quot;41.18%&quot;
|Ricardo Lopez3,120&quot;5.59%&quot;
|Robert Lindblad622&quot;1.12%&quot;
|Réjeanne Rioux2,041&quot;3.66%&quot;
|Margaret Larrass (NLP)743&quot;1.33%&quot;
|Maurice Godin†
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Longueuil
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Caroline St-Hilaire20,868&quot;52.25%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sophie Joncas12,991&quot;32.53%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Michel Minguy2,066&quot;5.17%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Timothy Spurr655&quot;1.64%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Richard Lafleur2,210&quot;5.53%&quot;
|Stéphane Chénier (M-L)183 &quot;0.46%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Caroline St-Hilaire
|
|David Fiset (Mar.)968 &quot;2.42%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint-Bruno—Saint-Hubert
|Pierrette Venne22,217&quot;43.98%&quot;
|Claude Leblanc19,743&quot;39.08%&quot;
|Jean Vézina3,305&quot;6.54%&quot;
|Marie Henretta1,029&quot;2.04%&quot;
|Otmane Brixi2,673&quot;5.29%&quot;
|Maryève Daigle (Mar.)1,546&quot;3.06%&quot;
|Pierrette Venne
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint-Jean
|Claude Bachand22,686&quot;47.44%&quot;
|Joseph Khoury17,262&quot;36.09%&quot;
|Josée Coulombe3,169&quot;6.63%&quot;
|Julien Patenaude698&quot;1.46%&quot;
|Gérald L&#x27;Ecuyer2,764&quot;5.78%&quot;
|Marc St-Jean (Mar.)1,246&quot;2.61%&quot;
|Claude Bachand
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint-Lambert
|Christian Picard16,519&quot;38.11%&quot;
|Yolande Thibeault19,679&quot;45.40%&quot;
|Nic Leblanc3,066&quot;7.07%&quot;
|
|Walter Stirling2,704&quot;6.24%&quot;
|Katherine Léveillé (Mar.)1,377&quot;3.18%&quot;
|Yolande Thibeault
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Vaudreuil-Soulanges
|Éric Cimon17,587&quot;34.49%&quot;
|Nick Discepola26,292&quot;51.56%&quot;
|Dean Drysdale4,188&quot;8.21%&quot;
|Shaun G. Lynch904&quot;1.77%&quot;
|Stratos Psarianos2,020&quot;3.96%&quot;
|
|Nick Discepola
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Verchères—Les Patriotes
|Stéphane Bergeron28,696&quot;52.29%&quot;
|Mark Provencher16,740&quot;30.50%&quot;
|Stéphane Désilets2,870&quot;5.23%&quot;
|Charles Bussières1,074&quot;1.96%&quot;
|Frédéric Grenier3,859&quot;7.03%&quot;
|Jonathan Bérubé (Mar.)1,643&quot;2.99%&quot;
|Stéphane Bergeron
|}

===Eastern Montreal===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Anjou—Rivière-des-Prairies
|Jacques Dagenais14,755&quot;30.35%&quot;
|Yvon Charbonneau28,134&quot;57.86%&quot;
|Gianni Chiazzese2,005&quot;4.12%&quot;
|Bruce Whelan624&quot;1.28%&quot;
|Michel Tanguay2,034&quot;4.18%&quot;
|
|Normand Néron918&quot;1.89%&quot;
|Hélène Héroux (M-L)151&quot;0.31%&quot;
|Yvon Charbonneau
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Hochelaga—Maisonneuve
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Réal Ménard21,250&quot;49.20%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Louis Morena16,143&quot;37.38%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Stephanie Morency1,502&quot;3.48%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Milan Mirich767&quot;1.78%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Benoit Harbec1,751&quot;4.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Alex Néron1,227&quot;2.84%&quot;
|Pierre Bibeau (Comm.)274 &quot;0.63%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Réal Ménard
|
|Christine Dandenault (M-L)275 &quot;0.64%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Laurier—Sainte-Marie
|Gilles Duceppe23,473&quot;52.79%&quot;
|Jean Philippe Côté11,451&quot;25.75%&quot;
|Stéphane Prud&#x27;homme960&quot;2.16%&quot;
|Richard Chartier2,111&quot;4.75%&quot;
|Jean François Tessier1,879&quot;4.23%&quot;
|Dylan Perceval-Maxwell2,169&quot;4.88%&quot;
|Marc-Boris St-Maurice2,156&quot;4.85%&quot;
|Ginette Boutet (M-L)269&quot;0.60%&quot;
|Gilles Duceppe
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Mercier
|Francine Lalonde24,755&quot;52.87%&quot;
|Normand Biron15,416&quot;32.93%&quot;
|J. Marc-Antoine Delsoin1,684&quot;3.60%&quot;
|Nicholas Vikander480&quot;1.03%&quot;
|Martin Gelgoot1,629&quot;3.48%&quot;
|Richard Savignac1,813&quot;3.87%&quot;
|Eric Duquette937&quot;2.00%&quot;
|Geneviève Royer (M-L)104&quot;0.22%&quot;
|Francine Lalonde
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Rosemont—Petite-Patrie
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bernard Bigras23,315&quot;49.13%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Claude Vigneault16,052&quot;33.83%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Etienne Morin1,354&quot;2.85%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Noémi Lo Pinto1,417&quot;2.99%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marc Bissonnette2,006&quot;4.23%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sébastien Chagnon-Jean1,475&quot;3.11%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Claude Messier1,486&quot;3.13%&quot;
|Joanne Pritchard (NA)114 &quot;0.24%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bernard Bigras
|
|Dorothy Sauras (Comm.)233 &quot;0.49%&quot;

===Western Montreal===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Lac-Saint-Louis
|Guy Amyot3,913&quot;6.67%&quot;
|Clifford Lincoln43,515&quot;74.16%&quot;
|William F. Shaw4,223&quot;7.20%&quot;
|Erin Sikora1,464&quot;2.50%&quot;
|Daniel Gendron4,411&quot;7.52%&quot;
|
|Elena D&#x27;Apollonia1,031&quot;1.76%&quot;
|Garnet Colly (M-L)119&quot;0.20%&quot;
|Clifford Lincoln
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |LaSalle—Émard
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Denis Martel11,805&quot;24.20%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Martin32,069&quot;65.75%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Giuseppe Joe De Santis1,806&quot;3.70%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Bernans837&quot;1.72%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Deepak T. Massand1,111&quot;2.28%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mathieux St-Cyr765&quot;1.57%&quot;
|Gilles Bigras (NLP)273 &quot;0.56%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Martin
|
|Irma Ortiz (Comm.)107 &quot;0.22%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Mount Royal
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jean-Sebastien Houle1,740&quot;4.27%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Irwin Cotler33,118&quot;81.24%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Alex Gabanski1,444&quot;3.54%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Maria Pia Chávez1,034&quot;2.54%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Stephane Gelgoot2,489&quot;6.11%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jean-Claude Balu681&quot;1.67%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Judith Chafoya (Comm.)140 &quot;0.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Irwin Cotler
|
|Ena Kahn (NLP)122 &quot;0.30%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Notre-Dame-de-Grâce—Lachine
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jeannine Ouellet8,449&quot;18.11%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marlene Jennings28,328&quot;60.72%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Darrin Etcovich2,022&quot;4.33%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bruce Toombs2,208&quot;4.73%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Kathy Megyery3,352&quot;7.19%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Katie Graham1,031&quot;2.21%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Grégoire Faber897&quot;1.92%&quot;
|Rachel Hoffman (M-L)159 &quot;0.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marlene Jennings
|
|Michael Wilson (NLP)205 &quot;0.44%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Outremont
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Amir Khadir11,151&quot;28.29%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Martin Cauchon18,796&quot;47.68%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Josée Duchesneau1,283&quot;3.25%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Peter Graefe2,199&quot;5.58%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Robert Archambault3,190&quot;8.09%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jan Schotte1,478&quot;3.75%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Huguette Plourde1,013&quot;2.57%&quot;
|Louise Charron (M-L)194 &quot;0.49%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Martin Cauchon
|
|Pierre Smith (Comm.)118 &quot;0.30%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Pierrefonds—Dollard
|Sylvie Brousseau5,937&quot;10.99%&quot;
|Bernard Patry39,357&quot;72.85%&quot;
|Neil Drabkin3,481&quot;6.44%&quot;
|Adam Hodgins1,109&quot;2.05%&quot;
|John Profit2,991&quot;5.54%&quot;
|
|Jean-François Labrecque1,149&quot;2.13%&quot;
|
|Bernard Patry
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint-Laurent—Cartierville
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Yves Beauregard5,838&quot;13.07%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Stéphane Dion32,861&quot;73.58%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Kaddis R. Sidaros1,909&quot;4.27%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Piper Elizabeth Huggins1,070&quot;2.40%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |J. Pierre Rouleau2,308&quot;5.17%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |
|Jean-Paul Bedard (M-L)234 &quot;0.52%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Stéphane Dion
|
|Oscar Chavez (Comm.)206 &quot;0.46%&quot;
|
|Ken Fernandez (CAP)232 &quot;0.52%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Verdun—Saint-Henri—Saint-Paul—Pointe Saint-Charles
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Pedro Utillano11,976&quot;29.37%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Raymond Lavigne20,905&quot;51.27%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jacques Gendron2,098&quot;5.15%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Matthew McLauchlin1,003&quot;2.46%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bernard Côté2,670&quot;6.55%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Lorraine Ann Craig933&quot;2.29%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marc-André Roy924&quot;2.27%&quot;
|William Lorensen (NA)117 &quot;0.29%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Raymond Lavigne
|
|Bill Sloan (Comm.)148 &quot;0.36%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Westmount—Ville-Marie
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Marcela Valdivia4,110&quot;10.71%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Lucienne Robillard23,093&quot;60.19%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Felix Cotte1,697&quot;4.42%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Willy Blomme1,990&quot;5.19%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bryan Price4,597&quot;11.98%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Brian Sarwer-Foner1,245&quot;3.25%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Patrice Caron692&quot;1.80%&quot;
|Saroj Bains (M-L)150 &quot;0.39%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Lucienne Robillard
|
|Allen Faguy (NLP)96 &quot;0.25%&quot;
|
|Michel Laporte (NA)694 &quot;1.81%&quot;
|}

===Northern Montreal and Laval===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Ahuntsic
|Fatima El Amraoui17,132&quot;32.23%&quot;
|Eleni Bakopanos28,643&quot;53.89%&quot;
|Eugenia Romain1,816&quot;3.42%&quot;
|Steve Moran997&quot;1.88%&quot;
|Jessica Chartrand3,018&quot;5.68%&quot;
|Mimi Ghosh1,123&quot;2.11%&quot;
|Vincent Dorais159&quot;0.30%&quot;
|Antonio Artuso (Comm.)262&quot;0.49%&quot;
|Eleni Bakopanos
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Bourassa
|Umberto Di Genova11,462&quot;28.07%&quot;
|Denis Coderre25,403&quot;62.22%&quot;
|Marcel Lys François1,435&quot;3.51%&quot;
|Richard Gendron736&quot;1.80%&quot;
|Marcel Pitre1,325&quot;3.25%&quot;
|
|Claude Brunelle330&quot;0.81%&quot;
|Ulises Nitor (Comm.)137&quot;0.34%&quot;
|Denis Coderre
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Laval Centre
|Madeleine Dalphond-Guiral23,746&quot;43.35%&quot;
|Pierre Lafleur23,704&quot;43.27%&quot;
|Eric Marchand2,437&quot;4.45%&quot;
|Jean-Yves Dion832&quot;1.52%&quot;
|Guy Fortin2,778&quot;5.07%&quot;
|Julien Bernard1,285&quot;2.35%&quot;
|
|
|Madeleine Dalphond-Guiral
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Laval East
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mathieu Alarie24,726&quot;42.55%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Carole-Marie Allard26,018&quot;44.77%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rosane Raymond2,354&quot;4.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sujata Dey573&quot;0.99%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |André G. Plourde2,459&quot;4.23%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Frédéric Gauvin660&quot;1.14%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gabriel Cornellier-Brunelle178&quot;0.31%&quot;
|Christian Lajoie (Mar.)892 &quot;1.53%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Maud Debien†
|
|Régent Millette (Ind.)255 &quot;0.44%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Laval West
|Manon Sauvé19,975&quot;32.27%&quot;
|Raymonde Folco31,758&quot;51.30%&quot;
|Leo Housakos4,631&quot;7.48%&quot;
|Christian Patenaude764&quot;1.23%&quot;
|Michael M. Fortier3,613&quot;5.84%&quot;
|Luc Beaulieu983&quot;1.59%&quot;
|Polyvios Tsakanikas180&quot;0.29%&quot;
|
|Raymonde Folco
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Papineau—Saint-Denis
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Philippe Ordenes11,779&quot;26.60%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Pierre Pettigrew23,955&quot;54.10%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Yannis Felemegos2,114&quot;4.77%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Hans Marotte1,983&quot;4.48%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Emmanuel Préville1,215&quot;2.74%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Boris-Antoine Legault1,128&quot;2.55%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Peter Macrisopoulos482&quot;1.09%&quot;
|Mustaque A. Sarker (Ind.)738 &quot;1.67%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Pierre Pettigrew
|
|Antoine Théorêt-Poupart (Mar.)886 &quot;2.00%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint-Léonard—Saint-Michel
|Marcel Ferlatte6,679&quot;14.47%&quot;
|Alfonso Gagliano35,396&quot;76.66%&quot;
|Daniel Champagne1,750&quot;3.79%&quot;
|Sara Mayo528&quot;1.14%&quot;
|Mostafa Ben Kirane1,057&quot;2.29%&quot;
|
|Yves Le Seigle127&quot;0.28%&quot;
|Karina Néron (Mar.)635&quot;1.38%&quot;
|Alfonso Gagliano

===Laurentides, Outaouais and Northern Quebec===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Abitibi—Baie-James—Nunavik
|François Lemieux15,567&quot;42.76%&quot;
|Guy St-Julien18,198&quot;49.99%&quot;
|François Dionne1,297&quot;3.56%&quot;
|Daniel Fredrick534&quot;1.47%&quot;
|Sylvain Gemme809&quot;2.22%&quot;
|
|
|Guy St-Julien&quot;&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Argenteuil—Papineau—Mirabel
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Mario Laframboise21,713&quot;43.20%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Lise Bourgault21,171&quot;42.12%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Francine Labelle2,897&quot;5.76%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Didier Charles550&quot;1.09%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jean-Denis Pelletier1,848&quot;3.68%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Marie-Thérèse Nault256&quot;0.51%&quot;
|Pierre Audette (Mar.)934 &quot;1.86%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Maurice Dumas
|
|Gilles Bisson (Green)723 &quot;1.44%&quot;
|
|Laurent Filion (NA)167&quot;0.33%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Gatineau
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Richard Nadeau12,817&quot;25.40%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Mark Assad25,960&quot;51.45%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Stéphany Crowley5,069&quot;10.05%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Carl Hétu1,763&quot;3.49%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Michael F. Vasseur3,619&quot;7.17%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jean-Claude Pommet472&quot;0.94%&quot;
|Ronald Bélanger (Ind.)389 &quot;0.77%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Mark Assad
|
|Samantha Demers (NA)228 &quot;0.45%&quot;
|
|Françoise Roy (M-L)139&quot;0.28%&quot;
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Hull—Aylmer
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Caroline Brouard10,051&quot;23.08%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Marcel Proulx22,385&quot;51.40%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Michel Geisterfer3,639&quot;8.36%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Peter Piening1,521&quot;3.49%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Guy Dufort4,181&quot;9.60%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Rita Bouchard426&quot;0.98%&quot;
|Robert Brooks (CAP)167 &quot;0.38%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Marcel Proulx
|
|Ron Gray (NA)184&quot;0.42%&quot;
|
|Alexandre Legeais (M-L)106 &quot;0.24%&quot;
|
|Aubert Martins (Mar.)892 &quot;2.05%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Laurentides
|Monique Guay30,337&quot;49.90%&quot;
|Dominique Boyer23,619&quot;38.85%&quot;
|William Azeff2,269&quot;3.73%&quot;
|Brendan Naef720&quot;1.18%&quot;
|Jacques Vien3,094&quot;5.09%&quot;
|Jacinthe Millaire757&quot;1.25%&quot;
|
|Monique Guay
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Pontiac—Gatineau—Labelle
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Johanne Deschamps14,552&quot;32.06%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Robert Bertrand20,590&quot;45.36%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Judith Grant6,587&quot;14.51%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Melissa Hunter840&quot;1.85%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Benoit Larocque1,791&quot;3.95%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Eleanor Hyodo184&quot;0.41%&quot;
|Christian Legeais (M-L)93 &quot;0.20%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Robert Bertrand
|
|Thomas J. Sabourin (NA)98 &quot;0.22%&quot;
|
|Gretchen Schwarz (Green)654 &quot;1.44%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Rivière-des-Mille-Îles
|Gilles-A. Perron26,508&quot;49.41%&quot;
|Robert Fragasso18,456&quot;34.40%&quot;
|François Desrochers3,677&quot;6.85%&quot;
|Stephane Thinel739&quot;1.38%&quot;
|Jonathan Paquette2,935&quot;5.47%&quot;
|
|Eric Squire (Green)1,329&quot;2.48%&quot;
|Gilles Perron
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Témiscamingue
|Pierre Brien18,801&quot;50.14%&quot;
|Roch Charron16,028&quot;42.75%&quot;
|Eric Larochelle1,368&quot;3.65%&quot;
|Anik-Maude Morin493&quot;1.31%&quot;
|Sébastien Héroux804&quot;2.14%&quot;
|
|
|Pierre Brien
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Terrebonne—Blainville
|Diane Bourgeois28,933&quot;51.91%&quot;
|François-Hugues Liberge17,668&quot;31.70%&quot;
|Guylaine St-Georges3,741&quot;6.71%&quot;
|Normand Beaudet1,111&quot;1.99%&quot;
|Mélanie Gemme3,089&quot;5.54%&quot;
|Pascale Levert1,193&quot;2.14%&quot;
|
|Paul Mercier
|}

==Ontario==

===Ottawa===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Nepean—Carleton
|David Pratt24,570&quot;41.16%&quot;
|Michael Green22,310&quot;37.37%&quot;
|Craig Parsons2,223&quot;3.72%&quot;
|Bill Knott9,536&quot;15.98%&quot;
|Isobel McGregor805&quot;1.35%&quot;
|
|Lester Newby118&quot;0.20%&quot;
|Jacques Waisvisz (CAP)131&quot;0.22%&quot;
|David Pratt
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Ottawa Centre
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Mac Harb22,716&quot;40.01%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |David Brown10,167&quot;17.91%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Heather-jane Robertson13,516&quot;23.81%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Beverley Mitchell7,505&quot;13.22%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Chris Bradshaw1,531&quot;2.70%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Brad Powers813&quot;1.43%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Neil Paterson111&quot;0.20%&quot;
|Mistahi Corkill (M-L)66 &quot;0.12%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; |Mac Harb
|
|Carla Marie Dancey (CAP)210 &quot;0.37%&quot;
|
|Marvin Glass (Comm.)139 &quot;0.24%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Ottawa—Orléans
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Eugène Bellemare26,635&quot;51.01%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rita Burke13,316&quot;25.50%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Maureen Prebinski2,169&quot;4.15%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marc-André Bélair8,738&quot;16.73%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Richard Warman561&quot;1.07%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Albert534&quot;1.02%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Heather Hanson117&quot;0.22%&quot;
|Louis Lang (M-L)41 &quot;0.08%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Eugène Bellemare
|
|Jean Saintonge (CAP)108 &quot;0.21%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Ottawa South
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Manley26,585&quot;51.33%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Brad Darbyson12,677&quot;24.48%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jeannie Page3,463&quot;6.69%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Kevin Lister8,096&quot;15.63%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ron Whalen679&quot;1.31%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |James Hea141&quot;0.27%&quot;
|Marsha Fine (M-L)80 &quot;0.15%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Manley
|
|Mick Panesar (Comm.)69 &quot;0.13%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Ottawa—Vanier
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mauril Bélanger26,749&quot;55.56%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Nestor Gayowsky7,600&quot;15.79%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joseph Zebrowski4,194&quot;8.71%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Stephen Woollcombe7,400&quot;15.37%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Adam Sommerfeld1,083&quot;2.25%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Raymond Turmel728&quot;1.51%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Pierrette Blondin187&quot;0.39%&quot;
|Kim Roberge (M-L)74 &quot;0.15%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mauril Bélanger
|
|Raymond Samuéls (CAP)126 &quot;0.26%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Ottawa West—Nepean
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Marlene Catterall22,606&quot;43.32%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Barry Yeates14,753&quot;28.27%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Kevin Kinsella2,718&quot;5.21%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Tom Curran10,507&quot;20.13%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Matt Takach585&quot;1.12%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Sotos Petrides423&quot;0.81%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Richard Michael Wolfson58&quot;0.11%&quot;
|David Creighton (CAP)376 &quot;0.72%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Marlene Catterall
|
|Stuart Ryan (Comm.)70 &quot;0.13%&quot;
|
|John Turmel (Ind.)89 &quot;0.17%&quot;

===Eastern Ontario===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Glengarry—Prescott—Russell
|Don Boudria31,371&quot;67.96%&quot;
|L. Sebastian Anders8,632&quot;18.70%&quot;
|Guy Belle-Isle1,877&quot;4.07%&quot;
|Ashley O&#x27;Kurley3,942&quot;8.54%&quot;
|
|Wayne Foster (NLP)340&quot;0.74%&quot;
|Don Boudria
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Hastings—Frontenac—Lennox and Addington
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Larry McCormick16,996&quot;39.00%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Sean McAdam13,227&quot;30.35%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Tom O&#x27;Neill2,200&quot;5.05%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Daryl Kramp10,231&quot;23.48%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Paul Isaacs156&quot;0.36%&quot;
|Ross Baker (Ind.)207 &quot;0.48%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Larry McCormick
|
|Kenneth Switzer (NA)43 &quot;0.10%&quot;
|
|Chris Walker (Green)516 &quot;1.18%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kingston and the Islands
|Peter Milliken26,457&quot;51.69%&quot;
|Kevin Goligher7,904&quot;15.44%&quot;
|Gary Wilson4,951&quot;9.67%&quot;
|Blair MacLean9,222&quot;18.02%&quot;
|
|Chris Milburn (Green)2,652&quot;5.18%&quot;
|Peter Milliken
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Lanark—Carleton
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Ian Murray22,811&quot;35.99%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Scott Reid24,670&quot;38.93%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Theresa Kiefer1,946&quot;3.07%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bryan Brulotte12,430&quot;19.61%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Ross Elliott388&quot;0.61%&quot;
|John Baranyi (Ind.)150 &quot;0.24%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Ian Murray
|
|Stuart Langstaff (Green)871 &quot;1.37%&quot;
|
|Britt Roberts (NLP)107 &quot;0.17%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Leeds—Grenville
|Joe Jordan18,594&quot;39.51%&quot;
|Gord Brown18,539&quot;39.39%&quot;
|Martin Hanratty990&quot;2.10%&quot;
|John M. Johnston7,940&quot;16.87%&quot;
|Jane Pamela Scharf181&quot;0.38%&quot;
|Jerry Heath (Green)816&quot;1.73%&quot;
|Joe Jordan
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Prince Edward—Hastings
|Lyle Vanclief20,055&quot;50.46%&quot;
|Jim Graham9,707&quot;24.43%&quot;
|Jason Gannon1,897&quot;4.77%&quot;
|Dennis Timbrell8,083&quot;20.34%&quot;
|
|
|Lyle Vanclief
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |(federal electoral district)|Renfrew—Nipissing—Pembroke
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Hec Clouthier18,211&quot;39.00%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Cheryl Gallant20,634&quot;44.18%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Ole Hendrickson1,607&quot;3.44%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bob Amaron5,287&quot;11.32%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |
|André Giordano (NLP)78 &quot;0.17%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Hec Clouthier
|
|Thane C. Heins (NA)121 &quot;0.26%&quot;
|
|Stanley E. Sambey (Mar.)762 &quot;1.63%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Stormont—Dundas—Charlottenburgh
|Bob Kilger19,113&quot;46.69%&quot;
|Guy Lauzon16,151&quot;39.45%&quot;
|Kimberley Fry1,696&quot;4.14%&quot;
|Michael Bailey3,635&quot;8.88%&quot;
|Georges Elie Novy127&quot;0.31%&quot;
|Ian Campbell (NLP)214&quot;0.52%&quot;
|Bob Kilger
|}

===Central Ontario===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Barrie—Simcoe—Bradford
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Aileen Carroll26,309&quot;48.27%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rob Hamilton17,600&quot;32.29%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Keith Lindsay2,385&quot;4.38%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jane MacLaren7,588&quot;13.92%&quot;
|Brian K. White (NA)234 &quot;0.43%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Aileen Carroll
|
|Ian Woods (CAP)387 &quot;0.71%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Bruce—Grey—Owen Sound
|Ovid L. Jackson19,817&quot;44.22%&quot;
|Murray Peer15,960&quot;35.61%&quot;
|Karen Gventer2,166&quot;4.83%&quot;
|Allen Wilford6,872&quot;15.33%&quot;
|
|Ovid Jackson
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Dufferin—Peel—Wellington—Grey
|Murray Calder21,678&quot;45.57%&quot;
|Don Crawford15,028&quot;31.59%&quot;
|Mitchel Healey1,473&quot;3.10%&quot;
|Richard Majkot7,926&quot;16.66%&quot;
|Robert Strang (Green)1,464&quot;3.08%&quot;
|Murray Calder
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Durham
|Alex Shepherd20,602&quot;45.20%&quot;
|Gerry Skipwith13,743&quot;30.15%&quot;
|Ken Ranney2,545&quot;5.58%&quot;
|Sam Cureatz8,367&quot;18.36%&quot;
|Durk Bruinsma (NA)326&quot;0.72%&quot;
|Alex Shepherd
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Haliburton—Victoria—Brock
|John O&#x27;Reilly16,710&quot;33.95%&quot;
|Pat Dunn15,591&quot;31.68%&quot;
|Rick Denyer2,409&quot;4.89%&quot;
|Laurie Scott14,508&quot;29.48%&quot;
|
|John O&#x27;Reilly
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Northumberland
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Harold Macklin20,109&quot;45.90%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rick Norlock11,410&quot;26.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ben Burd2,141&quot;4.89%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ralph James Zarboni8,768&quot;20.02%&quot;
|Tom Lawson (Green)1,102 &quot;2.52%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Christine Stewart
|
|Gail Thompson (CAP)276 &quot;0.63%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Peterborough
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Peter Adams25,310&quot;48.41%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Eric John Allan Mann14,924&quot;28.54%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Herb Wiseman3,967&quot;7.59%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Darrin Langen7,034&quot;13.45%&quot;
|Bob Bowers (Ind.)147 &quot;0.28%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Peter Adams
|
|Tim Holland (Green)903 &quot;1.73%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Simcoe—Grey
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Bonwick22,224&quot;44.77%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |George Demery16,113&quot;32.46%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Michael Kennedy1,646&quot;3.32%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bill Dunkley8,655&quot;17.44%&quot;
|Victor Carvalho (NA)246 &quot;0.50%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Bonwick
|
|James Wilson McGillivray (CAP)751 &quot;1.51%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Simcoe North
|Paul DeVillers24,510&quot;50.76%&quot;
|Peter Stock14,283&quot;29.58%&quot;
|Ann Billings2,272&quot;4.71%&quot;
|Lucy Stewart6,914&quot;14.32%&quot;
|Adrian P. Kooger (NA)305&quot;0.63%&quot;
|Paul Devillers
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |York North
|Karen Kraft Sloan22,665&quot;46.50%&quot;
|Bob Yaciuk11,985&quot;24.59%&quot;
|Ian Scott1,696&quot;3.48%&quot;
|Joe Wamback11,890&quot;24.39%&quot;
|Ian Knight (NA)509&quot;1.04%&quot;
|Karen Kraft Sloan
|}

===Durham and York===
|-
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Markham
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |John McCallum32,104&quot;66.64%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jim Jones9,015&quot;18.71%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Janice Hagan1,129&quot;2.34%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |David Scrymgeour5,085&quot;10.55%&quot;
|Akber Choudhry (Ind.)222 &quot;0.46%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jim Jones
|
|Jim Conrad (CAP)130 &quot;0.27%&quot;
|
|Bernadette Manning (Green)493 &quot;1.02%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Oak Ridges
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bryon Wilfert33,058&quot;59.41%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bob Callow11,714&quot;21.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joseph Thevarkunnel1,623&quot;2.92%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Oostrom8,409&quot;15.11%&quot;
|Steven Haylestrom (Green)672 &quot;1.21%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bryon Wilfert
|
|Mary Wan (NLP)172 &quot;0.31%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Oshawa
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ivan Grose16,179&quot;42.92%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Barry Bussey10,863&quot;28.82%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bruce Rogers4,203&quot;11.15%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bruce L. Wright5,675&quot;15.05%&quot;
|David Gershuny (M-L)97 &quot;0.26%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ivan Grose
|
|Craig James Michael McMillan (Mar.)679 &quot;1.80%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Pickering—Ajax—Uxbridge
|Dan McTeague28,834&quot;57.44%&quot;
|Ken Griffith11,941&quot;23.79%&quot;
|Ralph Chatoor1,523&quot;3.03%&quot;
|Michael Hills6,883&quot;13.71%&quot;
|Chris Pennington (Green)1,014&quot;2.02%&quot;
|Dan McTeague
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Thornhill
|Elinor Caplan27,152&quot;64.59%&quot;
|Robert Goldin6,643&quot;15.80%&quot;
|Nathan Rotman1,653&quot;3.93%&quot;
|Lou Watson6,338&quot;15.08%&quot;
|Art Jaszczyk (CAP)254&quot;0.60%&quot;
|Elinor Caplan
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Vaughan—King—Aurora
|Maurizio Bevilacqua38,208&quot;67.22%&quot;
|Adrian Visentin9,757&quot;17.17%&quot;
|Octavia Beckles1,938&quot;3.41%&quot;
|Menotti Mazzuca6,551&quot;11.53%&quot;
|Lesley Knight (NA)384&quot;0.68%&quot;
|Maurizio Bevilacqua
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Whitby—Ajax
|Judi Longfield25,693&quot;52.68%&quot;
|Shaun Gillespie13,159&quot;26.98%&quot;
|Vic Perroni2,359&quot;4.84%&quot;
|Rob Chopowick7,563&quot;15.51%&quot;
|
|Judi Longfield

===Suburban Toronto===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Don Valley East
|David Collenette25,915&quot;66.60%&quot;
|Kasra Nejatian4,736&quot;12.17%&quot;
|Ron Casey-Nestor2,249&quot;5.78%&quot;
|Cecilia Fusco5,645&quot;14.51%&quot;
|Judith Snow153&quot;0.39%&quot;
|Ryan Kidd (NA)212&quot;0.54%&quot;
|David Collenette
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Etobicoke Centre
|Allan Rock26,083&quot;56.37%&quot;
|Michael G. Craik10,318&quot;22.30%&quot;
|Karen Dolan2,124&quot;4.59%&quot;
|Ross Vaughan7,566&quot;16.35%&quot;
|Dagmar Sullivan181&quot;0.39%&quot;
|
|Allan Rock
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Etobicoke—Lakeshore
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jean Augustine22,467&quot;51.78%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Court9,160&quot;21.11%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Richard Joseph Banigan2,835&quot;6.53%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Haslam8,453&quot;19.48%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Janice Murray116&quot;0.27%&quot;
|Ed Bil (Comm.)113 &quot;0.26%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jean Augustine
|
|Don Jackson (NLP)244 &quot;0.56%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Etobicoke North
|Roy Cullen23,345&quot;72.54%&quot;
|Mahmood Elahi6,280&quot;19.51%&quot;
|Ana Maria Sapp2,210&quot;6.87%&quot;
|
|
|Elizabeth Rowley (Comm.)347&quot;1.08%&quot;
|Roy Cullen
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Scarborough—Agincourt
|Jim Karygiannis26,986&quot;70.89%&quot;
|Andrew Faust5,100&quot;13.40%&quot;
|Michael Laxer1,499&quot;3.94%&quot;
|Bruce Elliott4,030&quot;10.59%&quot;
|Sarah Thompson112&quot;0.29%&quot;
|Wayne Cook (CAP)341&quot;0.90%&quot;
|Jim Karygiannis
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Scarborough Centre
|John Cannis26,969&quot;67.51%&quot;
|Bill Settatree8,849&quot;22.15%&quot;
|Ali Mallah3,171&quot;7.94%&quot;
|
|
|Paul Coulbeck (Mar.)959&quot;2.40%&quot;
|John Cannis
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Scarborough East
|John McKay24,019&quot;59.82%&quot;
|Paul Calandra7,559&quot;18.83%&quot;
|Denise Lake1,884&quot;4.69%&quot;
|W. Paul McCrossan6,284&quot;15.65%&quot;
|France Tremblay113&quot;0.28%&quot;
|Dave Glover (CAP)292&quot;0.73%&quot;
|John McKay
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Scarborough—Rouge River
|Derek Lee28,669&quot;79.05%&quot;
|Kaizer Suleman3,237&quot;8.93%&quot;
|Paulette Senior1,793&quot;4.94%&quot;
|Alan Shumak2,566&quot;7.08%&quot;
|
|
|Derek Lee
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Scarborough Southwest
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Tom Wappel21,466&quot;60.01%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Nabil El-Khazen4,912&quot;13.73%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dan Harris3,638&quot;10.17%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ellery Hollingsworth5,251&quot;14.68%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Walter Aolari (CAP)336 &quot;0.94%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Tom Wappel
|
|Dora Stewart (Comm.)165 &quot;0.46%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Willowdale
|Jim Peterson27,038&quot;61.27%&quot;
|Kevyn Nightingale7,411&quot;16.79%&quot;
|Yvonne Bobb2,404&quot;5.45%&quot;
|Chungsen Leung7,134&quot;16.17%&quot;
|Roger Carter145&quot;0.33%&quot;
|
|Jim Peterson
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |York Centre
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Art Eggleton24,788&quot;71.09%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jeffrey Dorfman4,615&quot;13.24%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Maurice Coulter2,109&quot;6.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mark Tweyman2,518&quot;7.22%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Diane Johnston142&quot;0.41%&quot;
|Christopher Black (Comm.)163 &quot;0.47%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Art Eggleton
|
|Constantine Kritsonis (Green)532 &quot;1.53%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |York West
|Judy Sgro19,768&quot;77.28%&quot;
|Munish Chandra2,734&quot;10.69%&quot;
|Julia McCrea2,365&quot;9.25%&quot;
|
|Amarjit Dhillon175&quot;0.68%&quot;
|G. Marcello Marchetti (Mar.)539&quot;2.11%&quot;
|Judy Sgro

===Central Toronto===
|-
|rowspan=3 bgcolor=whitesmoke|Beaches—East York
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Maria Minna22,515&quot;52.74%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Abu Alam3,838&quot;8.99%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Mel Watkins8,936&quot;20.93%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Wayne Clutterbuck5,766&quot;13.51%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |James Mendel599&quot;1.40%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bruce Watson682&quot;1.60%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Steve Rutchinski53&quot;0.12%&quot;
|Donalda Fredeen (NLP)88 &quot;0.21%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Maria Minna
|
|Ann Nicholson (Comm.)82 &quot;0.19%&quot;
|
|Randall Whitcomb (CAP)128 &quot;0.30%&quot;
|rowspan=2 bgcolor=whitesmoke|Davenport
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Charles Caccia17,014&quot;66.72%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Anthony Montenegrino2,021&quot;7.93%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jordan Berger3,457&quot;13.56%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Eduardo Marcos1,526&quot;5.98%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mark O&#x27;Brien642&quot;2.52%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Elmer Gale480&quot;1.88%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Ann Emmett (CAP)288 &quot;1.13%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Charles Caccia†
|
|Stephen Porter (NLP)73 &quot;0.29%&quot;
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|Don Valley West
|John Godfrey25,329&quot;55.37%&quot;
|John Wakelin7,239&quot;15.83%&quot;
|Ali Naqvi2,024&quot;4.42%&quot;
|Michael Murton10,583&quot;23.14%&quot;
|
|Greg Stock469&quot;1.03%&quot;
|Fernand Deschamps97&quot;0.21%&quot;
|
|John Godfrey
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|Eglinton—Lawrence
|Joe Volpe25,161&quot;60.68%&quot;
|Joel Etienne5,497&quot;13.26%&quot;
|Simon Rowland2,663&quot;6.42%&quot;
|Louise Sankey7,156&quot;17.26%&quot;
|Doug Howat688&quot;1.66%&quot;
|
|Frank Chilelli164&quot;0.40%&quot;
|Matthew Macleod (NLP)133&quot;0.32%&quot;
|Joe Volpe
|rowspan=3 bgcolor=whitesmoke|Parkdale—High Park
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Sarmite Bulte20,676&quot;49.41%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Vicki Vancas4,882&quot;11.67%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Paul Schmidt7,947&quot;18.99%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |David Strycharz5,681&quot;13.58%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Neil Spiegel1,161&quot;2.77%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Terry Parker775&quot;1.85%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Lorne Gershuny122&quot;0.29%&quot;
|Michel Dugré (NA)132 &quot;0.32%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Sarmite Bulte
|
|Greg Robertson (CAP)317 &quot;0.76%&quot;
|
|Wilfred Szczesny (Comm.)155 &quot;0.37%&quot;
|rowspan=2 bgcolor=whitesmoke|St. Paul&#x27;s
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Carolyn Bennett&quot;25,35854.01%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Theo Caldwell&quot;5,45711.62%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Guy Hunter&quot;4,4519.48%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Barry Cline&quot;10,09921.51%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Don Roebuck&quot;7691.64%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Andrew Potter&quot;5141.09%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Barbara Seed&quot;880.19%&quot;
|Ron Parker (NLP)83 &quot;0.18%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Carolyn Bennett
|
|Mark Till (CAP)128 &quot;0.27%&quot;
|rowspan=3 bgcolor=whitesmoke|Toronto Centre—Rosedale
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bill Graham26,203&quot;55.33%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Richard Walker5,058&quot;10.68%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |David Berlin5,300&quot;11.19%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Randall Pearce8,149&quot;17.21%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Neev Tapiero722&quot;1.52%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Philip Fernandez116&quot;0.24%&quot;
|Danny Goldstick (Comm.)121 &quot;0.26%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bill Graham
|
|David Gordon (NLP)224 &quot;0.47%&quot;
|
|Paul Hellyer (CAP)1,466 &quot;3.10%&quot;
|rowspan=3 bgcolor=whitesmoke|Toronto—Danforth
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Dennis Mills20,330&quot;51.90%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Chris Butryn3,021&quot;7.71%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Paula Turtle10,830&quot;27.65%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Rose A. Dyson3,138&quot;8.01%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Robert Nevin769&quot;1.96%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Sean Keir513&quot;1.31%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Melanie Cishecki82&quot;0.21%&quot;
|Miguel Figueroa (Comm.)129 &quot;0.33%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Dennis Mills
|
|Linda Martin (NLP)154 &quot;0.39%&quot;
|
|William Angus Millar (CAP)202 &quot;0.52%&quot;
|rowspan=2 bgcolor=whitesmoke|Trinity—Spadina
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Tony Ianno20,032&quot;47.56%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Lee Monaco2,250&quot;5.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Michael Valpy16,001&quot;37.99%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John E. Polko2,309&quot;5.48%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Matthew Hammond562&quot;1.33%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Lewin673&quot;1.60%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Nick Lin102&quot;0.24%&quot;
|Jesse Benjamin (Comm.)90 &quot;0.21%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Tony Ianno
|
|Ashley Deans (NLP)98 &quot;0.23%&quot;
|rowspan=2 bgcolor=whitesmoke|York South—Weston
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Alan Tonks15,841&quot;45.60%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dan Houssar1,754&quot;5.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Tom Parkin1,288&quot;3.71%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jason Daniel Baker986&quot;2.84%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Denis Calnan293&quot;0.84%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Anna Dicarlo102&quot;0.29%&quot;
|Hassan Husseini (Comm.)130 &quot;0.37%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Nunziata
|
|John Nunziata (NA)14,344 &quot;41.29%&quot;

===Brampton, Mississauga and Oakville===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Bramalea—Gore—Malton—Springdale
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gurbax S. Malhi21,917&quot;57.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gurdish Mangat7,214&quot;18.78%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Vishnu Roche1,864&quot;4.85%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Danny Varaich6,019&quot;15.67%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Greig269&quot;0.70%&quot;
|Jim Bridgewood (Comm.)350 &quot;0.91%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gurbax Malhi
|
|Gurinder Malhi (Ind.)783 &quot;2.04%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Brampton Centre
|Sarkis Assadourian18,365&quot;50.64%&quot;
|Prabhat Kapur6,247&quot;17.23%&quot;
|Sue Slean1,795&quot;4.95%&quot;
|Beryl Ford9,229&quot;25.45%&quot;
|Andrew K. Roy628&quot;1.73%&quot;
|
|
|Sarkis Assadourian
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Brampton West—Mississauga
|Colleen Beaumier31,041&quot;66.38%&quot;
|Hardial Sangha7,666&quot;16.39%&quot;
|Matt Harsant1,567&quot;3.35%&quot;
|W. Glenn Harewood5,957&quot;12.74%&quot;
|Mike Hofer529&quot;1.13%&quot;
|
|
|Colleen Beaumier
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Mississauga Centre
|Carolyn Parrish24,381&quot;64.13%&quot;
|Harry Dhaliwal6,643&quot;17.47%&quot;
|Gail McCabe1,404&quot;3.69%&quot;
|Nina Tangri5,077&quot;13.35%&quot;
|
|Bob McCabe125&quot;0.33%&quot;
|Alan Ward (Mar.)389&quot;1.02%&quot;
|Carolyn Parrish
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Mississauga East
|Albina Guarnieri22,158&quot;64.50%&quot;
|Jainstien Dookie5,372&quot;15.64%&quot;
|Henry Beer1,451&quot;4.22%&quot;
|Riina DeFaria5,144&quot;14.97%&quot;
|
|Pierre Chénier227&quot;0.66%&quot;
|
|Albina Guarnieri
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Mississauga South
|Paul Szabo20,676&quot;51.77%&quot;
|Brad Butt10,139&quot;25.39%&quot;
|Ken Cole1,636&quot;4.10%&quot;
|David Brown6,903&quot;17.28%&quot;
|Pamela Murray516&quot;1.29%&quot;
|Tim Sullivan67&quot;0.17%&quot;
|
|Paul Szabo
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Mississauga West
|Steve Mahoney31,260&quot;63.20%&quot;
|Philip Leong10,582&quot;21.40%&quot;
|Cynthia Kazadi1,532&quot;3.10%&quot;
|Gul Nawaz5,275&quot;10.67%&quot;
|Carolyn Brown810&quot;1.64%&quot;
|
|
|Steve Mahoney
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Oakville
|M.A. Bonnie Brown23,074&quot;47.74%&quot;
|Dan Ferrone13,544&quot;28.02%&quot;
|Willie Lambert1,335&quot;2.76%&quot;
|Rick Byers9,589&quot;19.84%&quot;
|David deBelle790&quot;1.63%&quot;
|
|
|Bonnie Brown

===Hamilton, Burlington and Niagara===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Ancaster—Dundas—Flamborough—Aldershot
|John Bryden19,921&quot;41.16%&quot;
|Ray Pennings15,272&quot;31.55%&quot;
|Gordon Guyatt3,756&quot;7.76%&quot;
|Gerry Aggus9,451&quot;19.53%&quot;
|
|
|
|John Bryden
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Burlington
|Paddy Torsney22,175&quot;46.77%&quot;
|Don Pennell11,500&quot;24.26%&quot;
|Larry McMahon1,722&quot;3.63%&quot;
|Stephen Collinson11,240&quot;23.71%&quot;
|
|
|Tom Snyder (Green)771&quot;1.63%&quot;
|Paddy Torsney
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Erie—Lincoln
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Maloney17,054&quot;42.21%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dean Allison14,992&quot;37.11%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jody Di Bartolomeo2,423&quot;6.00%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Hurren5,174&quot;12.81%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Gregory143&quot;0.35%&quot;
|David W. Bylsma (NA)476 &quot;1.18%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Maloney
|
|William Schleich (CAP)137 &quot;0.34%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Hamilton East
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Sheila Copps16,435&quot;52.85%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Joshua Conroy6,039&quot;19.42%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jim Stevenson4,111&quot;13.22%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Steven Knight3,321&quot;10.68%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Julie Gordon105&quot;0.34%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Helene Darisse-Yildirim97&quot;0.31%&quot;
|Michael Baldasaro (Mar.)575 &quot;1.85%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Sheila Copps
|
|Salvatore Sam Cino (Ind.)270 &quot;0.87%&quot;
|
|Bob Mann (Comm.)144 &quot;0.46%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Hamilton Mountain
|Beth Phinney22,536&quot;50.91%&quot;
|Mike Scott9,621&quot;21.73%&quot;
|James Stephenson4,387&quot;9.91%&quot;
|John Smith7,467&quot;16.87%&quot;
|Rolf Gerstenberger259&quot;0.59%&quot;
|
|
|Beth Phinney
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Hamilton West
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Stan Keyes21,273&quot;52.72%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Leon O&#x27;Connor7,295&quot;18.08%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Catherine Hudson5,300&quot;13.13%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Ron Blackie5,024&quot;12.45%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Wendell Fields61&quot;0.15%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Rita Rassenberg94&quot;0.23%&quot;
|Hamish Jamie Campbell (Green)616 &quot;1.53%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Stan Keyes
|
|Stephen Downey (NA)163 &quot;0.40%&quot;
|
|Danielle Keir (Mar.)437 &quot;1.08%&quot;
|
|Mike Mirza (Comm.)91 &quot;0.23%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Niagara Centre
|Tony Tirabassi21,641&quot;45.74%&quot;
|Bernie Law13,313&quot;28.14%&quot;
|Mike Grimaldi7,029&quot;14.86%&quot;
|Joe Atkinson4,893&quot;10.34%&quot;
|Ron Walker149&quot;0.31%&quot;
|
|Tom Prue (CAP)290&quot;0.61%&quot;
|Gilbert Parent†
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Niagara Falls
|Gary Pillitteri17,907&quot;45.92%&quot;
|Mel Grunstein11,999&quot;30.77%&quot;
|Ed Booker2,356&quot;6.04%&quot;
|Tony Baldinelli6,077&quot;15.58%&quot;
|
|William Norman Amos155&quot;0.40%&quot;
|Clara Tarnoy (Green)501&quot;1.28%&quot;
|Gary Pillitteri
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |St. Catharines
|Walt Lastewka20,992&quot;44.93%&quot;
|Randy Taylor Dumont15,871&quot;33.97%&quot;
|John Bacher2,878&quot;6.16%&quot;
|Ken Atkinson6,522&quot;13.96%&quot;
|Elaine Couto93&quot;0.20%&quot;
|Jim Morris203&quot;0.43%&quot;
|Tilly Bylsma (NA)166&quot;0.36%&quot;
|Walt Lastewka
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Stoney Creek
|Tony Valeri24,150&quot;51.08%&quot;
|Doug Conley13,354&quot;28.25%&quot;
|Mark Davies3,083&quot;6.52%&quot;
|Grant Howell6,102&quot;12.91%&quot;
|Paul Lane137&quot;0.29%&quot;
|
|Phil Rose (CAP)450&quot;0.95%&quot;
|Tony Valeri

===Midwestern Ontario===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Brant
|Jane Stewart24,068&quot;56.42%&quot;
|Chris Cattle10,955&quot;25.68%&quot;
|Dee Chisholm3,126&quot;7.33%&quot;
|Stephen Kun3,580&quot;8.39%&quot;
|Graeme Dunn484&quot;1.13%&quot;
|Mike Clancy447&quot;1.05%&quot;
|
|Jane Stewart
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Cambridge
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Janko Peric22,148&quot;46.60%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Reg Petersen14,915&quot;31.38%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Pam Wolf4,111&quot;8.65%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John L. Housser5,988&quot;12.60%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|John G. Gots (NA)160 &quot;0.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Janko Peric
|
|Thomas Mitchell (NLP)210 &quot;0.44%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Guelph—Wellington
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Brenda Chamberlain26,440&quot;48.19%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Max Layton11,037&quot;20.12%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Edward Pickersgill5,685&quot;10.36%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marie Adsett10,188&quot;18.57%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bill Hulet966&quot;1.76%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sharon Tanti207&quot;0.38%&quot;
|Manuel Couto (M-L)68 &quot;0.12%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Brenda Chamberlain
|
|Gord Truscott (NA)275 &quot;0.50%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Haldimand—Norfolk—Brant
|Bob Speller20,867&quot;46.82%&quot;
|Jim Maki15,416&quot;34.59%&quot;
|Norm Walpole2,124&quot;4.77%&quot;
|Gary Muntz5,761&quot;12.93%&quot;
|
|L. Scott Morgan397&quot;0.89%&quot;
|
|Bob Speller
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Halton
|Julian Reed28,168&quot;47.27%&quot;
|Tim Dobson15,656&quot;26.27%&quot;
|Brenda Dolling2,633&quot;4.42%&quot;
|Tom Kilmer12,114&quot;20.33%&quot;
|Tom Adams1,018&quot;1.71%&quot;
|
|
|Julian Reed
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Huron—Bruce
|Paul Steckle21,547&quot;49.91%&quot;
|Mark Beaven10,343&quot;23.96%&quot;
|Christine Kemp2,669&quot;6.18%&quot;
|Ken Kelly8,138&quot;18.85%&quot;
|
|Philip Holley225&quot;0.52%&quot;
|Dave Joslin (NA)249&quot;0.58%&quot;
|Paul Steckle
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kitchener Centre
|Karen Redman23,511&quot;52.84%&quot;
|Eloise Jantzi11,603&quot;26.08%&quot;
|Paul Royston3,058&quot;6.87%&quot;
|Steven Daniel Gadbois6,162&quot;13.85%&quot;
|
|
|Martin Suter (Comm.)158&quot;0.36%&quot;
|Karen Redman
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kitchener—Waterloo
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Andrew Telegdi27,132&quot;50.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joshua Doig12,402&quot;23.01%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Richard Walsh-Bowers4,394&quot;8.15%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Brian Bourke8,621&quot;15.99%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jack MacAulay809&quot;1.50%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Robert E. Cormier273&quot;0.51%&quot;
|Frank Ellis (NA)105 &quot;0.19%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Andrew Telegdi
|
|Christine Nugent (M-L)164 &quot;0.30%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Oxford
|John Finlay15,181&quot;35.55%&quot;
|Patricia Smith11,455&quot;26.82%&quot;
|Shawn Rouse2,254&quot;5.28%&quot;
|Dave MacKenzie13,050&quot;30.56%&quot;
|
|Alex Kreider227&quot;0.53%&quot;
|John Thomas Markus (NA)536&quot;1.26%&quot;
|John Baird Finlay
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Perth—Middlesex
|John Alexander Richardson16,988&quot;40.37%&quot;
|Garnet Bloomfield9,785&quot;23.26%&quot;
|Sam Dinicol2,800&quot;6.65%&quot;
|Gary Schellenberger11,545&quot;27.44%&quot;
|Eric Eberhardt689&quot;1.64%&quot;
|Larry Carruthers128&quot;0.30%&quot;
|Tom Kroesbergen (NA)141&quot;0.34%&quot;
|John Richardson
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Waterloo—Wellington
|Lynn Myers19,619&quot;43.66%&quot;
|John Reimer14,797&quot;32.93%&quot;
|Allan Douglas Strong1,845&quot;4.11%&quot;
|Michael Chong7,999&quot;17.80%&quot;
|Brent A. Bouteiller432&quot;0.96%&quot;
|
|Peter Ellis (NA)249&quot;0.55%&quot;
|Lynn Myers

===Southwestern Ontario===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Chatham-Kent—Essex
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jerry Pickard20,085&quot;49.71%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sean Smart12,957&quot;32.07%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Susan MacKay2,209&quot;5.47%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ryan Bailey4,156&quot;10.29%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bobby Clarke715&quot;1.77%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Louis Duke (NA)73 &quot;0.18%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jerry Pickard
|
|Dudley Smith (CAP)213 &quot;0.53%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Elgin—Middlesex—London
|Gar Knutson17,202&quot;41.02%&quot;
|Bill Walters15,496&quot;36.95%&quot;
|Tim McCallum2,319&quot;5.53%&quot;
|Delia Reiche6,080&quot;14.50%&quot;
|John R. Fisher431&quot;1.03%&quot;
|
|Ken DeVries (NA)407&quot;0.97%&quot;
|Gar Knutson
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Essex
|Susan Whelan20,524&quot;44.33%&quot;
|Scott Cowan16,019&quot;34.60%&quot;
|Marion Overholt6,431&quot;13.89%&quot;
|Merrill Baker3,175&quot;6.86%&quot;
|
|Robert Cruise152&quot;0.33%&quot;
|
|Susan Whelan
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Lambton—Kent—Middlesex
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rose-Marie Ur21,124&quot;48.95%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ron Young13,302&quot;30.83%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joyce Jolliffe1,871&quot;4.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Phair5,918&quot;13.71%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dan Valkos341&quot;0.79%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Eva Cryderman (CAP)232 &quot;0.54%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rose-Marie Ur
|
|Roger James (NA)365 &quot;0.85%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |London—Fanshawe
|Pat O&#x27;Brien19,677&quot;54.81%&quot;
|Robert Vaughan7,998&quot;22.28%&quot;
|Andrew Sadler4,107&quot;11.44%&quot;
|Derrall Bellaire4,119&quot;11.47%&quot;
|
|
|
|Pat O&#x27;Brien
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |London North Centre
|Joe Fontana22,795&quot;51.46%&quot;
|Nancy Branscombe9,062&quot;20.46%&quot;
|Colleen Redmond3,936&quot;8.89%&quot;
|Lorie Johnson7,305&quot;16.49%&quot;
|Jeremy McNaughton681&quot;1.54%&quot;
|Albert Smith65&quot;0.15%&quot;
|Tim Berg (Mar.)453&quot;1.02%&quot;
|Joe Fontana
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |London West
|Sue Barnes23,794&quot;49.37%&quot;
|Salim Mansur10,162&quot;21.09%&quot;
|George Goodlet3,596&quot;7.46%&quot;
|Jeff Lang9,788&quot;20.31%&quot;
|Jeremy Price614&quot;1.27%&quot;
|Margaret Villamizar80&quot;0.17%&quot;
|Richard Goos (CAP)161&quot;0.33%&quot;
|Sue Barnes
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Sarnia—Lambton
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Roger Gallaway19,329&quot;50.97%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Dave Christie11,208&quot;29.56%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Glenn Sonier2,735&quot;7.21%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Paul Bailey3,320&quot;8.76%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Allan McKeown514&quot;1.36%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Andre C. Vachon32&quot;0.08%&quot;
|Ed Banninga (NA)356 &quot;0.94%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Roger Gallaway
|
|Shannon Bourke (NLP)92 &quot;0.24%&quot;
|
|John Elliott (Ind.)189 &quot;0.50%&quot;
|
|Rene Phillion (CAP)145 &quot;0.38%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Windsor—St. Clair
|Rick Limoges16,600&quot;39.87%&quot;
|Phillip Pettinato5,639&quot;13.55%&quot;
|Joe Comartin17,001&quot;40.84%&quot;
|Bruck Easton1,906&quot;4.58%&quot;
|Stephen Lockwood390&quot;0.94%&quot;
|Dale Woodyard95&quot;0.23%&quot;
|
|Rick Limoges
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Windsor West
|Herb Gray20,729&quot;54.21%&quot;
|Jeff Watson8,777&quot;22.96%&quot;
|John McGinlay6,080&quot;15.90%&quot;
|Ian West2,116&quot;5.53%&quot;
|
|Enver Villamizar229&quot;0.60%&quot;
|Christopher Soda (Ind.)304&quot;0.80%&quot;
|Herb Gray

===Northern Ontario===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Algoma—Manitoulin
|Brent St. Denis15,000&quot;48.36%&quot;
|Ron Swain8,992&quot;28.99%&quot;
|Grant Buck4,326&quot;13.95%&quot;
|Dale Lapham2,269&quot;7.32%&quot;
|Alexander Jablanczy428&quot;1.38%&quot;
|
|Brent St. Denis
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kenora—Rainy River
|Bob Nault14,416&quot;45.21%&quot;
|Ed Prefontaine9,125&quot;28.62%&quot;
|Susan Barclay6,868&quot;21.54%&quot;
|Brian Barrett1,476&quot;4.63%&quot;
|
|
|Bob Nault
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Nickel Belt
|Raymond Bonin19,187&quot;55.57%&quot;
|Neil Martin6,370&quot;18.45%&quot;
|Sandy Bass7,304&quot;21.16%&quot;
|Reg Couldridge1,664&quot;4.82%&quot;
|
|
|Raymond Bonin
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Nipissing
|Bob Wood18,888&quot;57.04%&quot;
|Ken Ferron7,461&quot;22.53%&quot;
|Wendy Young2,572&quot;7.77%&quot;
|Alan Dayes4,192&quot;12.66%&quot;
|
|
|Bob Wood
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Parry Sound-Muskoka
|Andy Mitchell17,911&quot;47.52%&quot;
|George Stripe9,569&quot;25.39%&quot;
|Joanne Bury1,665&quot;4.42%&quot;
|Keith Montgomery7,055&quot;18.72%&quot;
|Richard Thomas1,495&quot;3.97%&quot;
|
|Andy Mitchell
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Sault Ste. Marie
|Carmen F. Provenzano18,867&quot;50.79%&quot;
|David Ronald Rose7,006&quot;18.86%&quot;
|Bud Wildman9,202&quot;24.77%&quot;
|Doug Lawson1,168&quot;3.14%&quot;
|Kathie Brosemer776&quot;2.09%&quot;
|Martin Bruce Odber (CAP)128&quot;0.34%&quot;
|Carmen Provenzano
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Sudbury
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Diane Marleau20,290&quot;58.52%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mike Smith6,554&quot;18.90%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Chislett4,368&quot;12.60%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Alex McGregor2,642&quot;7.62%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Thomas Gerry503&quot;1.45%&quot;
|Daryl Janet Shandro (Comm.)98 &quot;0.28%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Diane Marleau
|
|Kathy Wells-McNeil (CAP)215 &quot;0.62%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Thunder Bay—Atikokan
|Stan Dromisky11,449&quot;36.98%&quot;
|David Richard Leskowski9,067&quot;29.29%&quot;
|Rick Baker6,023&quot;19.45%&quot;
|Ian M. Sinclair3,652&quot;11.80%&quot;
|Kristin Boyer769&quot;2.48%&quot;
|
|Stan Dromisky
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Thunder Bay—Superior North
|Joe Comuzzi15,241&quot;48.12%&quot;
|Doug Pantry6,278&quot;19.82%&quot;
|John Rafferty6,169&quot;19.48%&quot;
|Richard Neumann2,753&quot;8.69%&quot;
|Carl Rose648&quot;2.05%&quot;
|Denis A. Carrière (Mar.)581&quot;1.83%&quot;
|Joe Comuzzi
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Timiskaming—Cochrane
|Ben Serré19,404&quot;62.40%&quot;
|Dan Louie5,840&quot;18.78%&quot;
|Ambrose Raftis2,461&quot;7.91%&quot;
|William J. Stairs2,603&quot;8.37%&quot;
|Joseph Gold790&quot;2.54%&quot;
|
|Benoit Serré
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Timmins—James Bay
|Réginald Bélair16,335&quot;54.22%&quot;
|James Gibb3,356&quot;11.14%&quot;
|Len Wood9,385&quot;31.15%&quot;
|Daniel Clark1,053&quot;3.49%&quot;
|
|
|Réginald Bélair

==Manitoba==

===Rural Manitoba===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Brandon—Souris
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dick Scott6,544&quot;17.86%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gary Nestibo11,678&quot;31.87%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Errol Black4,518&quot;12.33%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rick Borotsik13,707&quot;37.41%&quot;
|Colin G. Atkins (NA)94 &quot;0.26%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rick Borotsik
|
|Lisa Gallagher (Comm.)102 &quot;0.28%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Churchill
|Elijah Harper7,514&quot;32.23%&quot;
|Jason Shaw4,126&quot;17.70%&quot;
|Bev Desjarlais10,477&quot;44.94%&quot;
|Doreen Murray1,198&quot;5.14%&quot;
|
|Bev Desjarlais
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Dauphin—Swan River
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jane Dawson7,091&quot;21.32%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Inky Mark15,855&quot;47.66%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Wayne Kines5,813&quot;17.47%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Keith Eliasson3,946&quot;11.86%&quot;
|Terry Drul (CAP)372 &quot;1.12%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Inky Mark
|
|Iris Yawney (NA)189 &quot;0.57%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Portage—Lisgar
|Gerry J.E. Gebler6,133&quot;17.82%&quot;
|Brian William Pallister17,318&quot;50.31%&quot;
|Diane Beresford2,073&quot;6.02%&quot;
|Morley McDonald5,339&quot;15.51%&quot;
|E. Jake Hoeppner (Ind.)3,558&quot;10.34%&quot;
|Jake Hoeppner
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Provencher
|David Iftody14,419&quot;35.62%&quot;
|Vic Toews21,358&quot;52.76%&quot;
|Peter Hiebert1,980&quot;4.89%&quot;
|Henry C. Dyck2,726&quot;6.73%&quot;
|
|David Iftody
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Selkirk—Interlake
|Kathy Arnason9,612&quot;23.59%&quot;
|Howard Hilstrom17,856&quot;43.82%&quot;
|Paul Pododworny8,113&quot;19.91%&quot;
|Tom Goodman4,992&quot;12.25%&quot;
|Anthony Barendregt (NA)178&quot;0.44%&quot;
|Howard Hilstrom

===Winnipeg===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Charleswood—St. James—Assiniboia
|John Harvard13,901&quot;36.21%&quot;
|Cyril McFate11,569&quot;30.14%&quot;
|Dennis Kshyk2,786&quot;7.26%&quot;
|Curtis Moore9,991&quot;26.03%&quot;
|Greg Crowe138&quot;0.36%&quot;
|
|John Harvard
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saint Boniface
|Ronald J. Duhamel20,173&quot;52.17%&quot;
|Joyce M. Chilton8,962&quot;23.18%&quot;
|John Parry5,026&quot;13.00%&quot;
|Mike Reilly4,505&quot;11.65%&quot;
|
|
|Ron Duhamel
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Winnipeg Centre
|Kevin Lamoureux9,310&quot;34.11%&quot;
|Reg Smith3,975&quot;14.56%&quot;
|Pat Martin11,263&quot;41.26%&quot;
|Michel Allard1,915&quot;7.02%&quot;
|Harold Dyck134&quot;0.49%&quot;
|Mikel Magnusson (Green)698&quot;2.56%&quot;
|Pat Martin
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Winnipeg North Centre
|Mary Richard6,755&quot;27.47%&quot;
|
|Judy Wasylycia-Leis14,356&quot;58.39%&quot;
|Myron Troniak2,950&quot;12.00%&quot;
|Darrell Rankin525&quot;2.14%&quot;
|
|Judy Wasylycia-Leis
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Winnipeg North—St. Paul
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Rey D. Pagtakhan14,556&quot;38.78%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Trevor Sprague11,412&quot;30.40%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Roman Yereniuk7,931&quot;21.13%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Dave Vust2,959&quot;7.88%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Paul Sidon110&quot;0.29%&quot;
|Cynthia Cooke (CAP)208 &quot;0.55%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Rey Pagtakhan
|
|Georgina Rhéaume (Green)232 &quot;0.62%&quot;
|
|Eric Truijen (NA)126 &quot;0.34%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Winnipeg South
|Reg Alcock21,433&quot;50.94%&quot;
|Bill Hancock12,638&quot;30.04%&quot;
|Duane Nicol4,224&quot;10.04%&quot;
|Geoffrey Lambert3,599&quot;8.55%&quot;
|
|Didz Zuzens (Ind.)183&quot;0.43%&quot;
|Reg Alcock
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Winnipeg South Centre
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Anita Neville15,231&quot;40.46%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Betty Granger3,210&quot;8.53%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |James Allum7,501&quot;19.93%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Newman10,675&quot;28.36%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Allison181&quot;0.48%&quot;
|Chris Buors (Mar.)640 &quot;1.70%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Lloyd Axworthy†
|
|Magnus Thompson (CAP)202 &quot;0.54%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Winnipeg—Transcona
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bret Dobbin6,041&quot;18.43%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Shawn Rattai8,336&quot;25.44%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bill Blaikie15,680&quot;47.85%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Chris Brewer2,133&quot;6.51%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |James Hogaboam87&quot;0.27%&quot;
|Theresa Ducharme (Ind.)118 &quot;0.36%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bill Blaikie
|
|C. David Nickarz (Green)229 &quot;0.70%&quot;
|
|Robert Scott (NA)146 &quot;0.45%&quot;

==Saskatchewan==

===Southern Saskatchewan===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Cypress Hills—Grasslands
|Marlin Bryce Belt3,791&quot;12.57%&quot;
|David Anderson18,593&quot;61.65%&quot;
|Keith Murch5,101&quot;16.91%&quot;
|William Caton2,676&quot;8.87%&quot;
|
|Lee Morrison†
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Palliser
|Garry Johnson6,492&quot;20.41%&quot;
|Don Findlay11,927&quot;37.50%&quot;
|Dick Proctor12,136&quot;38.16%&quot;
|Brent Shirkey1,248&quot;3.92%&quot;
|
|Dick Proctor
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Regina—Lumsden—Lake Centre
|Hem Juttla4,296&quot;14.66%&quot;
|Larry Spencer12,585&quot;42.94%&quot;
|John Solomon12,424&quot;42.40%&quot;
|
|
|John Solomon
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Regina—Qu&#x27;Appelle
|Melvin Isnana5,106&quot;17.98%&quot;
|Don Leier11,567&quot;40.72%&quot;
|Lorne Nystrom11,731&quot;41.30%&quot;
|
|
|Lorne Nystrom
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Souris—Moose Mountain
|Myles Fuchs4,371&quot;14.35%&quot;
|Roy H. Bailey19,278&quot;63.28%&quot;
|Tom Cameron4,755&quot;15.61%&quot;
|Larry Gabruch2,060&quot;6.76%&quot;
|
|Roy Bailey
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Wascana
|Ralph Goodale14,24441.19%
|James Rybchuk12,49236.12%
|Garth Ormiston7,44621.53%
|
|Wayne Gilmer4011.16%
|Ralph Goodale
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Yorkton—Melville
|Ken Pilon5,153&quot;16.24%&quot;
|Garry Breitkreuz19,978&quot;62.98%&quot;
||Peter Champagne5,007&quot;15.78%&quot;
||Brent Haas1,583&quot;4.99%&quot;
|
|Garry Breitkreuz

===Northern Saskatchewan===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Battlefords—Lloydminster
|Peter Frey5,098&quot;17.36%&quot;
|Gerry Ritz17,691&quot;60.23%&quot;
|Elgin Wayne Wyatt5,107&quot;17.39%&quot;
|Harry Zamonsky1,474&quot;5.02%&quot;
|
|
|Gerry Ritz
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Blackstrap
||J. Wayne Zimmer8,206&quot;22.65%&quot;
|Lynne Yelich16,028&quot;44.24%&quot;
|Noreen Johns9,551&quot;26.36%&quot;
|Tim Stephenson1,926&quot;5.32%&quot;
|Neil Sinclair519&quot;1.43%&quot;
|
|Allan Kerpan†
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Churchill River
|Rick Laliberte9,856&quot;41.81%&quot;
|Kerry Peterson7,679&quot;32.57%&quot;
|Ray Funk5,141&quot;21.81%&quot;
|David J. Rogers755&quot;3.20%&quot;
|
|Brendan Cross143&quot;0.61%&quot;
|Rick Laliberte
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Prince Albert
|Tim Longworth6,754&quot;20.77%&quot;
|Brian Fitzpatrick14,825&quot;45.59%&quot;
|Dennis J. Nowoselsky6,676&quot;20.53%&quot;
|David Orchard3,943&quot;12.13%&quot;
|Benjamin Webster317&quot;0.97%&quot;
|
|Derrek Konrad§
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saskatoon—Humboldt
|Morris Bodnar7,740&quot;21.72%&quot;
|Jim Pankiw15,780&quot;44.28%&quot;
|Armand Roy9,420&quot;26.43%&quot;
|Lori K. Isinger1,963&quot;5.51%&quot;
|Jason Hanson488&quot;1.37%&quot;
|Michelle Luciuk245&quot;0.69%&quot;
|Jim Pankiw
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saskatoon—Rosetown—Biggar
|Alice Farness3,023&quot;11.27%&quot;
|Carol Skelton11,177&quot;41.66%&quot;
|Dennis Gruending11,109&quot;41.41%&quot;
|Dale W. Buxton1,518&quot;5.66%&quot;
|
|
|Dennis Gruending
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saskatoon—Wanuskewin
|Bill Patrick5,567&quot;16.82%&quot;
|Maurice Vellacott17,404&quot;52.57%&quot;
|Hugh Walker8,022&quot;24.23%&quot;
|Kirk Eggum1,709&quot;5.16%&quot;
|David Greenfield402&quot;1.21%&quot;
|
|Maurice Vellacott

==Alberta==

===Rural Alberta===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Athabasca
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Harold Cardinal9,793&quot;28.40%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dave Chatters18,775&quot;54.46%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Alysia Erickson872&quot;2.53%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Doug Faulkner4,224&quot;12.25%&quot;
|Reginald Normore (Mar.)469 &quot;1.36%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David Chatters
|
|Harvey Alex Scott (Green)345 &quot;1.00%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Crowfoot
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Orest Werezak2,964&quot;6.19%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Kevin Sorenson33,767&quot;70.56%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jay Russell1,457&quot;3.04%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Verlyn Olson6,778&quot;14.16%&quot;
|Jack Ramsay (NA)2,668 &quot;5.57%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jack Ramsay
|
|Valerie Morrow (NA)223 &quot;0.47%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Elk Island
|Paul Bokowski9,289&quot;17.69%&quot;
|Ken Epp33,730&quot;64.23%&quot;
|Chris Harwood3,316&quot;6.31%&quot;
|Rod Scarlett6,178&quot;11.76%&quot;
|
|Ken Epp
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Lakeland
|Wayne Kowalski9,050&quot;20.18%&quot;
|Leon Benoit29,348&quot;65.45%&quot;
|Raymond Stone2,069&quot;4.61%&quot;
|Paul Pelletier4,373&quot;9.75%&quot;
|
|Leon Benoit
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Lethbridge
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Vaughan Hartigan7,797&quot;16.94%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rick Casson30,380&quot;66.02%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Garth Hardy2,648&quot;5.75%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Kimberly Denise Budd4,062&quot;8.83%&quot;
|Don C. Ferguson (Green)864 &quot;1.88%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rick Casson
|
|Dan Lamden (CAP)264 &quot;0.57%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Macleod
|Marlene LaMontagne4,137&quot;9.41%&quot;
|Grant Hill30,783&quot;70.05%&quot;
|Dwayne Good Striker2,945&quot;6.70%&quot;
|Cyril R. Abbott6,079&quot;13.83%&quot;
|
|Grant Hill
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Medicine Hat
|Trevor Butts4,392&quot;10.48%&quot;
|Monte Solberg31,134&quot;74.28%&quot;
|Luke Lacasse2,153&quot;5.14%&quot;
|Gordon Musgrove4,236&quot;10.11%&quot;
|
|Monte Solberg
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Peace River
|Kim Ksenia Fenton6,495&quot;15.49%&quot;
|Charlie Penson27,508&quot;65.59%&quot;
|Patricia Lawrence2,914&quot;6.95%&quot;
|Milton Hommy5,021&quot;11.97%&quot;
|
|Charlie Penson
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Red Deer
|Walter Kubanek6,522&quot;12.82%&quot;
|Bob Mills36,940&quot;72.61%&quot;
|Linda Roth2,346&quot;4.61%&quot;
|Doug Wagstaff5,064&quot;9.95%&quot;
|
|Bob Mills
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Wetaskiwin
|John Jackie8,318&quot;17.17%&quot;
|Dale Johnston33,675&quot;69.50%&quot;
|Cliff Reid2,045&quot;4.22%&quot;
|Kenneth R. Sockett4,413&quot;9.11%&quot;
|
|Dale Johnston
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Wild Rose
|Bryan E. Mahoney6,334&quot;11.09%&quot;
|Myron Thompson40,193&quot;70.36%&quot;
|Anne Wilson2,320&quot;4.06%&quot;
|Truper McBride7,370&quot;12.90%&quot;
|Garnet T. Hammer (Ind.)908&quot;1.59%&quot;
|Myron Thompson
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Yellowhead
|John Higgerty6,348&quot;15.64%&quot;
|Rob Merrifield26,824&quot;66.08%&quot;
|J. Noel Lapierre1,910&quot;4.71%&quot;
|Dale F. Galbraith5,141&quot;12.66%&quot;
|Jacob Strydhorst (NA)371&quot;0.91%&quot;
|Cliff Breitkreuz†

===Edmonton and environs===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Edmonton Centre-East
|Sue Olsen14,323&quot;34.21%&quot;
|Peter Goldring17,768&quot;42.44%&quot;
|Ray Martin7,304&quot;17.44%&quot;
|Kevin Mahfouz2,252&quot;5.38%&quot;
|Naomi Rankin (Comm.)222&quot;0.53%&quot;
|Peter Goldring
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Edmonton North
|Jim Jacuta14,786&quot;34.33%&quot;
|Deborah Grey22,063&quot;51.22%&quot;
|Laurie Lang3,216&quot;7.47%&quot;
|Dean Sanduga3,010&quot;6.99%&quot;
|
|Deborah Grey
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Edmonton Southeast
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |David Kilgour21,109&quot;50.87%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Tim Uppal16,392&quot;39.51%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Joginder Kandola1,285&quot;3.10%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Allan Ryan2,269&quot;5.47%&quot;
|Matthew James (Comm.)97 &quot;0.23%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |David Kilgour
|
|Michael Sekuloff (CAP)154 &quot;0.37%&quot;
|
|Richard Shelford (NLP)187 &quot;0.45%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Edmonton Southwest
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Chiu Lau18,223&quot;33.98%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |James Rajotte26,197&quot;48.85%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bernie Keeler2,746&quot;5.12%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joseph Fernando5,803&quot;10.82%&quot;
|Wade McKinley (NLP)195 &quot;0.36%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ian McClelland†
|
|Jerry Paschen (Green)462 &quot;0.86%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Edmonton—Strathcona
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jonathan Dai17,816&quot;31.89%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Rahim Jaffer23,463&quot;42.00%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Hélène Narayana8,256&quot;14.78%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Gregory Toogood5,047&quot;9.04%&quot;
|Kevan Hunter (M-L)164 &quot;0.29%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Rahim Jaffer
|
|Ken Kirk (Mar.)814 &quot;1.46%&quot;
|
|Kesa Rose Semenchuk (CAP)299 &quot;0.54%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Edmonton West
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Anne McLellan21,978&quot;44.24%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Betty Unger21,245&quot;42.77%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Richard D. Vanderberg2,895&quot;5.83%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rory J. Koopmans3,009&quot;6.06%&quot;
|Peggy Morton (M-L)194 &quot;0.39%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Anne McLellan
|
|Dan Parker (CAP)354 &quot;0.71%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |St. Albert
|Bob Russell13,637&quot;24.78%&quot;
|John Williams32,745&quot;59.50%&quot;
|John Williams2,965&quot;5.39%&quot;
|Andy Jones5,687&quot;10.33%&quot;
|
|John Williams

===Calgary===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Calgary Centre
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joanne Levy5,630&quot;9.84%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Eric Lowther22,054&quot;38.53%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Don LePan1,604&quot;2.80%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joe Clark26,358&quot;46.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Michael Alvarez-Toye1,170&quot;2.04%&quot;
|Margaret Peggy Askin (M-L)133 &quot;0.23%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Eric Lowther
|
|Beverley Smith (Ind.)293 &quot;0.51%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Calgary East
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Doug Perras6,843&quot;20.47%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Deepak Obhrai18,141&quot;54.26%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Kaie Jones1,444&quot;4.32%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Roger Richard5,510&quot;16.48%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |
|Jason Devine (Comm.)152 &quot;0.45%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Deepak Obhrai
|
|Grant Adam Krieger (Mar.)1,222 &quot;3.65%&quot;
|
|Neeraj Varma (NLP)124 &quot;0.37%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Calgary Northeast
|Sam Keshavjee9,841&quot;21.79%&quot;
|Art Hanger28,242&quot;62.54%&quot;
|H. Ken Sahil1,852&quot;4.10%&quot;
|Jerry Vague5,222&quot;11.56%&quot;
|
|
|Art Hanger
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Calgary—Nose Hill
|Brian Thiessen11,602&quot;19.43%&quot;
|Diane Ablonczy35,904&quot;60.13%&quot;
|Jon Adams2,227&quot;3.73%&quot;
|James F. McArdle8,696&quot;14.56%&quot;
|Andrew Pickles1,092&quot;1.83%&quot;
|Maureen Ann Roberts (CAP)194&quot;0.32%&quot;
|Diane Ablonczy
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Calgary Southeast
|Dana Peace6,646&quot;12.19%&quot;
|Jason Kenney34,492&quot;63.25%&quot;
|Giorgio Cattabeni1,111&quot;2.04%&quot;
|Ray Clark11,353&quot;20.82%&quot;
|James Stephen Kohut931&quot;1.71%&quot;
|
|Jason Kenney
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Calgary Southwest
|Barry J. Rust7,954&quot;14.93%&quot;
|Preston Manning34,529&quot;64.81%&quot;
|Jennifer Stewart2,113&quot;3.97%&quot;
|Paul Monaghan8,679&quot;16.29%&quot;
|
|
|Preston Manning
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Calgary West
|Frank Bruseker11,181&quot;18.19%&quot;
|Rob Anders33,222&quot;54.05%&quot;
|Greg Klassen2,350&quot;3.82%&quot;
|Jim Silye13,259&quot;21.57%&quot;
|Evan Osenton1,456&quot;2.37%&quot;
|
|Rob Anders

==British Columbia==

===BC Interior===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Cariboo—Chilcotin
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John McCarvill6,555&quot;20.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Philip Mayfield19,213&quot;59.63%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Raymond John Skelly2,915&quot;9.05%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Pamela J. Culbert2,822&quot;8.76%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Al Charlebois (M-L)124 &quot;0.38%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Philip Mayfield
|
|William Turkel (Ind.)591 &quot;1.83%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kamloops, Thompson and Highland Valleys
|Jon Moser7,582&quot;15.63%&quot;
|Betty Hinton23,577&quot;48.59%&quot;
|Nelson Riis13,600&quot;28.03%&quot;
|Randy Patch3,217&quot;6.63%&quot;
|
|Ernie Schmidt (CAP)544&quot;1.12%&quot;
|Nelson Riis
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kelowna
|Joe Leask13,564&quot;23.86%&quot;
|Werner Schmidt33,810&quot;59.47%&quot;
|John O. Powell3,572&quot;6.28%&quot;
|Doug Mallo4,708&quot;8.28%&quot;
|
|Jack W. Peach (CAP)1,199&quot;2.11%&quot;
|Werner Schmidt
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kootenay—Boundary—Okanagan
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Bill Barlee11,357&quot;27.36%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jim Gouk19,386&quot;46.70%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Don Scarlett4,091&quot;9.85%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Michele Elise Duncan2,147&quot;5.17%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Andrew Shadrack2,689&quot;6.48%&quot;
|Bev Collins (CAP)762 &quot;1.84%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jim Gouk
|
|Annie Holtby (NLP)191 &quot;0.46%&quot;
|
|Dan Loehndorf (Mar.)889 &quot;2.14%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Kootenay—Columbia
|Delvin R. Chatterson5,581&quot;14.74%&quot;
|Jim Abbott25,663&quot;67.78%&quot;
|Andrea Dunlop3,297&quot;8.71%&quot;
|Jerry Pirie2,165&quot;5.72%&quot;
|Jubilee Rose Cacaci1,158&quot;3.06%&quot;
|
|Jim Abbott
|rowspan=5 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Okanagan—Coquihalla
|rowspan=5 |
|rowspan=5 |Tom Chapman9,923&quot;20.46%&quot;
|rowspan=5 |
|rowspan=5 |Stockwell Day28,794&quot;59.37%&quot;
|rowspan=5 |
|rowspan=5 |Ken Ellis4,096&quot;8.45%&quot;
|rowspan=5 |
|rowspan=5 |Gordon John Seiter2,939&quot;6.06%&quot;
|rowspan=5 |
|rowspan=5 |Harry Naegel1,110&quot;2.29%&quot;
|Clay Harmon (NA)95 &quot;0.20%&quot;
|rowspan=5 |
|rowspan=5 |Stockwell Day
|
|Elizabeth Innes (NLP)167 &quot;0.34%&quot;
|
|Dorothy-Jean O&#x27;Donnell (M-L)99 &quot;0.20%&quot;
|
|Larry Taylor (CAP)461 &quot;0.95%&quot;
|
|Teresa Taylor (Mar.)818 &quot;1.69%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Okanagan—Shuswap
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Marvin Friesen9,855&quot;20.59%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Darrel Stinson29,345&quot;61.30%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Wayne Alexander Fowler4,060&quot;8.48%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Sheila Marguerite Wardman3,096&quot;6.47%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |
|K. No Daniels (NA)447 &quot;0.93%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Darrel Stinson
|
|Vera Gottlieb (CAP)724 &quot;1.51%&quot;
|
|David Lethbridge (Comm.)347 &quot;0.72%&quot;
|rowspan=3 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Prince George—Bulkley Valley
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Jeannette Townsend8,202&quot;23.43%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Dick Harris20,596&quot;58.84%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Mark Walsh2,029&quot;5.80%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Oliver William Ray2,448&quot;6.99%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |John Grogan793&quot;2.27%&quot;
|David MacKay (M-L)84 &quot;0.24%&quot;
|rowspan=3 |
|rowspan=3 |Dick Harris
|
|John Van der Woude (NA)152 &quot;0.43%&quot;
|
|Suzanne Woodrow (CAP)701 &quot;2.00%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Prince George—Peace River
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Arleene Thorpe5,319&quot;15.53%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jay Hill23,840&quot;69.62%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Lenart Nelson1,597&quot;4.66%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jan Christiansen2,103&quot;6.14%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Hilary Crowley744&quot;2.17%&quot;
|Henry A. Dunbar (CAP)562 &quot;1.64%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jay Hill
|
|Colby Nicholson (M-L)80 &quot;0.23%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Skeena
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Rhoda Witherly8,714&quot;29.12%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Andy Burton12,787&quot;42.73%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Larry Guno6,273&quot;20.96%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Devin Lee Glowinski965&quot;3.22%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Roger Colin Benham688&quot;2.30%&quot;
|Cliff Brown (NLP)140 &quot;0.47%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mike Scott†
|
|George Joseph (NA)361 &quot;1.21%&quot;

===Fraser Valley and Southern Lower Mainland===
|-
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Delta—South Richmond
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jim Doswell15,858&quot;29.16%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John M. Cummins30,882&quot;56.79%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ernie Fulton3,060&quot;5.63%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Curtis MacDonald3,838&quot;7.06%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Frank Wagner (NA)225 &quot;0.41%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Cummins
|
|Allan Warnke (CAP)517 &quot;0.95%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Dewdney—Alouette
|Jatinder Sidhu8,717&quot;18.07%&quot;
|Grant McNally28,181&quot;58.42%&quot;
|Malcolm James Crockett5,535&quot;11.47%&quot;
|Gord Kehler5,804&quot;12.03%&quot;
|
|
|Grant McNally
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Fraser Valley
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Hal H. Singleton8,965&quot;16.29%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Chuck Strahl38,509&quot;69.97%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Rob Lees3,185&quot;5.79%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Rocky Nenka2,330&quot;4.23%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Carol Battaglio528&quot;0.96%&quot;
|Debbie Anderson (CAP)425 &quot;0.77%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Chuck Strahl
|
|Chris Bolster (Comm.)69 &quot;0.13%&quot;
|
|Norm Siefken (Mar.)811 &quot;1.47%&quot;
|
|Ed Van Woudenberg (NA)212 &quot;0.39%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Langley—Abbotsford
|Steve Ferguson9,554&quot;17.26%&quot;
|Randy White38,810&quot;70.11%&quot;
|Paul Latham2,353&quot;4.25%&quot;
|Bev Braaten4,218&quot;7.62%&quot;
|
|Harold John Ludwig (NA)420&quot;0.76%&quot;
|Randy White
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Richmond
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Raymond Chan19,940&quot;42.04%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joe Peschisolido21,064&quot;44.41%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gail Paquette2,695&quot;5.68%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Frank Peter Tofin2,578&quot;5.44%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Kevan Hudson897&quot;1.89%&quot;
|Kathy McClement (NLP)164 &quot;0.35%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Raymond Chan
|
|Edith Petersen (M-L)93 &quot;0.20%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |South Surrey—White Rock—Langley
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bill Brooks10,200&quot;21.26%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Val Meredith28,762&quot;59.95%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Matt Todd2,718&quot;5.66%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Alistair Johnston4,796&quot;10.00%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Steve Chitty844&quot;1.76%&quot;
|Mavis Louise Becker (Mar.)559 &quot;1.17%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Val Meredith
|
|Daphne Quance (NLP)100 &quot;0.21%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Surrey Central
|Peter Warkentin19,513&quot;33.78%&quot;
|Gurmant Grewal29,812&quot;51.61%&quot;
|Dan Goy3,211&quot;5.56%&quot;
|Dan Baxter3,940&quot;6.82%&quot;
|David Walters1,175&quot;2.03%&quot;
|Harjit Daudharia (Comm.)114&quot;0.20%&quot;
|Gurmant Grewal
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Surrey North
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Shinder Purewal10,279&quot;28.87%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Chuck Cadman19,973&quot;56.10%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Art Hildebrant2,619&quot;7.36%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dareck Faichuk1,714&quot;4.81%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Brian Lutes556&quot;1.56%&quot;
|Tyler Campbell (Comm.)174 &quot;0.49%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Chuck Cadman
|
|Gerhard Herwig (NA)285 &quot;0.80%&quot;

===Vancouver and Northern Lower Mainland===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Burnaby—Douglas
|Francesca Zumpano10,774&quot;23.67%&quot;
|Alan McDonnell15,057&quot;33.08%&quot;
|Svend Robinson17,018&quot;37.39%&quot;
|Kenneth Edgar King2,477&quot;5.44%&quot;
|
|
|Roger Perkins (Comm.)189&quot;0.42%&quot;
|Svend Robinson
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |New Westminster—Coquitlam—Burnaby
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Lee Rankin14,579&quot;30.97%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Forseth20,698&quot;43.97%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Lorrie Williams7,076&quot;15.03%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Mike Redmond3,492&quot;7.42%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |François C. Nantel1,028&quot;2.18%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Hanne Gidora (Comm.)109 &quot;0.23%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Paul Forseth
|
|Brian Sproule (M-L)93 &quot;0.20%&quot;
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |North Vancouver
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Bill Bell18,343&quot;32.77%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Ted White27,920&quot;49.88%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Sam Schechter2,760&quot;4.93%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Laurence Putnam3,975&quot;7.10%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Diana Jewell877&quot;1.57%&quot;
|Tunya Audain (Mar.)1,008 &quot;1.80%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Ted White
|
|Dallas Collis (Ind.)760 &quot;1.36%&quot;
|
|Rusty Corben (Ind.)253 &quot;0.45%&quot;
|
|Michael Hill (M-L)80 &quot;0.14%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Port Moody—Coquitlam—Port Coquitlam
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Lou Sekora16,937&quot;29.39%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |James Moore28,631&quot;49.69%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Jamie Arden5,340&quot;9.27%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Joe Gluska4,506&quot;7.82%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Dave King839&quot;1.46%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Will Arlow452&quot;0.78%&quot;
|Paul Geddes (Mar.)818 &quot;1.42%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sharon Hayes†
|
|George Gidora (Comm.)98 &quot;0.17%&quot;
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Vancouver Centre
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Hedy Fry24,553&quot;42.30%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |John Mortimer15,176&quot;26.15%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Scott Robertson6,993&quot;12.05%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Lee Johnson6,828&quot;11.76%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Jamie-Lee Hamilton2,285&quot;3.94%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Jeff Jewell742&quot;1.28%&quot;
|Kimball Cariou (Comm.)99 &quot;0.17%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Hedy Madeleine Fry
|
|Marc Emery (Mar.)1,116 &quot;1.92%&quot;
|
|Valerie Laporte (NLP)177 &quot;0.30%&quot;
|
|Joseph Theriault (M-L)75 &quot;0.13%&quot;
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Vancouver East
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Mason Loh13,421&quot;33.74%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Sal Vetro5,536&quot;13.92%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Libby Davies16,818&quot;42.28%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Michael Walsh1,439&quot;3.62%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Kelly Elizabeth White975&quot;2.45%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Brian Bacon432&quot;1.09%&quot;
|Edna Mathilda Brass (NA)196 &quot;0.49%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Libby Davies
|
|Rosemary Galte (NLP)97 &quot;0.24%&quot;
|
|Gloria Anne Kieler (NA)143 &quot;0.36%&quot;
|
|David Malmo-Levine (Mar.)724 &quot;1.82%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Vancouver Kingsway
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sophia Leung16,118&quot;43.07%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Alice Wong11,076&quot;29.60%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Victor Wong5,921&quot;15.82%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Kanman Wong1,803&quot;4.82%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Phillip Petrik1,009&quot;2.70%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Connie Fogal1,200&quot;3.21%&quot;
|Elwyn Patterson (Comm.)168 &quot;0.45%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Sophia Leung
|
|Donna Petersen (M-L)126 &quot;0.34%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Vancouver Quadra
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Stephen Owen22,253&quot;44.84%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Kerry-Lynne Findlay18,613&quot;37.50%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Loretta Woodcock2,595&quot;5.23%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bill Clarke4,112&quot;8.28%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Doug Warkentin1,434&quot;2.89%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Chris Shaw390&quot;0.79%&quot;
|Steven Beck (NLP)126 &quot;0.25%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Ted McWhinney†
|
|Anne Jamieson (M-L)109 &quot;0.22%&quot;
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Vancouver South—Burnaby
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Herb Dhaliwal17,705&quot;42.69%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Ron Jack15,384&quot;37.09%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Herschel Hardin3,848&quot;9.27%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Dan Tidball2,649&quot;6.38%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Imtiaz Popat646&quot;1.55%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Adam Sealey430&quot;1.03%&quot;
|Charles Boylan (M-L)101&quot;0.24%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Herb Dhaliwal
|
|Michelle Jasmine Chang (Ind.)465&quot;1.12%&quot;
|
|Derrick O&#x27;Keefe (Ind.)158&quot;1.03%&quot;
|
|Prince Pabbies (NLP)81&quot;0.19%&quot;
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |West Vancouver—Sunshine Coast
|Ian McKay14,169&quot;26.60%&quot;
|John Reynolds25,546&quot;47.97%&quot;
|Telis Savvaidis3,351&quot;6.29%&quot;
|Kate Manvell4,993&quot;9.38%&quot;
|Jane Bishop2,605&quot;4.89%&quot;
|Marc Bombois976&quot;1.83%&quot;
|Dana Larsen (Mar.)1,618&quot;3.04%&quot;
|John Reynolds

===Vancouver Island===
|-
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca
|Alan Thompson11,536&quot;23.92%&quot;
|Keith Martin23,982&quot;49.73%&quot;
|Carol E. Harris6,468&quot;13.41%&quot;
|John Vukovic3,857&quot;8.00%&quot;
|Casey Brennan2,056&quot;4.26%&quot;
|Paul E. Tessier324&quot;0.67%&quot;
|
|Keith Martin
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Nanaimo—Alberni
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Hira Chopra10,877&quot;20.70%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |James D. Lunney26,516&quot;50.45%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bill Holdom7,635&quot;14.53%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bill McCullough5,340&quot;10.16%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marty Howe235&quot;0.45%&quot;
|Brunie Brunie (Ind.)830 &quot;1.58%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Bill Gilmour†
|
|Donald Lavallee (Mar.)1,125 &quot;2.14%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Nanaimo—Cowichan
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Marshall Cooper&quot;10,85721.42%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Reed Elley&quot;23,64146.63%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Garth Mirau&quot;8,59916.96%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Cynthia-Mary Hemsworth&quot;3,6407.18%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Norm Abbey&quot;1,1962.36%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |
|Doug Catley (CAP)&quot;1,500 2.96%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Reed Elley
|
|Meaghan Walker-Williams (Mar.)&quot;1,262 2.49%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Saanich—Gulf Islands
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Karen Knott19,002&quot;32.30%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gary Lunn25,392&quot;43.16%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Pat O&#x27;Neill4,721&quot;8.02%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Don Page6,049&quot;10.28%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Wally Du Temple3,243&quot;5.51%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Kathleen Lapeyrouse217&quot;0.37%&quot;
|Dan Moreau (NA)123 &quot;0.21%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Gary Lunn
|
|Charley Stimac (Comm.)88 &quot;0.15%&quot;
|rowspan=2 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Vancouver Island North
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Daniel P. Smith12,092&quot;24.84%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Duncan24,844&quot;51.04%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Alex Turner5,701&quot;11.71%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |David R. Tingley2,997&quot;6.16%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Pam Munroe2,532&quot;5.20%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |Nancy More205&quot;0.42%&quot;
|Jack East (M-L)92 &quot;0.19%&quot;
|rowspan=2 |
|rowspan=2 |John Duncan
|
|John Krell (NA)216 &quot;0.44%&quot;
|rowspan=4 style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Victoria
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |David Anderson23,730&quot;42.65%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Bruce Hallsor16,502&quot;29.66%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |David Turner7,243&quot;13.02%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Brian Burchill3,629&quot;6.52%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Joan Elizabeth Russow3,264&quot;5.87%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |Cal Danyluk138&quot;0.25%&quot;
|Chuck Beyer (Mar.)863 &quot;1.55%&quot;
|rowspan=4 |
|rowspan=4 |David Anderson
|
|Lorenzo A. Bouchard (Ind.)101 &quot;0.18%&quot;
|
|Mary Moreau (NA)75 &quot;0.13%&quot;
|
|Scott Rushton (Comm.)92 &quot;0.17%&quot;

==Nunavut==
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Nunavut
|Nancy Karetak-Lindell5,327&quot;69.01%&quot;
|Palluq Susan Enuaraq1,410&quot;18.27%&quot;
|Mike Sherman633&quot;8.20%&quot;
|Brian Robert Jones349&quot;4.52%&quot;
|Nancy Karetak-Lindell

==Northwest Territories==
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Western Arctic
|Ethel Blondin-Andrew5,855&quot;45.60%&quot;
|Fred Turner2,273&quot;17.70%&quot;
|Dennis Bevington3,430&quot;26.71%&quot;
|Bruce McLaughlin1,282&quot;9.98%&quot;
|Ethel Blondin-Andrew

==Yukon==
| style=&quot;background-color:whitesmoke&quot; |Yukon
|Larry Bagnell4,293&quot;32.48%&quot;
|Jim Kenyon3,659&quot;27.68%&quot;
|Louise Hardy4,223&quot;31.95%&quot;
|Don Cox991&quot;7.50%&quot;
|Geoffrey Capp53&quot;0.40%&quot;
|Larry Bagnell

==Notes==

==References==
*Elections Canada - Official Results of 37th General Election</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108502471" start="31" end="71" title="Results of the 2000 Canadian federal election by riding" label="candidates in the 2000 Canadian election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355905" start="118" end="148" title="2000 Canadian federal election" label="2000 Canadian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="187" end="224" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="231" end="245" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366143" start="253" end="274" title="Canadian Action Party" label="Canadian Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160378" start="284" end="309" title="Communist Party of Canada" label="Communist Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q691730" start="319" end="340" title="Green Party of Canada" label="Green Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="349" end="360" title="Independent politician#Canada" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="372" end="395" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q512498" start="404" end="419" title="Marijuana Party (Canada)" label="Marijuana Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344321" start="427" end="459" title="Communist Party of Canada (Marxist-Leninist)" label="Marxist-Leninist Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q491782" start="477" end="494" title="Natural Law Party" label="Natural Law Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="502" end="522" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="529" end="569" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909953" start="997" end="1025" title="Bonavista—Trinity—Conception" label="Bonavista—Trinity—Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q668542" start="1027" end="1038" title="Brian Tobin" label="Brian Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737984" start="1141" end="1151" title="Jim Morgan (Canadian politician)" label="Jim Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495939" start="1179" end="1191" title="Fred Mifflin" label="Fred Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928483" start="1242" end="1265" title="Burin—St. George&amp;#x27;s" label="Burin—St. George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903295" start="1267" end="1280" title="Bill Matthews" label="Bill Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173965" start="1306" end="1319" title="Peter Fenwick (politician)" label="Peter Fenwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095085" start="1518" end="1536" title="Gander—Grand Falls" label="Gander—Grand Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536629" start="1538" end="1550" title="George Baker (Canadian politician)" label="George Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143222" start="1754" end="1781" title="Humber—St. Barbe—Baie Verte" label="Humber—St. Barbe—Baie Verte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104325" start="1783" end="1794" title="Gerry Byrne (politician)" label="Gerry Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839455" start="1856" end="1869" title="Trevor Taylor (politician)" label="Trevor Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214536" start="1998" end="2006" title="Labrador (electoral district)" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504422" start="2008" end="2029" title="Lawrence D. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495268" start="2248" end="2268" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s East (federal electoral district)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343768" start="2480" end="2495" title="Norman Doyle" label="Norman E. Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495266" start="2691" end="2711" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s West (federal electoral district)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115478" start="2713" end="2724" title="Chuck Furey" label="Chuck Furey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264447" start="2819" end="2831" title="Loyola Hearn" label="Loyola Hearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938039" start="2990" end="2998" title="Cardigan (electoral district)" label="Cardigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219913" start="3000" end="3017" title="Lawrence MacAulay" label="Lawrence MacAulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396821" start="3120" end="3133" title="Kevin MacAdam" label="Kevin MacAdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049209" start="3227" end="3233" title="Egmont (electoral district)" label="Egmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q591236" start="3235" end="3246" title="Joe McGuire" label="Joe McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961057" start="3452" end="3464" title="Hillsborough (electoral district)" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481629" start="3490" end="3502" title="Shawn Murphy (politician)" label="Shawn Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243845" start="3612" end="3622" title="Dody Crane" label="Dody Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543559" start="3777" end="3789" title="George Proud" label="George Proud"/>
<link wikidata="Q513772" start="3881" end="3889" title="Malpeque (electoral district)" label="Malpeque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566825" start="3891" end="3903" title="Wayne Easter" label="Wayne Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937241" start="4155" end="4181" title="Bras d&amp;#x27;Or—Cape Breton" label="Bras d&amp;#x27;Or—Cape Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438181" start="4183" end="4196" title="Rodger Cuzner" label="Rodger Cuzner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836998" start="4260" end="4277" title="Michelle Dockrill" label="Michelle Dockrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721926" start="4302" end="4315" title="Alfie MacLeod" label="Alfie MacLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007524" start="4409" end="4430" title="Cumberland—Colchester" label="Cumberland—Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271668" start="4432" end="4447" title="Dianne Brushett" label="Dianne Brushett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903153" start="4554" end="4564" title="Bill Casey" label="Bill Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016601" start="4652" end="4661" title="Dartmouth (electoral district)" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q725023" start="4663" end="4678" title="Bernie Boudreau" label="Bernie Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277479" start="4704" end="4716" title="Jordi Morgan" label="Jordi Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982698" start="4740" end="4750" title="Wendy Lill" label="Wendy Lill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816827" start="4776" end="4787" title="Tom McInnis (Canadian politician)" label="Tom McInnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604650" start="4921" end="4928" title="Halifax (federal electoral district)" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604970" start="5075" end="5090" title="Alexa McDonough" label="Alexa McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125968" start="5413" end="5425" title="Halifax West" label="Halifax West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101057" start="5427" end="5438" title="Geoff Regan" label="Geoff Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585096" start="5501" end="5513" title="Gordon Earle" label="Gordon Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197141" start="5688" end="5699" title="Kings—Hants" label="Kings—Hants"/>
<link wikidata="Q349836" start="5915" end="5927" title="Scott Brison" label="Scott Brison"/>
<link wikidata="Q128574" start="6022" end="6031" title="Joe Clark" label="Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382570" start="6225" end="6254" title="Pictou—Antigonish—Guysborough" label="Pictou—Antigonish—Guysborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q716246" start="6378" end="6393" title="Peter MacKay" label="Peter G. MacKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460955" start="6525" end="6568" title="Sackville—Musquodoboit Valley—Eastern Shore" label="Sackville—Musquodoboit Valley—Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376896" start="6646" end="6659" title="Peter Stoffer" label="Peter Stoffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492274" start="6832" end="6843" title="South Shore (electoral district)" label="South Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262450" start="6845" end="6856" title="Derek Wells" label="Derek Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103893" start="6958" end="6970" title="Gerald Keddy" label="Gerald Keddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506854" start="7060" end="7075" title="Sydney—Victoria" label="Sydney—Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294068" start="7077" end="7088" title="Mark Eyking" label="Mark Eyking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175630" start="7155" end="7168" title="Peter Mancini" label="Peter Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345310" start="7301" end="7310" title="West Nova" label="West Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436396" start="7312" end="7327" title="Robert Thibault" label="Robert Thibault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768961" start="7429" end="7439" title="Mark Muise" label="Mark Muise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822240" start="7549" end="7564" title="Acadie—Bathurst" label="Acadie—Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898674" start="7566" end="7583" title="Bernard Thériault" label="Bernard Thériault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574110" start="7644" end="7654" title="Yvon Godin" label="Yvon Godin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893293" start="7778" end="7800" title="Beausejour—Petitcodiac" label="Beausejour—Petitcodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034854" start="7802" end="7817" title="Dominic LeBlanc" label="Dominic LeBlanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762577" start="7915" end="7929" title="Angela Vautour" label="Angela Vautour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087204" start="8021" end="8032" title="Fredericton (federal electoral district)" label="Fredericton"/>
<link wikidata="Q763987" start="8034" end="8044" title="Andy Scott (politician)" label="Andy Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q267073" start="8289" end="8300" title="Fundy—Royal" label="Fundy—Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434216" start="8337" end="8346" title="Rob Moore (politician)" label="Rob Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239097" start="8406" end="8417" title="John Herron (New Brunswick politician)" label="John Herron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275454" start="8506" end="8527" title="Madawaska—Restigouche" label="Madawaska—Restigouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106581" start="8529" end="8547" title="Jeannot Castonguay" label="Jeannot Castonguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170639" start="8650" end="8662" title="Jean F. Dubé" label="Jean F. Dubé"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000012" start="8752" end="8761" title="Miramichi (electoral district)" label="Miramichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15424278" start="8763" end="8778" title="Charles Hubbard (politician)" label="Charles Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320478" start="8981" end="9005" title="Moncton—Riverview—Dieppe" label="Moncton—Riverview—Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978380" start="9007" end="9025" title="Claudette Bradshaw" label="Claudette Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345015" start="9280" end="9303" title="New Brunswick Southwest" label="New Brunswick Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116362" start="9416" end="9429" title="Greg Thompson" label="Greg Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979314" start="9529" end="9539" title="Saint John (electoral district)" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372441" start="9565" end="9573" title="Paul Zed" label="Paul Zed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051762" start="9743" end="9754" title="Elsie Wayne" label="Elsie Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q614586" start="9996" end="10013" title="Tobique—Mactaquac" label="Tobique—Mactaquac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761285" start="10015" end="10025" title="Andy Savoy" label="Andy Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562030" start="10131" end="10145" title="Gilles Bernier (New Brunswick politician)" label="Gilles Bernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894828" start="10274" end="10318" title="Bellechasse—Etchemins—Montmagny—L&amp;#x27;Islet" label="Bellechasse—Etchemins—Montmagny—L&amp;#x27;Islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085087" start="10320" end="10337" title="François Langlois" label="François Langlois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105813" start="10363" end="10378" title="Gilbert Normand" label="Gilbert Normand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909947" start="10551" end="10595" title="Bonaventure—Gaspé—Îles-de-la-Madeleine—Pabok" label="Bonaventure—Gaspé—Îles-de-la-Madeleine—Pabok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421283" start="10597" end="10610" title="Raynald Blais" label="Raynald Blais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102696" start="10636" end="10650" title="Georges Farrah" label="Georges Farrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573328" start="10751" end="10763" title="Yvan Bernier" label="Yvan Bernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192490" start="10813" end="10863" title="Kamouraska—Rivière-du-Loup—Témiscouata—Les Basques" label="Kamouraska—Rivière-du-Loup—Témiscouata—Les Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370961" start="10865" end="10875" title="Paul Crête" label="Paul Crête"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272017" start="11151" end="11182" title="Lévis-et-Chutes-de-la-Chaudière" label="Lévis-et-Chutes-de-la-Chaudière"/>
<link wikidata="Q783429" start="11184" end="11196" title="Antoine Dubé" label="Antoine Dubé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128505" start="11485" end="11501" title="Matapédia—Matane" label="Matapédia—Matane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170202" start="11503" end="11516" title="Jean-Yves Roy" label="Jean-Yves Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425957" start="11666" end="11677" title="René Canuel" label="René Canuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432130" start="11727" end="11756" title="Rimouski—Neigette-et-La-Mitis" label="Rimouski—Neigette-et-La-Mitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506058" start="11758" end="11774" title="Suzanne Tremblay" label="Suzanne Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322846" start="12097" end="12152" title="Beauport—Montmorency—Côte-de-Beaupré—Île-d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Beauport—Montmorency—Côte-de-Beaupré—Île-d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309849" start="12178" end="12192" title="Michel Guimond" label="Michel Guimond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384606" start="12637" end="12647" title="Charlevoix (federal electoral district)" label="Charlevoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q947426" start="12649" end="12663" title="Gérard Asselin" label="Gérard Asselin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963421" start="12906" end="12925" title="Chicoutimi—Le Fjord" label="Chicoutimi—Le Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847943" start="12966" end="12978" title="André Harvey (MP)" label="André Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183620" start="13195" end="13204" title="Jonquière (federal electoral district)" label="Jonquière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179870" start="13206" end="13228" title="Jocelyne Girard-Bujold" label="Jocelyne Girard-Bujold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214650" start="13448" end="13471" title="Lac-Saint-Jean—Saguenay" label="Lac-Saint-Jean—Saguenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501538" start="13473" end="13489" title="Stéphan Tremblay" label="Stéphan Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285881" start="13769" end="13780" title="Manicouagan (electoral district)" label="Manicouagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104875" start="13782" end="13799" title="Ghislain Fournier" label="Ghislain Fournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437020" start="14057" end="14065" title="Roberval (electoral district)" label="Roberval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309730" start="14067" end="14082" title="Michel Gauthier" label="Michel Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829856" start="14194" end="14207" title="Alain Giguère" label="Alain Giguère"/>
<link wikidata="Q429015" start="14363" end="14391" title="Charlesbourg—Jacques-Cartier" label="Charlesbourg—Jacques-Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431010" start="14393" end="14408" title="Richard Marceau" label="Richard Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16027794" start="14477" end="14493" title="Gérard Latulippe" label="Gérard Latulippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260598" start="14711" end="14723" title="Louis-Hébert (federal electoral district)" label="Louis-Hébert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386693" start="14725" end="14738" title="Hélène Alarie" label="Hélène Alarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144856" start="14764" end="14779" title="Hélène Scherrer" label="Hélène Scherrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414825" start="15033" end="15039" title="Quebec (electoral district)" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965764" start="15065" end="15082" title="Christiane Gagnon" label="Christiane Gagnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310714" start="15207" end="15220" title="Michel Rivard (politician)" label="Michel Rivard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414810" start="15613" end="15624" title="Quebec East" label="Quebec East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3168592" start="15626" end="15644" title="Jean-Paul Marchand" label="Jean-Paul Marchand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166071" start="15670" end="15687" title="Jean-Guy Carignan" label="Jean Guy Carignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886296" start="15927" end="15958" title="Bas-Richelieu—Nicolet—Bécancour" label="Bas-Richelieu—Nicolet—Bécancour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262931" start="15960" end="15975" title="Louis Plamondon" label="Louis Plamondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899326" start="16268" end="16285" title="Berthier—Montcalm" label="Berthier—Montcalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308981" start="16287" end="16305" title="Michel Bellehumeur" label="Michel Bellehumeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955900" start="16600" end="16609" title="Champlain (federal electoral district)" label="Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288964" start="16611" end="16624" title="Marcel Gagnon" label="Marcel Gagnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189174" start="16650" end="16662" title="Julie Boulet" label="Julie Boulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379090" start="16726" end="16740" title="Philip Toone" label="Philippe Toone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455963" start="16806" end="16821" title="Réjean Lefebvre" label="Réjean Lefebvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183138" start="16872" end="16880" title="Joliette (electoral district)" label="Joliette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386508" start="16882" end="16897" title="Pierre Paquette" label="Pierre Paquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426477" start="17116" end="17127" title="René Laurin" label="René Laurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259967" start="17178" end="17202" title="Lotbinière—L&amp;#x27;Érable" label="Lotbinière—L&amp;#x27;Érable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349280" start="17204" end="17220" title="Odina Desrochers" label="Odina Desrochers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170984" start="17364" end="17375" title="Jean Landry (Canadian politician)" label="Jean Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399336" start="17467" end="17475" title="Portneuf (electoral district)" label="Portneuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977334" start="17519" end="17533" title="Claude Duplain" label="Claude Duplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387708" start="17637" end="17653" title="Pierre de Savoye" label="Pierre de Savoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427232" start="17704" end="17714" title="Repentigny (federal electoral district)" label="Repentigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q818132" start="17716" end="17732" title="Benoît Sauvageau" label="Benoît Sauvageau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462963" start="18020" end="18033" title="Saint-Maurice (federal electoral district)" label="Saint-Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q128543" start="18078" end="18091" title="Jean Chrétien" label="Jean Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539914" start="18347" end="18361" title="Trois-Rivières (electoral district)" label="Trois-Rivières"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573938" start="18387" end="18401" title="Yves Rocheleau" label="Yves Rocheleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893126" start="18877" end="18883" title="Beauce (electoral district)" label="Beauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977313" start="18921" end="18934" title="Claude Drouin" label="Claude Drouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926009" start="19170" end="19186" title="Brome—Missisquoi (federal electoral district)" label="Brome—Missisquoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022854" start="19226" end="19239" title="Denis Paradis" label="Denis Paradis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616618" start="19335" end="19350" title="Heward Grafftey" label="Heward Grafftey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990889" start="19440" end="19457" title="Compton—Stanstead" label="Compton—Stanstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q634326" start="19498" end="19509" title="David Price (Canadian politician)" label="David Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040119" start="19750" end="19758" title="Drummond (federal electoral district)" label="Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372756" start="19760" end="19774" title="Pauline Picard" label="Pauline Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088610" start="20017" end="20035" title="Frontenac—Mégantic" label="Frontenac—Mégantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166072" start="20037" end="20054" title="Jean-Guy Chrétien" label="Jean-Guy Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123766" start="20080" end="20092" title="Gérard Binet" label="Gérard Binet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431483" start="20352" end="20371" title="Richmond—Arthabaska" label="Richmond—Arthabaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847252" start="20373" end="20389" title="André Bellavance" label="André Bellavance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847182" start="20534" end="20547" title="André Bachand (Progressive Conservative MP)" label="André Bachand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462434" start="20680" end="20701" title="Saint-Hyacinthe—Bagot" label="Saint-Hyacinthe—Bagot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573373" start="20703" end="20715" title="Yvan Loubier" label="Yvan Loubier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481722" start="20961" end="20969" title="Shefford (federal electoral district)" label="Shefford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026247" start="21010" end="21026" title="Diane St-Jacques" label="Diane St-Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481910" start="21297" end="21307" title="Sherbrooke (federal electoral district)" label="Sherbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479234" start="21333" end="21345" title="Serge Cardin" label="Serge Cardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893177" start="21897" end="21918" title="Beauharnois—Salaberry" label="Beauharnois—Salaberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q669034" start="21920" end="21931" title="Daniel Turp" label="Daniel Turp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479434" start="21957" end="21969" title="Serge Marcil" label="Serge Marcil"/>
<link wikidata="Q576452" start="22176" end="22195" title="Brossard—La Prairie" label="Brossard—La Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029840" start="22221" end="22237" title="Nicolas Tétrault" label="Nicolas Tétrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159947" start="22287" end="22300" title="Jacques Saada" label="Jacques Saada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430603" start="22350" end="22365" title="Richard Bélisle" label="Richard Bélisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948104" start="22696" end="22703" title="Chambly (electoral district)" label="Chambly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104884" start="22705" end="22719" title="Ghislain Lebel" label="Ghislain Lebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2971890" start="23014" end="23025" title="Châteauguay (federal electoral district)" label="Châteauguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435655" start="23027" end="23041" title="Robert Lanctôt" label="Robert Lanctôt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300854" start="23262" end="23275" title="Maurice Godin" label="Maurice Godin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027519" start="23335" end="23344" title="Longueuil (electoral district)" label="Longueuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940060" start="23370" end="23389" title="Caroline St-Hilaire" label="Caroline St-Hilaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461929" start="23842" end="23866" title="Saint-Bruno—Saint-Hubert" label="Saint-Bruno—Saint-Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387910" start="23868" end="23883" title="Pierrette Venne" label="Pierrette Venne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462577" start="24168" end="24178" title="Saint-Jean (federal electoral district)" label="Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976931" start="24180" end="24194" title="Claude Bachand" label="Claude Bachand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462690" start="24486" end="24499" title="Saint-Lambert (electoral district)" label="Saint-Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572493" start="24543" end="24560" title="Yolande Thibeault" label="Yolande Thibeault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339543" start="24586" end="24597" title="Nic Leblanc" label="Nic Leblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555066" start="24778" end="24797" title="Vaudreuil-Soulanges (electoral district)" label="Vaudreuil-Soulanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339737" start="24835" end="24849" title="Nick Discepola" label="Nick Discepola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555765" start="25055" end="25078" title="Verchères—Les Patriotes" label="Verchères—Les Patriotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501591" start="25080" end="25097" title="Stéphane Bergeron" label="Stéphane Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140203" start="25429" end="25455" title="Anjou—Rivière-des-Prairies" label="Anjou—Rivière-des-Prairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574089" start="25499" end="25515" title="Yvon Charbonneau" label="Yvon Charbonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138932" start="25806" end="25827" title="Hochelaga—Maisonneuve (federal electoral district)" label="Hochelaga—Maisonneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178668" start="25853" end="25864" title="Réal Ménard" label="Réal Ménard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219676" start="26400" end="26420" title="Laurier—Sainte-Marie" label="Laurier—Sainte-Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q205319" start="26422" end="26436" title="Gilles Duceppe" label="Gilles Duceppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287685" start="26683" end="26704" title="Marc-Boris St-Maurice" label="Marc-Boris St-Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306378" start="26834" end="26841" title="Mercier (federal electoral district)" label="Mercier"/>
<link wikidata="Q527102" start="26843" end="26859" title="Francine Lalonde" label="Francine Lalonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368487" start="27241" end="27263" title="Rosemont—La Petite-Patrie (electoral district)" label="Rosemont—Petite-Patrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897541" start="27289" end="27303" title="Bernard Bigras" label="Bernard Bigras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214654" start="27920" end="27935" title="Lac-Saint-Louis (electoral district)" label="Lac-Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979088" start="27970" end="27986" title="Clifford Lincoln" label="Clifford Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087185" start="28012" end="28027" title="William Shaw (Quebec politician)" label="William F. Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206268" start="28287" end="28300" title="LaSalle—Émard" label="LaSalle—Émard"/>
<link wikidata="Q128529" start="28388" end="28399" title="Paul Martin" label="Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321616" start="28885" end="28896" title="Mount Royal (electoral district)" label="Mount Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q983119" start="28990" end="29002" title="Irwin Cotler" label="Irwin Cotler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344591" start="29484" end="29511" title="Notre-Dame-de-Grâce—Lachine" label="Notre-Dame-de-Grâce—Lachine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395908" start="29602" end="29618" title="Marlene Jennings" label="Marlene Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358662" start="30135" end="30144" title="Outremont (electoral district)" label="Outremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607747" start="30170" end="30181" title="Amir Khadir" label="Amir Khadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q287258" start="30231" end="30245" title="Martin Cauchon" label="Martin Cauchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q600123" start="30760" end="30779" title="Pierrefonds—Dollard" label="Pierrefonds—Dollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898414" start="30822" end="30835" title="Bernard Patry" label="Bernard Patry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462729" start="31091" end="31117" title="Saint-Laurent—Cartierville" label="Saint-Laurent—Cartierville"/>
<link wikidata="Q366456" start="31207" end="31220" title="Stéphane Dion" label="Stéphane Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q256199" start="31729" end="31779" title="Verdun—Saint-Henri—Saint-Paul—Pointe Saint-Charles" label="Verdun—Saint-Henri—Saint-Paul—Pointe Saint-Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420985" start="31869" end="31884" title="Raymond Lavigne" label="Raymond Lavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567544" start="32408" end="32429" title="Westmount—Ville-Marie" label="Westmount—Ville-Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q743080" start="32520" end="32538" title="Lucienne Robillard" label="Lucienne Robillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q773612" start="33126" end="33134" title="Ahuntsic (federal electoral district)" label="Ahuntsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050739" start="33179" end="33194" title="Eleni Bakopanos" label="Eleni Bakopanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922232" start="33511" end="33519" title="Bourassa (electoral district)" label="Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022603" start="33564" end="33577" title="Denis Coderre" label="Denis Coderre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219740" start="33863" end="33875" title="Laval Centre" label="Laval Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275625" start="33877" end="33902" title="Madeleine Dalphond-Guiral" label="Madeleine Dalphond-Guiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834924" start="34201" end="34211" title="Laval East" label="Laval East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300099" start="34732" end="34743" title="Maud Debien" label="Maud Debien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219743" start="34841" end="34851" title="Laval West" label="Laval West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421267" start="34890" end="34904" title="Raymonde Folco" label="Raymonde Folco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229562" start="34930" end="34942" title="Leo Housakos" label="Leo Housakos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362910" start="35199" end="35219" title="Papineau—Saint-Denis" label="Papineau—Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386594" start="35311" end="35327" title="Pierre Pettigrew" label="Pierre Pettigrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462835" start="35869" end="35895" title="Saint-Léonard—Saint-Michel" label="Saint-Léonard—Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834863" start="35937" end="35953" title="Alfonso Gagliano" label="Alfonso Gagliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821651" start="36290" end="36316" title="Abitibi—Baie-James—Nunavik—Eeyou" label="Abitibi—Baie-James—Nunavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122132" start="36360" end="36373" title="Guy St-Julien" label="Guy St-Julien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860948" start="36598" end="36625" title="Argenteuil—Papineau—Mirabel" label="Argenteuil—Papineau—Mirabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q774354" start="36651" end="36668" title="Mario Laframboise" label="Mario Laframboise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242488" start="36718" end="36732" title="Lise Bourgault" label="Lise Bourgault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300729" start="37083" end="37096" title="Maurice Dumas" label="Maurice Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q693762" start="37244" end="37252" title="Gatineau (federal electoral district)" label="Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431065" start="37278" end="37292" title="Richard Nadeau" label="Richard Nadeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293987" start="37342" end="37352" title="Mark Assad" label="Mark Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143028" start="37856" end="37867" title="Hull—Aylmer" label="Hull—Aylmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289311" start="37959" end="37972" title="Marcel Proulx" label="Marcel Proulx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219609" start="38501" end="38512" title="Laurentides (electoral district)" label="Laurentides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320853" start="38514" end="38526" title="Monique Guay" label="Monique Guay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160169" start="38664" end="38676" title="Jacques Vien" label="Jacques Vien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397734" start="38812" end="38836" title="Pontiac—Gatineau—Labelle" label="Pontiac—Gatineau—Labelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180686" start="38862" end="38879" title="Johanne Deschamps" label="Johanne Deschamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434564" start="38929" end="38944" title="Robert Bertrand" label="Robert Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433602" start="39443" end="39465" title="Rivière-des-Mille-Îles (electoral district)" label="Rivière-des-Mille-Îles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106055" start="39467" end="39483" title="Gilles Perron" label="Gilles-A. Perron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084449" start="39550" end="39569" title="François Desrochers" label="François Desrochers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821652" start="39779" end="39792" title="Témiscamingue (electoral district)" label="Témiscamingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q726586" start="39794" end="39806" title="Pierre Brien" label="Pierre Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518686" start="40051" end="40072" title="Terrebonne—Blainville" label="Terrebonne—Blainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026188" start="40074" end="40089" title="Diane Bourgeois" label="Diane Bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371832" start="40323" end="40335" title="Paul Mercier (Bloc Québécois MP)" label="Paul Mercier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338267" start="40418" end="40433" title="Nepean—Carleton (federal electoral district)" label="Nepean—Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018638" start="40435" end="40446" title="David Pratt (Canadian politician)" label="David Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357743" start="40770" end="40783" title="Ottawa Centre (federal electoral district)" label="Ottawa Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722293" start="40809" end="40817" title="Mac Harb" label="Mac Harb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105954" start="41066" end="41080" title="Chris Bradshaw" label="Chris Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357764" start="41483" end="41497" title="Ottawa—Orléans" label="Ottawa—Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408532" start="41523" end="41539" title="Eugène Bellemare" label="Eugène Bellemare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329814" start="41780" end="41794" title="Richard Warman" label="Richard Warman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357747" start="42115" end="42127" title="Ottawa South" label="Ottawa South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389967" start="42153" end="42164" title="John Manley" label="John Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357766" start="42688" end="42701" title="Ottawa—Vanier" label="Ottawa—Vanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301645" start="42727" end="42742" title="Mauril Bélanger" label="Mauril Bélanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357746" start="43332" end="43350" title="Ottawa West—Nepean" label="Ottawa West—Nepean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771721" start="43376" end="43393" title="Marlene Catterall" label="Marlene Catterall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261412" start="43920" end="43931" title="John Turmel" label="John Turmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108745" start="44034" end="44060" title="Glengarry—Prescott—Russell (federal electoral district)" label="Glengarry—Prescott—Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035737" start="44062" end="44073" title="Don Boudria" label="Don Boudria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680490" start="44337" end="44376" title="Hastings—Frontenac—Lennox and Addington" label="Hastings—Frontenac—Lennox and Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490771" start="44402" end="44417" title="Larry McCormick (Canadian politician)" label="Larry McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q936763" start="44592" end="44603" title="Daryl Kramp" label="Daryl Kramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197139" start="44904" end="44928" title="Kingston and the Islands (federal electoral district)" label="Kingston and the Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q445809" start="44930" end="44944" title="Peter Milliken" label="Peter Milliken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526176" start="45009" end="45020" title="Gary Wilson (politician)" label="Gary Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939088" start="45202" end="45217" title="Lanark—Carleton" label="Lanark—Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499527" start="45243" end="45253" title="Ian Murray (Canadian politician)" label="Ian Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476240" start="45303" end="45313" title="Scott Reid (politician)" label="Scott Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q581570" start="45742" end="45757" title="Leeds—Grenville" label="Leeds—Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210586" start="45759" end="45769" title="Joe Jordan (politician)" label="Joe Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110844" start="45795" end="45805" title="Gord Brown" label="Gord Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403317" start="46050" end="46072" title="Prince Edward—Hastings" label="Prince Edward—Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707965" start="46074" end="46087" title="Lyle Vanclief" label="Lyle Vanclief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259005" start="46184" end="46199" title="Dennis Timbrell" label="Dennis Timbrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425442" start="46300" end="46355" title="Renfrew—Nipissing—Pembroke (federal electoral district)" label="(federal electoral district)|Renfrew—Nipissing—Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696107" start="46381" end="46394" title="Hec Clouthier" label="Hec Clouthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962814" start="46444" end="46458" title="Cheryl Gallant" label="Cheryl Gallant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499856" start="46854" end="46885" title="Stormont—Dundas—Charlottenburgh" label="Stormont—Dundas—Charlottenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q888038" start="46887" end="46897" title="Bob Kilger" label="Bob Kilger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121921" start="46923" end="46933" title="Guy Lauzon" label="Guy Lauzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885615" start="47211" end="47233" title="Barrie—Simcoe—Bradford" label="Barrie—Simcoe—Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697019" start="47259" end="47273" title="Aileen Carroll" label="Aileen Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926493" start="47654" end="47675" title="Bruce—Grey—Owen Sound" label="Bruce—Grey—Owen Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114116" start="47677" end="47692" title="Ovid Jackson" label="Ovid L. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040963" start="47894" end="47923" title="Dufferin—Peel—Wellington—Grey (federal electoral district)" label="Dufferin—Peel—Wellington—Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939149" start="47925" end="47938" title="Murray Calder" label="Murray Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390150" start="48187" end="48193" title="Durham (electoral district)" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717784" start="48195" end="48208" title="Alex Shepherd" label="Alex Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407376" start="48308" end="48319" title="Sam Cureatz" label="Sam Cureatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125962" start="48447" end="48472" title="Haliburton—Victoria—Brock" label="Haliburton—Victoria—Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251010" start="48474" end="48492" title="John O&amp;#x27;Reilly (politician)" label="John O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011457" start="48587" end="48599" title="Laurie Scott (politician)" label="Laurie Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344244" start="48704" end="48718" title="Northumberland (Ontario electoral district)" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152140" start="48744" end="48763" title="Paul Macklin" label="Paul Harold Macklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431588" start="48813" end="48825" title="Rick Norlock" label="Rick Norlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111191" start="49042" end="49059" title="Christine Stewart" label="Christine Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49162" end="49174" title="Peterborough (electoral district)" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915614" start="49200" end="49211" title="Peter Adams (politician)" label="Peter Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484122" start="49607" end="49618" title="Simcoe—Grey (federal electoral district)" label="Simcoe—Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149438" start="49644" end="49656" title="Paul Bonwick" label="Paul Bonwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484116" start="50053" end="50065" title="Simcoe North (federal electoral district)" label="Simcoe North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572591" start="50324" end="50334" title="York North" label="York North"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369789" start="50336" end="50353" title="Karen Kraft Sloan" label="Karen Kraft Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294344" start="50627" end="50634" title="Markham (federal electoral district)" label="Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182037" start="50660" end="50673" title="John McCallum" label="John McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628321" start="50723" end="50732" title="Jim Jones (Canadian politician)" label="Jim Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239602" start="50841" end="50857" title="David Scrymgeour" label="David Scrymgeour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347839" start="51110" end="51120" title="Oak Ridges (electoral district)" label="Oak Ridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927214" start="51146" end="51159" title="Bryon Wilfert" label="Bryon Wilfert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251287" start="51336" end="51348" title="John Oostrom" label="John Oostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357223" start="51556" end="51562" title="Oshawa (federal electoral district)" label="Oshawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096331" start="51588" end="51598" title="Ivan Grose" label="Ivan Grose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382505" start="51997" end="52020" title="Pickering—Ajax—Uxbridge" label="Pickering—Ajax—Uxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013143" start="52022" end="52034" title="Dan McTeague" label="Dan McTeague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525846" start="52283" end="52292" title="Thornhill (federal electoral district)" label="Thornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361139" start="52294" end="52307" title="Elinor Caplan" label="Elinor Caplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555075" start="52546" end="52565" title="Vaughan—King—Aurora" label="Vaughan—King—Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301682" start="52567" end="52586" title="Maurizio Bevilacqua" label="Maurizio Bevilacqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567760" start="52840" end="52851" title="Whitby—Ajax" label="Whitby—Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302818" start="52853" end="52867" title="Judi Longfield" label="Judi Longfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035922" start="53100" end="53115" title="Don Valley East (federal electoral district)" label="Don Valley East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017694" start="53117" end="53133" title="David Collenette" label="David Collenette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059353" start="53411" end="53427" title="Etobicoke Centre (electoral district)" label="Etobicoke Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837766" start="53429" end="53439" title="Allan Rock" label="Allan Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059361" start="53687" end="53706" title="Etobicoke—Lakeshore (federal electoral district)" label="Etobicoke—Lakeshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170455" start="53732" end="53746" title="Jean Augustine" label="Jean Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059355" start="54189" end="54204" title="Etobicoke North (federal electoral district)" label="Etobicoke North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445764" start="54206" end="54216" title="Roy Cullen" label="Roy Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475169" start="54428" end="54449" title="Scarborough—Agincourt (federal electoral district)" label="Scarborough—Agincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178858" start="54451" end="54466" title="Jim Karygiannis" label="Jim Karygiannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213393" start="54529" end="54542" title="Michael Laxer" label="Michael Laxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475163" start="54743" end="54761" title="Scarborough Centre (federal electoral district)" label="Scarborough Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181184" start="54763" end="54774" title="John Cannis" label="John Cannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q692458" start="54980" end="54996" title="Scarborough East" label="Scarborough East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182063" start="54998" end="55008" title="John McKay (Ontario politician, born 1948)" label="John McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149678" start="55034" end="55047" title="Paul Calandra" label="Paul Calandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152320" start="55107" end="55124" title="Paul McCrossan" label="W. Paul McCrossan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475170" start="55285" end="55308" title="Scarborough—Rouge River" label="Scarborough—Rouge River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023741" start="55310" end="55319" title="Derek Lee (politician)" label="Derek Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q123956481" start="55383" end="55398" title="Paulette Senior" label="Paulette Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475165" start="55529" end="55550" title="Scarborough Southwest (federal electoral district)" label="Scarborough Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530918" start="55576" end="55586" title="Tom Wappel" label="Tom Wappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213646" start="55700" end="55710" title="Dan Harris (politician)" label="Dan Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248660" start="55759" end="55779" title="Progressive Conservative Party candidates, 2000 Canadian federal election" label="Ellery Hollingsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569133" start="56001" end="56011" title="Willowdale (federal electoral district)" label="Willowdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178916" start="56013" end="56025" title="Jim Peterson" label="Jim Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967649" start="56128" end="56142" title="Chungsen Leung" label="Chungsen Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572587" start="56274" end="56285" title="York Centre (federal electoral district)" label="York Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q705518" start="56311" end="56323" title="Art Eggleton" label="Art Eggleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572594" start="56784" end="56793" title="York West" label="York West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188045" start="56795" end="56804" title="Judy Sgro" label="Judy Sgro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892787" start="57060" end="57077" title="Beaches—East York (federal electoral district)" label="Beaches—East York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291003" start="57103" end="57114" title="Maria Minna" label="Maria Minna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810899" start="57220" end="57231" title="Mel Watkins" label="Mel Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017300" start="57700" end="57709" title="Davenport (federal electoral district)" label="Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063889" start="57735" end="57749" title="Charles Caccia" label="Charles Caccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035926" start="58255" end="58270" title="Don Valley West (federal electoral district)" label="Don Valley West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181599" start="58272" end="58284" title="John Godfrey" label="John Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049206" start="58527" end="58544" title="Eglinton—Lawrence (federal electoral district)" label="Eglinton—Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180208" start="58546" end="58555" title="Joe Volpe" label="Joe Volpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365449" start="58846" end="58864" title="Parkdale—High Park" label="Parkdale—High Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424308" start="58890" end="58903" title="Sarmite Bulte" label="Sarmite Bulte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495297" start="59495" end="59510" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s (electoral district)" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403422" start="59536" end="59551" title="Carolyn Bennett" label="Carolyn Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781429" start="59601" end="59614" title="Theo Caldwell" label="Theo Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q921653" start="60079" end="60102" title="Toronto Centre—Rosedale" label="Toronto Centre—Rosedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q956335" start="60128" end="60139" title="Bill Graham (Canadian politician)" label="Bill Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q41695923" start="60252" end="60264" title="David Berlin" label="David Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213581" start="60498" end="60513" title="Dan Goldstick" label="Danny Goldstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896776" start="60626" end="60638" title="Paul Hellyer" label="Paul Hellyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532395" start="60698" end="60714" title="Toronto—Danforth (federal electoral district)" label="Toronto—Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258742" start="60740" end="60752" title="Dennis Mills" label="Dennis Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844549" start="61135" end="61150" title="Miguel Figueroa" label="Miguel Figueroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539297" start="61342" end="61357" title="Trinity—Spadina" label="Trinity—Spadina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822619" start="61383" end="61393" title="Tony Ianno" label="Tony Ianno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835047" start="61501" end="61514" title="Michael Valpy" label="Michael Valpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572599" start="61923" end="61940" title="York South—Weston (federal electoral district)" label="York South—Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830607" start="61966" end="61976" title="Alan Tonks" label="Alan Tonks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182196" start="62412" end="62425" title="John Nunziata" label="John Nunziata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923633" start="62559" end="62590" title="Bramalea—Gore—Malton—Springdale" label="Bramalea—Gore—Malton—Springdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120945" start="62616" end="62631" title="Gurbax Singh Malhi" label="Gurbax S. Malhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923648" start="63102" end="63117" title="Brampton Centre (federal electoral district)" label="Brampton Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424215" start="63119" end="63137" title="Sarkis Assadourian" label="Sarkis Assadourian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923650" start="63376" end="63401" title="Brampton West—Mississauga (federal electoral district)" label="Brampton West—Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982957" start="63403" end="63419" title="Colleen Beaumier" label="Colleen Beaumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982957" start="63598" end="63614" title="Colleen Beaumier" label="Colleen Beaumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q975611" start="63664" end="63682" title="Mississauga Centre (federal electoral district)" label="Mississauga Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045440" start="63684" end="63699" title="Carolyn Parrish" label="Carolyn Parrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q55081019" start="63799" end="63810" title="Nina Tangri" label="Nina Tangri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316905" start="63972" end="63988" title="Mississauga East" label="Mississauga East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831898" start="63990" end="64006" title="Albina Guarnieri" label="Albina Guarnieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316911" start="64251" end="64268" title="Mississauga South" label="Mississauga South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153898" start="64270" end="64280" title="Paul Szabo (politician)" label="Paul Szabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923387" start="64306" end="64315" title="Brad Butt" label="Brad Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316909" start="64539" end="64555" title="Mississauga West" label="Mississauga West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613233" start="64557" end="64570" title="Steve Mahoney" label="Steve Mahoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875369" start="64808" end="64816" title="Oakville (federal electoral district)" label="Oakville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910296" start="64818" end="64835" title="Bonnie Brown (politician)" label="M.A. Bonnie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213475" start="64861" end="64872" title="Dan Ferrone" label="Dan Ferrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q645153" start="65115" end="65152" title="Ancaster—Dundas—Flamborough—Aldershot" label="Ancaster—Dundas—Flamborough—Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236730" start="65154" end="65165" title="John H. Bryden" label="John Bryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585214" start="65229" end="65242" title="Gordon Guyatt" label="Gordon Guyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q774538" start="65369" end="65379" title="Burlington (federal electoral district)" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123636" start="65381" end="65394" title="Paddy Torsney" label="Paddy Torsney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056523" start="65653" end="65665" title="Erie—Lincoln" label="Erie—Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q285721" start="65691" end="65703" title="John David Maloney" label="John Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020613" start="65753" end="65765" title="Dean Allison" label="Dean Allison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66002" end="66017" title="Christian Heritage Party of Canada candidates in multiple elections#David W. Bylsma" label="David W. Bylsma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126449" start="66187" end="66200" title="Hamilton East (federal electoral district)" label="Hamilton East"/>
<link wikidata="Q276205" start="66226" end="66238" title="Sheila Copps" label="Sheila Copps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126460" start="66800" end="66817" title="Hamilton Mountain (federal electoral district)" label="Hamilton Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897611" start="66819" end="66831" title="Beth Phinney" label="Beth Phinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126450" start="67082" end="67095" title="Hamilton West (Canadian electoral district)" label="Hamilton West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597730" start="67121" end="67131" title="Stan Keyes" label="Stan Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339428" start="67735" end="67749" title="Niagara Centre (federal electoral district)" label="Niagara Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823570" start="67751" end="67765" title="Tony Tirabassi" label="Tony Tirabassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105822" start="67972" end="67986" title="Gilbert Parent" label="Gilbert Parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339434" start="68037" end="68050" title="Niagara Falls (federal electoral district)" label="Niagara Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525754" start="68052" end="68067" title="Gary Pillitteri" label="Gary Pillitteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q71929868" start="68165" end="68180" title="Tony Baldinelli" label="Tony Baldinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q267841" start="68355" end="68369" title="St. Catharines (federal electoral district)" label="St. Catharines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964008" start="68371" end="68384" title="Walt Lastewka" label="Walt Lastewka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499741" start="68694" end="68706" title="Stoney Creek (electoral district)" label="Stoney Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531923" start="68708" end="68719" title="Tony Valeri" label="Tony Valeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923856" start="69014" end="69019" title="Brant (electoral district)" label="Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161899" start="69021" end="69033" title="Jane Stewart (politician)" label="Jane Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934691" start="69307" end="69316" title="Cambridge (federal electoral district)" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154846" start="69342" end="69353" title="Janko Peric" label="Janko Peric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118872" start="69793" end="69810" title="Guelph—Wellington" label="Guelph—Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924395" start="69836" end="69854" title="Brenda Chamberlain (politician)" label="Brenda Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125931" start="70358" end="70381" title="Haldimand—Norfolk—Brant" label="Haldimand—Norfolk—Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934050" start="70383" end="70394" title="Bob Speller" label="Bob Speller"/>
<link wikidata="Q513052" start="70627" end="70633" title="Halton (federal electoral district)" label="Halton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307495" start="70635" end="70646" title="Julian Reed" label="Julian Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q290779" start="70880" end="70891" title="Huron—Bruce (federal electoral district)" label="Huron—Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372236" start="70893" end="70905" title="Paul Steckle" label="Paul Steckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197575" start="71177" end="71193" title="Kitchener Centre (federal electoral district)" label="Kitchener Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193126" start="71195" end="71207" title="Karen Redman" label="Karen Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566686" start="71471" end="71489" title="Kitchener—Waterloo (electoral district)" label="Kitchener—Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846742" start="71515" end="71529" title="Andrew Telegdi" label="Andrew Telegdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359048" start="72041" end="72047" title="Oxford (federal electoral district)" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018741" start="72049" end="72060" title="John Baird Finlay" label="John Finlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376176" start="72349" end="72364" title="Perth—Middlesex" label="Perth—Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809572" start="72366" end="72391" title="John Richardson (Canadian MP)" label="John Alexander Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098610" start="72494" end="72513" title="Gary Schellenberger" label="Gary Schellenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566693" start="72720" end="72739" title="Waterloo—Wellington" label="Waterloo—Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149767" start="72741" end="72751" title="Lynn Myers" label="Lynn Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254572" start="72777" end="72788" title="John Reimer" label="John Reimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308109" start="72858" end="72871" title="Michael Chong" label="Michael Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961519" start="73077" end="73095" title="Chatham-Kent—Essex (federal electoral district)" label="Chatham-Kent—Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184245" start="73121" end="73134" title="Jerry Pickard" label="Jerry Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050861" start="73591" end="73613" title="Elgin—Middlesex—London (federal electoral district)" label="Elgin—Middlesex—London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521814" start="73615" end="73626" title="Gar Knutson" label="Gar Knutson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058748" start="73900" end="73905" title="Essex (federal electoral district)" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648531" start="73907" end="73919" title="Susan Whelan" label="Susan Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216699" start="74169" end="74191" title="Lambton—Kent—Middlesex (federal electoral district)" label="Lambton—Kent—Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367612" start="74217" end="74230" title="Rose-Marie Ur" label="Rose-Marie Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258986" start="74688" end="74703" title="London—Fanshawe (federal electoral district)" label="London—Fanshawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056550" start="74705" end="74721" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Brien (Canadian politician)" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258929" start="74937" end="74956" title="London North Centre (federal electoral district)" label="London North Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180064" start="74958" end="74969" title="Joe Fontana" label="Joe Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258933" start="75283" end="75294" title="London West (federal electoral district)" label="London West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502950" start="75296" end="75306" title="Sue Barnes" label="Sue Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945521" start="75332" end="75344" title="Salim Mansur" label="Salim Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473661" start="75625" end="75639" title="Sarnia—Lambton (federal electoral district)" label="Sarnia—Lambton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439000" start="75665" end="75679" title="Roger Gallaway" label="Roger Gallaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569307" start="76265" end="76282" title="Windsor—St. Clair" label="Windsor—St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331552" start="76284" end="76296" title="Rick Limoges" label="Rick Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180028" start="76364" end="76376" title="Joe Comartin" label="Joe Comartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569303" start="76574" end="76586" title="Windsor West (federal electoral district)" label="Windsor West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548798" start="76588" end="76597" title="Herb Gray" label="Herb Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176612" start="76623" end="76634" title="Jeff Watson (politician)" label="Jeff Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835750" start="76900" end="76917" title="Algoma—Manitoulin" label="Algoma—Manitoulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924497" start="76919" end="76934" title="Brent St. Denis" label="Brent St. Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195246" start="77172" end="77190" title="Kenora—Rainy River (federal electoral district)" label="Kenora—Rainy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907780" start="77192" end="77201" title="Bob Nault" label="Bob Nault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339824" start="77404" end="77415" title="Nickel Belt (federal electoral district)" label="Nickel Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420476" start="77417" end="77430" title="Raymond Bonin" label="Raymond Bonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342103" start="77632" end="77641" title="Nipissing (electoral district)" label="Nipissing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934443" start="77643" end="77651" title="Bob Wood (MP)" label="Bob Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366038" start="77844" end="77863" title="Parry Sound—Muskoka (federal electoral district)" label="Parry Sound-Muskoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849149" start="77865" end="77878" title="Andy Mitchell (Ontario)" label="Andy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474220" start="78121" end="78137" title="Sault Ste. Marie (federal electoral district)" label="Sault Ste. Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043548" start="78139" end="78159" title="Carmen Provenzano" label="Carmen F. Provenzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983977" start="78227" end="78238" title="Bud Wildman" label="Bud Wildman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502922" start="78457" end="78464" title="Sudbury (federal electoral district)" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026236" start="78490" end="78503" title="Diane Marleau" label="Diane Marleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526043" start="78954" end="78974" title="Thunder Bay—Atikokan" label="Thunder Bay—Atikokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597617" start="78976" end="78989" title="Stan Dromisky" label="Stan Dromisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526041" start="79238" end="79264" title="Thunder Bay—Superior North (federal electoral district)" label="Thunder Bay—Superior North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180032" start="79266" end="79277" title="Joe Comuzzi" label="Joe Comuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254105" start="79339" end="79352" title="John Rafferty (Canadian politician)" label="John Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529007" start="79554" end="79574" title="Timiskaming—Cochrane" label="Timiskaming—Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890173" start="79576" end="79585" title="Benoît Serré" label="Ben Serré"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013343" start="79683" end="79700" title="William J. Stairs" label="William J. Stairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529015" start="79821" end="79838" title="Timmins—James Bay (federal electoral district)" label="Timmins—James Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386100" start="79840" end="79855" title="Réginald Bélair" label="Réginald Bélair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522037" start="79916" end="79924" title="Len Wood" label="Len Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923794" start="80102" end="80116" title="Brandon—Souris" label="Brandon—Souris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331250" start="80323" end="80336" title="Rick Borotsik" label="Rick Borotsik"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958326" start="80538" end="80547" title="Churchill—Keewatinook Aski" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q651597" start="80549" end="80562" title="Elijah Harper" label="Elijah Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899314" start="80622" end="80636" title="Bev Desjarlais" label="Bev Desjarlais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017075" start="80774" end="80792" title="Dauphin—Swan River" label="Dauphin—Swan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q766754" start="80878" end="80887" title="Inky Mark" label="Inky Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398756" start="81199" end="81213" title="Portage—Lisgar" label="Portage—Lisgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924976" start="81257" end="81280" title="Brian Pallister" label="Brian William Pallister"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104457" start="81385" end="81401" title="Jake Hoeppner" label="E. Jake Hoeppner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408277" start="81496" end="81506" title="Provencher" label="Provencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235332" start="81508" end="81520" title="David Iftody" label="David Iftody"/>
<link wikidata="Q559596" start="81546" end="81555" title="Vic Toews" label="Vic Toews"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978916" start="81719" end="81736" title="Selkirk—Interlake" label="Selkirk—Interlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919903" start="81776" end="81791" title="Howard Hilstrom" label="Howard Hilstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960785" start="82022" end="82054" title="Charleswood—St. James—Assiniboia" label="Charleswood—St. James—Assiniboia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505480" start="82056" end="82068" title="John Harvard (politician)" label="John Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983980" start="82301" end="82315" title="Saint Boniface (electoral district)" label="Saint Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363717" start="82317" end="82334" title="Ron Duhamel" label="Ronald J. Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231233" start="82401" end="82411" title="John Edmund Parry" label="John Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569365" start="82537" end="82552" title="Winnipeg Centre" label="Winnipeg Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195738" start="82554" end="82569" title="Kevin Lamoureux" label="Kevin Lamoureux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368557" start="82628" end="82638" title="Pat Martin" label="Pat Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569368" start="82839" end="82860" title="Winnipeg North Centre" label="Winnipeg North Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018895" start="82862" end="82874" title="Mary Richard" label="Mary Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188049" start="82901" end="82920" title="Judy Wasylycia-Leis" label="Judy Wasylycia-Leis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189464" start="82984" end="82998" title="Darrell Rankin" label="Darrell Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569369" start="83100" end="83123" title="Winnipeg North—St. Paul" label="Winnipeg North—St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319424" start="83149" end="83165" title="Rey Pagtakhan" label="Rey D. Pagtakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362253" start="83279" end="83293" title="Roman Yereniuk" label="Roman Yereniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569370" start="83651" end="83665" title="Winnipeg South" label="Winnipeg South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307723" start="83667" end="83677" title="Reg Alcock" label="Reg Alcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569366" start="83928" end="83949" title="Winnipeg South Centre" label="Winnipeg South Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850184" start="83975" end="83988" title="Anita Neville" label="Anita Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051614" start="84441" end="84459" title="Winnipeg—Transcona" label="Winnipeg—Transcona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903125" start="84606" end="84618" title="Bill Blaikie" label="Bill Blaikie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782858" start="84763" end="84779" title="Theresa Ducharme" label="Theresa Ducharme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008864" start="85036" end="85060" title="Cypress Hills—Grasslands" label="Cypress Hills—Grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017380" start="85104" end="85118" title="David Anderson (Saskatchewan politician)" label="David Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514607" start="85219" end="85231" title="Lee Morrison" label="Lee Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361537" start="85282" end="85290" title="Palliser (Saskatchewan electoral district)" label="Palliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273291" start="85367" end="85379" title="Dick Proctor" label="Dick Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376467" start="85506" end="85532" title="Regina—Lumsden—Lake Centre" label="Regina—Lumsden—Lake Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491146" start="85569" end="85582" title="Larry Spencer" label="Larry Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258474" start="85608" end="85620" title="John Solomon (Canadian politician)" label="John Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423524" start="85712" end="85734" title="Regina—Qu&amp;#x27;Appelle" label="Regina—Qu&amp;#x27;Appelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020483" start="85809" end="85822" title="Lorne Nystrom" label="Lorne Nystrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491962" start="85915" end="85936" title="Souris—Moose Mountain" label="Souris—Moose Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372540" start="85974" end="85987" title="Roy Bailey (politician)" label="Roy H. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423526" start="86148" end="86155" title="Wascana" label="Wascana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070905" start="86157" end="86170" title="Ralph Goodale" label="Ralph Goodale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572613" start="86325" end="86341" title="Yorkton—Melville" label="Yorkton—Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098474" start="86377" end="86393" title="Garry Breitkreuz" label="Garry Breitkreuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891841" start="86595" end="86619" title="Battlefords—Lloydminster" label="Battlefords—Lloydminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104348" start="86656" end="86666" title="Gerry Ritz" label="Gerry Ritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905600" start="86836" end="86846" title="Blackstrap (electoral district)" label="Blackstrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269598" start="86889" end="86901" title="Lynne Yelich" label="Lynne Yelich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730749" start="87039" end="87051" title="Allan Kerpan" label="Allan Kerpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024533" start="87102" end="87117" title="Desnethé—Missinippi—Churchill River" label="Churchill River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331530" start="87119" end="87133" title="Rick Laliberte" label="Rick Laliberte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297502" start="87197" end="87205" title="Ray Funk" label="Ray Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403304" start="87368" end="87381" title="Prince Albert (federal electoral district)" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q584043" start="87421" end="87438" title="Brian Fitzpatrick (Canadian politician)" label="Brian Fitzpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238241" start="87509" end="87522" title="David Orchard" label="David Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262946" start="87587" end="87600" title="Derrek Konrad" label="Derrek Konrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473813" start="87651" end="87669" title="Saskatoon—Humboldt" label="Saskatoon—Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q610534" start="87709" end="87719" title="Jim Pankiw" label="Jim Pankiw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473814" start="87950" end="87975" title="Saskatoon—Rosetown—Biggar" label="Saskatoon—Rosetown—Biggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q514977" start="88015" end="88028" title="Carol Skelton" label="Carol Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258467" start="88054" end="88070" title="Dennis Gruending" label="Dennis Gruending"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473816" start="88204" end="88224" title="Saskatoon—Wanuskewin" label="Saskatoon—Wanuskewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301505" start="88263" end="88280" title="Maurice Vellacott" label="Maurice Vellacott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077943" start="88529" end="88538" title="Athabasca (electoral district)" label="Athabasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660280" start="88564" end="88579" title="Harold Cardinal" label="Harold Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232327" start="88628" end="88641" title="David Chatters" label="Dave Chatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243941" start="88752" end="88765" title="Doug Faulkner" label="Doug Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005457" start="88983" end="88991" title="Crowfoot (electoral district)" label="Crowfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195810" start="89078" end="89092" title="Kevin Sorenson" label="Kevin Sorenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921506" start="89201" end="89213" title="Verlyn Olson" label="Verlyn Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114740" start="89238" end="89249" title="Jack Ramsay (politician)" label="Jack Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051312" start="89408" end="89418" title="Elk Island (electoral district)" label="Elk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195029" start="89458" end="89465" title="Ken Epp" label="Ken Epp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216473" start="89624" end="89632" title="Lakeland (electoral district)" label="Lakeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229624" start="89673" end="89684" title="Leon Benoit" label="Leon Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236894" start="89857" end="89867" title="Lethbridge (federal electoral district)" label="Lethbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431537" start="89958" end="89969" title="Rick Casson" label="Rick Casson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274746" start="90294" end="90301" title="Macleod (federal electoral district)" label="Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596262" start="90345" end="90355" title="Grant Hill (politician)" label="Grant Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q767079" start="90526" end="90538" title="Medicine Hat (federal electoral district)" label="Medicine Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322577" start="90577" end="90590" title="Monte Solberg" label="Monte Solberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373803" start="90757" end="90768" title="Peace River (federal electoral district)" label="Peace River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085384" start="90812" end="90826" title="Charlie Penson" label="Charlie Penson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422687" start="90996" end="91004" title="Red Deer (federal electoral district)" label="Red Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907761" start="91045" end="91054" title="Bob Mills (politician)" label="Bob Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567566" start="91212" end="91222" title="Wetaskiwin (federal electoral district)" label="Wetaskiwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210498" start="91260" end="91273" title="Dale Johnston" label="Dale Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568118" start="91440" end="91449" title="Wild Rose (electoral district)" label="Wild Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331616" start="91492" end="91506" title="Myron Thompson" label="Myron Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572142" start="91715" end="91725" title="Yellowhead (electoral district)" label="Yellowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434213" start="91765" end="91779" title="Rob Merrifield" label="Rob Merrifield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132550" start="91930" end="91946" title="Cliff Breitkreuz" label="Cliff Breitkreuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048045" start="92029" end="92049" title="Edmonton East" label="Edmonton Centre-East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634228" start="92051" end="92060" title="Sue Olsen" label="Sue Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376616" start="92086" end="92100" title="Peter Goldring" label="Peter Goldring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297789" start="92126" end="92136" title="Ray Martin (politician)" label="Ray Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964685" start="92198" end="92210" title="Naomi Rankin" label="Naomi Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048046" start="92304" end="92318" title="Edmonton North" label="Edmonton North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020868" start="92356" end="92368" title="Deborah Grey" label="Deborah Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339097" start="92538" end="92556" title="Edmonton Southeast" label="Edmonton Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q872073" start="92582" end="92595" title="David Kilgour" label="David Kilgour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528703" start="92645" end="92654" title="Tim Uppal" label="Tim Uppal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048053" start="93035" end="93053" title="Edmonton Southwest" label="Edmonton Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161357" start="93137" end="93150" title="James Rajotte" label="James Rajotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982254" start="93367" end="93381" title="Ian McClelland" label="Ian McClelland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048071" start="93487" end="93506" title="Edmonton Strathcona (federal electoral district)" label="Edmonton—Strathcona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417573" start="93594" end="93606" title="Rahim Jaffer" label="Rahim Jaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048051" start="93985" end="93998" title="Edmonton West" label="Edmonton West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851210" start="94024" end="94037" title="Anne McLellan" label="Anne McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898995" start="94087" end="94098" title="Betty Unger" label="Betty Unger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495239" start="94426" end="94436" title="St. Albert (electoral district)" label="St. Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933848" start="94438" end="94449" title="Bob Russell (Canadian politician)" label="Bob Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182766" start="94475" end="94488" title="John G. Williams (Canadian politician)" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933894" start="94678" end="94692" title="Calgary Centre" label="Calgary Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056331" start="94777" end="94789" title="Eric Lowther" label="Eric Lowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q128574" start="94896" end="94905" title="Joe Clark" label="Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933898" start="95189" end="95201" title="Calgary East" label="Calgary East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402044" start="95287" end="95300" title="Deepak Obhrai" label="Deepak Obhrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933900" start="95697" end="95714" title="Calgary Northeast" label="Calgary Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864534" start="95754" end="95764" title="Art Hanger" label="Art Hanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933912" start="95926" end="95943" title="Calgary—Nose Hill" label="Calgary—Nose Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026184" start="95985" end="95999" title="Diane Ablonczy" label="Diane Ablonczy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933904" start="96248" end="96265" title="Calgary Southeast" label="Calgary Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162959" start="96302" end="96314" title="Jason Kenney" label="Jason Kenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933905" start="96521" end="96538" title="Calgary Southwest" label="Calgary Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q959778" start="96578" end="96593" title="Preston Manning" label="Preston Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933901" start="96766" end="96778" title="Calgary West" label="Calgary West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485519" start="96780" end="96794" title="Frank Bruseker" label="Frank Bruseker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434145" start="96820" end="96830" title="Rob Anders" label="Rob Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198119" start="96892" end="96901" title="Jim Silye" label="Jim Silye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938766" start="97078" end="97095" title="Cariboo—Chilcotin" label="Cariboo—Chilcotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104714" start="97184" end="97199" title="Philip Mayfield" label="Philip Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192454" start="97560" end="97599" title="Kamloops, Thompson and Highland Valleys" label="Kamloops, Thompson and Highland Valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398690" start="97635" end="97647" title="Betty Hinton" label="Betty Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072433" start="97673" end="97684" title="Nelson Riis" label="Nelson Riis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194929" start="97849" end="97856" title="Kelowna (electoral district)" label="Kelowna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983495" start="97893" end="97907" title="Werner Schmidt" label="Werner Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984157" start="98123" end="98149" title="Kootenay—Boundary—Okanagan" label="Kootenay—Boundary—Okanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195284" start="98236" end="98244" title="Jim Gouk" label="Jim Gouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198835" start="98671" end="98688" title="Kootenay—Columbia" label="Kootenay—Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178720" start="98735" end="98745" title="Jim Abbott (Canadian politician)" label="Jim Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350010" start="98957" end="98976" title="Okanagan—Coquihalla" label="Okanagan—Coquihalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556889" start="99062" end="99075" title="Stockwell Day" label="Stockwell Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q512649" start="99609" end="99625" title="Okanagan—Shuswap" label="Okanagan—Shuswap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224572" start="99714" end="99728" title="Darrel Stinson" label="Darrel Stinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403323" start="100154" end="100182" title="Prince George—Bulkley Valley" label="Prince George—Bulkley Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430844" start="100275" end="100286" title="Dick Harris" label="Dick Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403325" start="100721" end="100746" title="Prince George—Peace River" label="Prince George—Peace River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163235" start="100835" end="100843" title="Jay Hill (politician)" label="Jay Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486209" start="101234" end="101240" title="Skeena (federal electoral district)" label="Skeena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760480" start="101329" end="101340" title="Andy Burton (politician)" label="Andy Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016460" start="101390" end="101400" title="Larry Guno" label="Larry Guno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848749" start="101618" end="101628" title="Mike Scott (politician)" label="Mike Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021947" start="101783" end="101803" title="Delta—South Richmond" label="Delta—South Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181299" start="101890" end="101905" title="John Cummins (Canadian politician)" label="John M. Cummins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731025" start="102161" end="102173" title="Allan Warnke" label="Allan Warnke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389409" start="102250" end="102266" title="Dewdney—Alouette" label="Dewdney—Alouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q22704269" start="102268" end="102282" title="Jati Sidhu" label="Jatinder Sidhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596340" start="102307" end="102320" title="Grant McNally" label="Grant McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086670" start="102505" end="102518" title="Fraser Valley (electoral district)" label="Fraser Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967611" start="102609" end="102621" title="Chuck Strahl" label="Chuck Strahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217273" start="103089" end="103107" title="Langley—Abbotsford" label="Langley—Abbotsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292513" start="103148" end="103159" title="Randy White (Canadian politician)" label="Randy White"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431468" start="103372" end="103380" title="Richmond (British Columbia federal electoral district)" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420751" start="103406" end="103418" title="Raymond Chan (politician)" label="Raymond Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211786" start="103468" end="103484" title="Joe Peschisolido" label="Joe Peschisolido"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505441" start="103877" end="103908" title="South Surrey—White Rock—Langley" label="South Surrey—White Rock—Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553399" start="103995" end="104007" title="Val Meredith" label="Val Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505435" start="104393" end="104407" title="Surrey Central" label="Surrey Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620158" start="104450" end="104464" title="Gurmant Grewal" label="Gurmant Grewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505436" start="104711" end="104723" title="Surrey North (federal electoral district)" label="Surrey North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967582" start="104814" end="104826" title="Chuck Cadman" label="Chuck Cadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928548" start="105256" end="105271" title="Burnaby—Douglas" label="Burnaby—Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q350091" start="105356" end="105370" title="Svend Robinson" label="Svend Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339022" start="105558" end="105591" title="New Westminster—Coquitlam—Burnaby" label="New Westminster—Coquitlam—Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150696" start="105677" end="105689" title="Paul Forseth" label="Paul Forseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344177" start="106112" end="106127" title="North Vancouver (electoral district)" label="North Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693869" start="106212" end="106221" title="Ted White (politician)" label="Ted White"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398378" start="106722" end="106757" title="Port Moody—Coquitlam—Port Coquitlam" label="Port Moody—Coquitlam—Port Coquitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685765" start="106783" end="106793" title="Lou Sekora" label="Lou Sekora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490087" start="107173" end="107185" title="Sharon Hayes" label="Sharon Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554460" start="107290" end="107306" title="Vancouver Centre" label="Vancouver Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129348" start="107332" end="107340" title="Hedy Fry" label="Hedy Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147102" start="107577" end="107595" title="Jamie Lee Hamilton" label="Jamie-Lee Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979818" start="107766" end="107776" title="Marc Emery" label="Marc Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q958124" start="107957" end="107971" title="Vancouver East (federal electoral district)" label="Vancouver East"/>
<link wikidata="Q513906" start="108114" end="108126" title="Libby Davies" label="Libby Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107170" start="108176" end="108189" title="Michael Walsh (film critic)" label="Michael Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554467" start="108621" end="108639" title="Vancouver Kingsway" label="Vancouver Kingsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354962" start="108665" end="108677" title="Sophia Leung" label="Sophia Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726162" start="108727" end="108737" title="Alice Wong" label="Alice Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554466" start="109190" end="109206" title="Vancouver Quadra" label="Vancouver Quadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498625" start="109232" end="109244" title="Stephen Owen (politician)" label="Stephen Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195494" start="109294" end="109313" title="Kerry-Lynne Findlay" label="Kerry-Lynne Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908485" start="109427" end="109438" title="Bill Clarke (politician)" label="Bill Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292988" start="109644" end="109657" title="Ted McWhinney" label="Ted McWhinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554463" start="109761" end="109784" title="Vancouver South—Burnaby" label="Vancouver South—Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133384" start="109810" end="109823" title="Herb Dhaliwal" label="Herb Dhaliwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744306" start="109931" end="109946" title="Herschel Hardin" label="Herschel Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567450" start="110420" end="110449" title="West Vancouver—Sunshine Coast" label="West Vancouver—Sunshine Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254663" start="110486" end="110499" title="John Reynolds (Canadian politician)" label="John Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058619" start="110801" end="110823" title="Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca" label="Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194748" start="110864" end="110876" title="Keith Martin (politician)" label="Keith Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q970918" start="111125" end="111140" title="Nanaimo—Alberni" label="Nanaimo—Alberni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161231" start="111227" end="111242" title="James Lunney" label="James D. Lunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909150" start="111541" end="111553" title="Bill Gilmour (politician)" label="Bill Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335526" start="111662" end="111678" title="Nanaimo—Cowichan" label="Nanaimo—Cowichan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306645" start="111769" end="111779" title="Reed Elley" label="Reed Elley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460439" start="112211" end="112231" title="Saanich—Gulf Islands" label="Saanich—Gulf Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098581" start="112318" end="112327" title="Gary Lunn" label="Gary Lunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q511033" start="112778" end="112800" title="Vancouver Island North" label="Vancouver Island North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181387" start="112891" end="112902" title="John Duncan (Canadian politician)" label="John Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557672" start="113337" end="113345" title="Victoria (British Columbia federal electoral district)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230766" start="113371" end="113385" title="David Anderson (British Columbia politician)" label="David Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240530" start="113498" end="113510" title="David Turner (politician)" label="David Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205414" start="113621" end="113642" title="Joan Russow" label="Joan Elizabeth Russow"/>
<link wikidata="Q584337" start="114001" end="114008" title="Nunavut (electoral district)" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335582" start="114010" end="114031" title="Nancy Karetak-Lindell" label="Nancy Karetak-Lindell"/>
<link wikidata="Q606515" start="114273" end="114287" title="Western Arctic" label="Western Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q957119" start="114289" end="114309" title="Ethel Blondin-Andrew" label="Ethel Blondin-Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023144" start="114370" end="114386" title="Dennis Bevington" label="Dennis Bevington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573173" start="114532" end="114537" title="Yukon (electoral district)" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218024" start="114539" end="114552" title="Larry Bagnell" label="Larry Bagnell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683846" wikidata="Q84086283" url="?curid=683846" title="U15">
<text>U15 or U-15 may refer to:

== Submarines ==
* , various vessels
* , a submarine of the Austro-Hungarian Navy

== Other uses ==
* U15 (Berlin U-Bahn), a transit line
* U15 (German universities), a university association in Germany
* Cubohemioctahedron
* Small nucleolar RNA SNORD15
* U15 Group of Canadian Research Universities
* Uppland Runic Inscription 15</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q84086283" start="0" end="3" title="U15" label="U15"/>
<link wikidata="Q84086283" start="7" end="11" title="U15" label="U-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863571" start="129" end="148" title="U15 (Berlin U-Bahn)" label="U15 (Berlin U-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699438" start="167" end="192" title="U15 (German universities)" label="U15 (German universities)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006726" start="232" end="250" title="Cubohemioctahedron" label="Cubohemioctahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543303" start="253" end="280" title="Small nucleolar RNA SNORD15" label="Small nucleolar RNA SNORD15"/>
<link wikidata="Q774093" start="283" end="326" title="U15 Group of Canadian Research Universities" label="U15 Group of Canadian Research Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899109" start="329" end="357" title="Uppland Runic Inscription 15" label="Uppland Runic Inscription 15"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683847" wikidata="Q342971" url="?curid=683847" title="Steve Perry (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Steve Perry]] (born 1949) is a recording artist and the former lead singer of the band Journey.

Steve or Stephen Perry may also refer to:
*Steve Perry (author) (born 1947), science fiction author
*Stephen R. Perry (born c. 1950), legal scholar and professor of law and philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania
*Steve Perry (Oregon musician) (born 1963), lead singer of the Cherry Poppin&#x27; Daddies
*Stephen Perry (inventor) (19th century), British inventor and businessman
*Stephen Perry (writer) (1954–2010), American writer for the &quot;Thundercats&quot; cartoon and comic book
*Steve Perry, pseudonym of pornographic actor Ben Dover
*Steven Perry (born 1988), American soccer player
*Steve Perry (baseball), first-round pick of the L.A. Dodgers in 1979
* Steve Perry, multiple medalist at the World Quizzing Championships
*Stephen Joseph Perry (1833–1889), English Jesuit and astronomer
*Stephen Samuel Perry (1825–1874), collected historical manuscripts related to Texas history

==See also==
* Stephen Parry (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342971" start="0" end="15" title="Steve Perry (disambiguation)" label="[[Steve Perry]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q342971" start="99" end="104" title="Steve Perry (disambiguation)" label="Steve"/>
<link wikidata="Q342971" start="108" end="121" title="Steve Perry (disambiguation)" label="Stephen Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368134" start="142" end="162" title="Steve Perry (author)" label="Steve Perry (author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513214" start="200" end="216" title="Stephen R. Perry" label="Stephen R. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613592" start="318" end="347" title="Steve Perry (Oregon musician)" label="Steve Perry (Oregon musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610227" start="409" end="433" title="Stephen Perry (inventor)" label="Stephen Perry (inventor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610225" start="484" end="506" title="Stephen Perry (writer)" label="Stephen Perry (writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885546" start="637" end="646" title="Ben Dover" label="Ben Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615138" start="648" end="660" title="Steven Perry" label="Steven Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578741" start="698" end="720" title="Steve Perry (baseball)" label="Steve Perry (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128067" start="807" end="835" title="World Quizzing Championship" label="World Quizzing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609630" start="837" end="857" title="Stephen Joseph Perry" label="Stephen Joseph Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610456" start="902" end="922" title="Stephen Samuel Perry" label="Stephen Samuel Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345023" start="1010" end="1040" title="Stephen Parry (disambiguation)" label="Stephen Parry (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683850" wikidata="Q177650" url="?curid=683850" title="Caleb Cushing">
<text>Caleb Cushing (January 17, 1800 – January 2, 1879) was an American Democratic politician and diplomat who served as a Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts and the 23rd United States Attorney General under President Franklin Pierce. From 1874 until 1877, he was the United States Minister to Spain.

Cushing was an eager proponent of territorial and commercial expansion, especially regarding the acquisition of Texas, Oregon and Cuba. He believed that enlarging the American sphere would fulfill &quot;the great destiny reserved for this exemplar American Republic.&quot; Cushing secured the first American treaty with China, the Treaty of Wangxia of 1844; it gave American merchants trading rights in five Chinese ports. After the Civil War, Cushing negotiated a treaty with Colombia to give the United States a right-of-way for a trans-oceanic Canal. He helped obtain a favorable settlement of the &quot;Alabama&quot; Claims, and as the ambassador to Spain in 1870s defused the troublesome &quot;Virginius&quot; Affair.

==Biography==

===Early life===
Cushing was born in Salisbury, Massachusetts, on January 17, 1800; he was the son of John Newmarch Cushing, a wealthy shipbuilder and merchant, and Lydia Dow, a delicate and sensitive woman from Seabrook, New Hampshire, who died when he was ten. The family moved across the Merrimack River to the prosperous shipping town of Newburyport, Massachusetts, in 1802. He entered Harvard University at the age of 13 and graduated in 1817. He was a teacher of mathematics there from 1820 to 1821, and was admitted to practice in the Massachusetts Court of Common Pleas in December 1821; he began practicing law in Newburyport in 1824. There he attended the First Presbyterian Church.

On November 23, 1824, Cushing married Caroline Elizabeth Wilde, daughter of Judge Samuel Sumner Wilde, of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court. His wife died about a decade later, leaving him childless and alone. He never married again.

===State legislature===
Cushing served as a Democratic-Republican member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives in 1825, then entered the Massachusetts Senate in 1826, and returned to the House in 1828. Afterwards, he spent two years in Europe from 1829 to 1831. Upon his return, he again served in the lower house of the state legislature in 1833 and 1834. Then, in late 1834, he was elected to the United States House of Representatives.

===Washington career===
Cushing served in Congress from 1835 until 1843 (the 24th, 25th, 26th and 27th Congresses). During the 27th Congress, he was chairman of the U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs.

Here the marked inconsistency characterizing his public life became manifest. For when John Tyler had become president, had been read out of the Whig party, and had vetoed Whig measures (including a tariff bill) for which Cushing had voted, Cushing first defended the vetoes and then voted again for the bills. In 1843 President Tyler nominated Cushing for U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, but the U.S. Senate refused to confirm him for this office. He was nominated three times in one day, and rejected all three times. John Canfield Spencer was chosen instead.

===China mission===
In 1843, Cushing was appointed by President Tyler to be commissioner and United States Ambassador to China, holding this position until March 4, 1845. With the goal of impressing the Royal Chinese court, the Cushing mission consisted of four American warships, loaded with gifts that exalted scientific wonders including revolvers, telescope, and an encyclopedia. His arrival at Macau in February 1844 created a local sensation, but the Chinese government was reluctant to designate another most favored nation. Cushing cleverly mixed the carrot and stick. He warned – against the backdrop of his warships – that not to receive an envoy was a national insult. He threatened to go directly to the Emperor – an unheard of procedure. The Emperor tried delay, but he finally sent an envoy to negotiate with Cushing, leading to the signing of the Treaty of Wanghia in the village of Wanghia on July 3, 1844. In addition to most favored nation status, Cushing made sure that Americans received extraterritoriality. In the following years American trade with China grew rapidly, thanks to the high-speed clipper ships which carried relatively small amounts of high-value cargo, such as ginseng and silk. American Protestant missionaries also began to arrive. The popular Chinese reaction was mostly hostile, but there was a favorable element that provided a base of support for American missionaries and businessmen. By 1850–64, China was enmeshed in the Taiping rebellion, a civil war which caused millions of deaths; foreign trade stagnated.

While serving as commissioner to China he was also empowered to negotiate a treaty of navigation and commerce with Japan.

===Return to Massachusetts===

In 1847, while again a representative in the Massachusetts state legislature, he introduced a bill appropriating money for the equipment of a regiment to serve in the Mexican–American War; although the bill was defeated, he raised the necessary funds privately.

He served in the Army during the Mexican War first as colonel of the 1st Massachusetts Volunteer Regiment, of which he was placed in command on January 15, 1847. He was promoted to brigadier-general of volunteers on April 14 of the same year. He did not see combat during this conflict, and entered Mexico City with his reserve battalion several months after that city had been pacified. He was discharged from the Army on July 20, 1848.

In 1847 and again in 1848 the Democrats nominated him for Governor of Massachusetts, but on each occasion he was defeated at the polls. He was again a representative in the state legislature in 1851, was offered the position as Massachusetts Attorney General in 1851, but declined; and served as mayor of Newburyport in 1851 and 1852. (He had written a major history of the town when he was 26 years old.)

He became an associate justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court in 1852. During the presidency Franklin Pierce, from March 7, 1853, until March 3, 1857, he was Attorney General of the United States. Cushing supported the March 1857 Dred Scott decision.

In 1858, 1859, 1862, and 1863 he again served in the Massachusetts House of Representatives.

Also during this time, he founded the Cushing Land Agency in St. Croix Falls, Wisconsin. The building it was housed in, now known as the Cushing Land Agency Building, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

===1860 and the Civil War===
In 1860 he presided over the Democratic National Convention, which met first at Charleston and later at Baltimore, until he joined those who seceded from the regular convention. He then presided also over the convention of the seceding delegates, who nominated John C. Breckinridge for the Presidency. Also in 1860 President James Buchanan sent him to Charleston as Confidential Commissioner to the Secessionists of South Carolina.

Despite having favored states&#x27; rights and opposed the abolition of slavery, during the Civil War, he supported the Union. He was later appointed by President Andrew Johnson as one of three commissioners assigned to revise and codify the laws of the United States Congress. He served in that capacity from 1866 to 1870.

===Return to diplomacy===
In 1868, in concert with the Minister Resident to Colombia, Cushing was sent to Bogotá, Colombia, and worked to negotiate a right-of-way treaty for a ship canal across the Isthmus of Panama.

At the Geneva conference for the settlement of the Alabama claims in 1871–1872 he was one of the counsels appointed by President Ulysses S. Grant for the United States before the Geneva Tribunal of Arbitration on the Alabama claims.

From January 6, 1874, to April 9, 1877, Cushing was Minister to Spain. He defused tensions over the &quot;Virginius&quot; Affair, and proved popular in the country.

===Supreme Court nomination===

On January 9, 1874, Grant nominated Cushing as Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court. The nomination came soon after Grant withdrew the nomination of George Henry Williams to the position. The selection caught many off-guard, including Cushing himself. Radical Republicans in the U.S. Senate immediately challenged Cushing&#x27;s loyalties on account of his earlier close personal rapport with Andrew Johnson and his alleged pre-Civil War Copperhead sympathies. Their feelings of distrust turned into all out opposition to his confirmation when a (non-political) letter that Cushing had written in 1861 to President of the Confederacy Jefferson Davis was found and made public. As a result of rising furor, the nomination was withdrawn on January 13, 1874.

==Death and legacy==
Cushing died in Newburyport on January 2, 1879, where he was laid to rest in the town&#x27;s Highland Cemetery.

The United States Revenue Cutter &quot;Caleb Cushing&quot; was named after Cushing. The &quot;Caleb Cushing&quot; served during the American Civil War and was destroyed by Confederate raiders during the Battle of Portland Harbor on June 27, 1863.
==Works==
* &quot;History and Present State of the Town of Newburyport, Mass.&quot; (1826)
* &quot;Review of the late Revolution in France&quot; (1833)
* &quot;Reminiscences of Spain&quot; (1833);
* &quot;Oration on the Material Growth and Territorial Progress of the United States&quot; (1839)
* &quot;Life and Public Services of William H. Harrison&quot; (1840)
* &quot;The Treaty of Washington&quot; (1873)
* &quot;Oration delivered by the Hon. Caleb Cushing, of Massachusetts, before the Tammany society, or Columbian order, at Tammany hall, on Monday, July 5th, 1858&quot;

==See also==
*Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States

==References==
==Further reading==

* Belohlavek, John M. &quot;Broken Glass: Caleb Cushing &amp; the Shattering of the Union&quot; (2005)
* Belohlavek, John M. &quot;Race, Progress, and Destiny: Caleb Cushing and the Quest for American Empire&quot; (1996)
* Fuess, Claude Moore &quot;The Life of Caleb Cushing&quot;, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co., 1923. (2 vols.)
* Haddad, John R. &quot;America&#x27;s First Adventure in China: Trade, Treaties, Opium, and Salvation&quot; (2013) pp. 136–159. online.
* Johnson, Kendall A. &quot;The New Middle Kingdom: China and the Early American Romance of Free Trade&quot;, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017.
* Kuo, Ping Chia. &quot;Caleb Cushing and the Treaty of Wanghia, 1844&quot;. &quot;The Journal of Modern History&quot; 5, no. 1 (1933): 34–54. Online
* Schurz, Carl. New York: McClure Publ. Co., 1907. Schurz reports his impressions of seeing Cushing, in an effort to discourage anti-slavery sentiment, speak at a &quot;Conservative Union Meeting&quot; at Faneuil Hall in Boston just before the Civil War (Volume II, Chapter IV, p. 162): &quot;While speaking he turned his left shoulder to the audience, looking at his hearers askance, and with a squint, too, as it seemed to me, but I may have been mistaken. There was something like a cynical sneer in his manner of bringing out his sentences, which made him look like Mephistopheles alive, and I do not remember ever to have heard a public speaker who stirred in me so decided a disinclination to believe what he said. In later years I met him repeatedly at dinner tables which he enlivened with his large information, his wit, and his fund of anecdote. But I could never quite overcome the impression he had made upon me at that meeting. I could always listen to him with interest, but never with spontaneous confidence.&quot;
* Welch, Richard E. &quot;Caleb Cushing&#x27;s Chinese Mission and the Treaty of Wanghia: A Review.&quot; &quot;Oregon Historical Quarterly&quot; 58.4 (1957): 328–357. Online

==External links==
* 


|-




|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177650" start="0" end="13" title="Caleb Cushing" label="Caleb Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="67" end="77" title="History of the United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="118" end="161" title="U.S. House Of Representatives" label="Member of the U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="167" end="180" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="194" end="224" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="241" end="256" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837668" start="291" end="322" title="United States Minister to Spain" label="United States Minister to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="437" end="442" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="444" end="450" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="455" end="459" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326406" start="656" end="673" title="Treaty of Wangxia" label="Treaty of Wangxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q591829" start="926" end="952" title="Alabama Claims" label="&amp;quot;Alabama&amp;quot; Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825907" start="1018" end="1046" title="Virginius Affair" label="&amp;quot;Virginius&amp;quot; Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002947" start="1101" end="1125" title="Salisbury, Massachusetts" label="Salisbury, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="1199" end="1210" title="shipbuilder" label="shipbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q375215" start="1276" end="1299" title="Seabrook, New Hampshire" label="Seabrook, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="1355" end="1370" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q54134" start="1406" end="1432" title="Newburyport, Massachusetts" label="Newburyport, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1454" end="1472" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453612" start="1730" end="1755" title="First Presbyterian Church, Newburyport" label="First Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412934" start="1840" end="1859" title="Samuel Sumner Wilde" label="Samuel Sumner Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="1868" end="1904" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="2044" end="2065" title="Democratic-Republican Party (United States)" label="Democratic-Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="2080" end="2118" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="2145" end="2165" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="Massachusetts Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2407" end="2445" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632038" start="2525" end="2529" title="24th United States Congress" label="24th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632330" start="2531" end="2535" title="25th United States Congress" label="25th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632497" start="2537" end="2541" title="26th United States Congress" label="26th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632667" start="2546" end="2559" title="27th United States Congress" label="27th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973577" start="2613" end="2652" title="U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="2742" end="2752" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="3012" end="3042" title="U.S. Secretary of the Treasury" label="U.S. Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3052" end="3063" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381825" start="3175" end="3196" title="John Canfield Spencer" label="John Canfield Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q115151654" start="3311" end="3344" title="United States Ambassador to China" label="United States Ambassador to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326406" start="4080" end="4097" title="Treaty of Wanghia" label="Treaty of Wanghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="4226" end="4245" title="extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="4686" end="4703" title="Taiping rebellion" label="Taiping rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="5097" end="5117" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="5690" end="5715" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406492" start="5860" end="5890" title="Massachusetts Attorney General" label="Massachusetts Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="6145" end="6160" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="6210" end="6247" title="Attorney General of the United States" label="Attorney General of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="6282" end="6301" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="Dred Scott decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470469" start="6459" end="6485" title="St. Croix Falls, Wisconsin" label="St. Croix Falls, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714431" start="6535" end="6563" title="Cushing Land Agency Building" label="Cushing Land Agency Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="6582" end="6618" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185865" start="6679" end="6709" title="Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="6730" end="6740" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="6754" end="6763" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q273212" start="6911" end="6931" title="John C. Breckinridge" label="John C. Breckinridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="6975" end="6989" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="7106" end="7125" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="7142" end="7151" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="7246" end="7260" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="7514" end="7520" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061488" start="7522" end="7530" title="United States of Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="7606" end="7623" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q591829" start="7677" end="7691" title="Alabama claims" label="Alabama claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131110" start="7723" end="7730" title="counsel" label="counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="7755" end="7771" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837668" start="7912" end="7929" title="United States Ambassador to Spain" label="Minister to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825907" start="7960" end="7988" title="Virginius Affair" label="&amp;quot;Virginius&amp;quot; Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="8105" end="8118" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="8126" end="8153" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q725008" start="8219" end="8240" title="George Henry Williams" label="George Henry Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="8322" end="8341" title="Radical Republicans" label="Radical Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q510690" start="8508" end="8518" title="Copperhead (politics)" label="Copperhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999471" start="8675" end="8703" title="President of the Confederate States of America" label="President of the Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="8704" end="8719" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9093" end="9111" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889677" start="9164" end="9189" title="Battle of Portland Harbor" label="Battle of Portland Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456442" start="9801" end="9861" title="Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States" label="Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q59240430" start="10122" end="10141" title="Claude Fuess" label="Fuess, Claude Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q127437" start="10684" end="10696" title="Carl Schurz" label="Schurz, Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q49137" start="10887" end="10899" title="Faneuil Hall" label="Faneuil Hall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683852" wikidata="Q1180885" url="?curid=683852" title="East Greenbush">
<text>East Greenbush is the name the following places in the United States of America:

*East Greenbush (CDP), New York
*East Greenbush (town), New York</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3460456" start="83" end="113" title="East Greenbush (CDP), New York" label="East Greenbush (CDP), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q986308" start="115" end="146" title="East Greenbush (town), New York" label="East Greenbush (town), New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683856" wikidata="Q398723" url="?curid=683856" title="The Last Supper (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[Last Supper]] refers to the last meal that Jesus Christ took with his disciples.

The Last Supper may also refer to:
==Artwork==
Depictions of the Last Supper in Christian art:
* &quot;Last Supper&quot; (Castagno), a 1447 painting by Andrea del Castagno
* &quot;Last Supper&quot; (Rosselli) (1481–1482), a fresco by Biagio d&#x27;Antonio in the Sistine Chapel
* &quot;Last Supper&quot; (Perugino) (1493–1496), a fresco by Pietro Perugino
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (Leonardo) (1495–1498), a mural painting by Leonardo da Vinci
* &quot;Altarpiece of the Holy Sacrament&quot; or &quot;Last Supper&quot;, a 1464–1467 painting in a triptych altarpiece by Dieric Bouts
* &quot;Last Supper&quot; (Ghirlandaio), a 1480 painting by Domenico Ghirlandaio
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, a 1542 painting by Jacopo Bassano
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (1555–1562), a painting by Vicente Juan Masip
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (Damaskinos), 1591 painting by Michael Damaskinos
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (Tintoretto), a 1594 painting by Tintoretto
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, a 16th-century painting by Plautilla Nelli
* The Last Supper (Crespi) (1624–1625), by Daniele Crespi
* &quot;Last Supper&quot; (Rubens) (1630–1631), a 1631 painting by Peter Paul Rubens
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, a 1648 painting by Philippe de Champaigne
* &quot;Last Supper&quot;, a 17th-century painting by Nicolas Poussin
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, a 1721 painting by Gustavus Hesselius
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, an 1861 painting by Nikolai Ge
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, a 19th-century painting by Pascal Dagnan-Bouveret
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (Nolde), a 1909 painting by Emil Nolde
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (Pisani), a 1917 painting by Lazzaro Pisani
* &quot;The Sacrament of the Last Supper&quot; (1955), by Salvador Dalí
* The Last Supper (Warhol), a (1984-1986) series of paintings by Andy Warhol
* The Last Supper (Ribera), a 1651 oil on canvas painting by Jusepe de Ribera

==Film==
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (1976 film), an historical film by Tomás Gutiérrez Alea
* &quot;Last Supper&quot; (1992 film), BBC television film directed by Robert Frank
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (1994 film), a Canadian drama by Cynthia Roberts
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (1995 film), a comedy-drama starring Cameron Diaz
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (2003 film), a South Korean comedy
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (2006 film), a comedic short film
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (2012 film), a Chinese historical film
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (2014 film), an Indian thriller film
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (2025 film), an American drama film
* &quot;Last Supper&quot; (2014 film), also titled &quot;Going to America&quot;, an American film

== Government ==

* Last Supper (Defense industry), a meal hosted at the Pentagon at the end of the Cold War concerning the future of the US defense industry

==Music==
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (Black Sabbath video), a video/DVD featuring the band&#x27;s live onstage shows from their 1999 U.S tour
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, a 1995 album by Belphegor
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (Jim Gaffigan album), 2004
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (Grave Digger album), 2005
* &quot;The Last Supper: Live at Hammerstein Ballroom&quot;, a 2006 Coheed and Cambria concert DVD
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, a song in the 1970 rock opera &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot;
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (opera), a 2000 opera

==Other arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Chew – The Last Suppers&quot;, a comic book series by John Layman and Rob Guillory
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (novel), a 1983 novel by Charles McCarry
* &quot;Last Supper&quot; (&quot;The Outer Limits&quot;), a 1997 episode of &quot;The Outer Limits&quot; television show
* &quot;The Last Supper,&quot; a 1989 episode of &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot;, the first entry in the &quot;Giovanni Chronicles&quot; series of tabletop game books

==See also==
* Eucharist, or the Lord&#x27;s Supper
* Last meal, customarily given to a condemned prisoner</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q398723" start="4" end="19" title="The Last Supper (disambiguation)" label="[[Last Supper]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q398723" start="88" end="103" title="The Last Supper (disambiguation)" label="The Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494691" start="153" end="181" title="Last Supper in Christian art" label="Last Supper in Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009677" start="185" end="219" title="Last Supper (Castagno)" label="&amp;quot;Last Supper&amp;quot; (Castagno)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003126" start="262" end="296" title="Last Supper (Rosselli)" label="&amp;quot;Last Supper&amp;quot; (Rosselli)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208044" start="368" end="402" title="Last Supper (Perugino)" label="&amp;quot;Last Supper&amp;quot; (Perugino)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128910" start="446" end="484" title="The Last Supper (Leonardo)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (Leonardo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q318944" start="544" end="576" title="Altarpiece of the Holy Sacrament" label="Altarpiece of the Holy Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q290918" start="675" end="712" title="The Last Supper (Ghirlandaio)" label="&amp;quot;Last Supper&amp;quot; (Ghirlandaio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q346502" start="804" end="818" title="Jacopo Bassano" label="Jacopo Bassano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11287651" start="876" end="894" title="Vicente Juan Masip" label="Vicente Juan Masip"/>
<link wikidata="Q109287241" start="897" end="937" title="The Last Supper (Damaskinos)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (Damaskinos)"/>
<link wikidata="Q718276" start="956" end="974" title="Michael Damaskinos" label="Michael Damaskinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472983" start="977" end="1017" title="Last Supper (Tintoretto)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (Tintoretto)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906452" start="1107" end="1122" title="Plautilla Nelli" label="Plautilla Nelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q25207" start="1125" end="1149" title="The Last Supper (Crespi)" label="The Last Supper (Crespi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699475" start="1183" end="1215" title="Last Supper (Rubens)" label="&amp;quot;Last Supper&amp;quot; (Rubens)"/>
<link wikidata="Q314814" start="1316" end="1338" title="Philippe de Champaigne" label="Philippe de Champaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="1393" end="1408" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130717" start="1459" end="1477" title="Gustavus Hesselius" label="Gustavus Hesselius"/>
<link wikidata="Q457976" start="1529" end="1539" title="Nikolai Ge" label="Nikolai Ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q663837" start="1598" end="1620" title="Pascal Dagnan-Bouveret" label="Pascal Dagnan-Bouveret"/>
<link wikidata="Q116858669" start="1623" end="1658" title="The Last Supper (Nolde)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (Nolde)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058504" start="1692" end="1728" title="The Last Supper (Pisani)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (Pisani)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30521" start="1772" end="1804" title="The Sacrament of the Last Supper" label="The Sacrament of the Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q111937151" start="1838" end="1862" title="The Last Supper (Warhol)" label="The Last Supper (Warhol)"/>
<link wikidata="Q98545387" start="1915" end="1939" title="The Last Supper (Ribera)" label="The Last Supper (Ribera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746083" start="2003" end="2042" title="The Last Supper (1976 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (1976 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2089" end="2124" title="Last Supper (1992 film)" label="&amp;quot;Last Supper&amp;quot; (1992 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q467574" start="2158" end="2170" title="Robert Frank" label="Robert Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746073" start="2173" end="2212" title="The Last Supper (1994 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (1994 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127045" start="2252" end="2291" title="The Last Supper (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (1995 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746075" start="2332" end="2371" title="The Last Supper (2003 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (2003 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987920" start="2397" end="2436" title="The Last Supper (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q387096" start="2461" end="2500" title="The Last Supper (2012 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (2012 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111945973" start="2530" end="2569" title="The Last Supper (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q132716707" start="2597" end="2636" title="The Last Supper (2025 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (2025 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151570" start="2663" end="2698" title="Last Supper (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;Last Supper&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q129744698" start="2780" end="2810" title="Last Supper (Defense industry)" label="Last Supper (Defense industry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q166084" start="2931" end="2980" title="The Last Supper (Black Sabbath video)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (Black Sabbath video)"/>
<link wikidata="Q589580" start="3111" end="3120" title="Belphegor (band)" label="Belphegor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746084" start="3123" end="3171" title="The Last Supper (Jim Gaffigan album)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (Jim Gaffigan album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746086" start="3180" end="3228" title="The Last Supper (Grave Digger album)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (Grave Digger album)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3243" end="3288" title="The Last Supper: Live at Hammerstein Ballroom" label="The Last Supper: Live at Hammerstein Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q242667" start="3401" end="3423" title="Jesus Christ Superstar" label="Jesus Christ Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746090" start="3432" end="3467" title="The Last Supper (opera)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15502397" start="3578" end="3589" title="John Layman" label="John Layman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746088" start="3609" end="3644" title="The Last Supper (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Last Supper&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545617" start="3680" end="3734" title="Last Supper (The Outer Limits)" label="&amp;quot;Last Supper&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Outer Limits&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q242022" start="3854" end="3871" title="War of the Worlds (1988 TV series)" label="War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q85763552" start="3938" end="3957" title="Giovanni Chronicles" label="Giovanni Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="4010" end="4019" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605306" start="4049" end="4058" title="Last meal" label="Last meal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683858" wikidata="Q186685" url="?curid=683858" title="Marae">
<text>A (in New Zealand Māori, Cook Islands Māori, Tahitian), (in Tongan), (in Marquesan) or (in Samoan) is a communal or sacred place that serves religious and social purposes in Polynesian societies. In all these languages, the term also means cleared and free of weeds or trees. generally consist of an area of cleared land roughly rectangular (the itself), bordered with stones or wooden posts (called &#x27; in Tahitian and Cook Islands Māori) perhaps with&#x27; (terraces) which were traditionally used for ceremonial purposes; and in some cases, such as Easter Island, a central stone &quot;&quot; or &quot;a&#x27;u&quot; is placed. In the Easter Island Rapa Nui culture, the term &quot;ahu&quot; or &quot;a&#x27;u&quot; has become a synonym for the whole marae complex.

In some modern Polynesian societies, notably that of the Māori of New Zealand, the marae is still a vital part of everyday life. In tropical Polynesia, most marae were destroyed or abandoned with the arrival of Christianity in the 19th century, and some have become attractions for tourists or archaeologists. Nevertheless, the place where these marae were built are still considered &quot;&quot; (sacred) in most of these cultures.

As is usual with Māori nouns, the same word serves as the singular and plural of &quot;marae&quot;.

==Etymology==
The word has been reconstructed by linguists to Eastern Oceanic &quot;*malaqe&quot; with the meaning &quot;open, cleared space used as meeting-place or ceremonial place&quot;.
== New Zealand ==
 In Māori society, the is a place where the culture can be celebrated, where the Māori language can be spoken, where intertribal obligations can be met, where customs can be explored and debated, where family occasions such as birthdays can be held, and where important ceremonies, such as welcoming visitors or farewelling the dead (&quot;tangihanga&quot;), can be performed. Like the related institutions of old Polynesia, the &quot;marae&quot; is a &quot;wāhi tapu&quot;, a &#x27;sacred place&#x27; which carries great cultural meaning.

In Māori usage, the (often shortened to ) is the open space in front of the (meeting house; literally &quot;large building&quot;). Generally the term is used to refer to the whole complex, including the buildings and the . This area is used for &quot;pōwhiri&quot; (welcome ceremonies) featuring oratory. Some (tribes) and (sub-tribes) do not allow women to perform oratory on their , though typically women perform a Karanga (call). The wharenui is the locale for important meetings, sleepovers, and craft and other cultural activities.
The &quot;wharekai&quot; (dining hall) is used primarily for communal meals, but other activities may be carried out there.

Many of the words associated with in tropical Polynesia are retained in the Māori context. For example, the word refers to the bench where the speakers sit; this means it retains its sacred and ceremonial associations. vary in size, with some being a bit bigger than a double garage, and some being larger than a typical town hall.

===Legal status===
A is a meeting place registered as a reserve under the Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993 (The Māori Land Act). Each has a group of trustees who are responsible for the operations of the . The Act governs the regulation of as reservations and sets out the responsibilities of the trustees in relation to the beneficiaries. Generally each has a charter which the trustees have negotiated with the beneficiaries of the . The charter details matters such as:

*the name of the &quot;&quot;, and a description of it;
*a list of the beneficiaries: usually (tribes/nations), (clans) or (families); in some cases, the is dedicated to the common good of the people of New Zealand.
*the methods used to select trustees;
*general governing principles of the ;
*the ways in which the trustees may be held accountable by the beneficiaries, and methods for conflict resolution;
*principles governing appointment and recognition of committees to administer the ;
*procedures for amending the charter, and for ensuring adherence to its principles.

The New Zealand Māori Arts and Crafts Institute Act 1963 was passed and the institute built to maintain the tradition of . The Institute is responsible for the building and restoration of over 40 around the country.

===Traditional, church, and educational uses===
Most iwi, hapū, and even many small settlements have their own marae. An example of such a small settlement with its own marae is at Hongoeka Bay, Plimmerton, the home of the renowned writer Patricia Grace. Since the second half of the 20th century, Māori in urban areas have been establishing intertribal &quot;marae&quot; such as Maraeroa in eastern Porirua. For many Māori, the &quot;marae&quot; is just as important to them as their own homes.

Some New Zealand churches also operate marae of their own, in which all of the functions of a traditional marae are carried out. Churches operating marae include the Anglican, Presbyterian, and Catholic churches. In recent years, it has become common for educational institutions, including primary and secondary schools, technical colleges, and universities, to build marae for the use of the students and for the teaching of Māori culture. These marae may also serve as a venue for the performance of official ceremonies relating to the school.

The of the University of Auckland, for instance, is used for graduation ceremonies of the Māori Department, as well as welcoming ceremonies for new staff of the university as a whole. Its primary function is to serve as a venue for the teaching of (oratory), Māori language and culture, and important ceremonies for distinguished guests of the university. Two detailed secondary-school marae are located in the Waikato at Te Awamutu College and Fairfield College. The latter was designed by a Māori architect with a detailed knowledge of carving and weaving; its features an intricately carved revolving (pillar) as well as many other striking features. In addition to school activities, it is used for weddings.

==== Tangihanga (funeral rites) ====
As in pre-European times, continue to be the location of many ceremonial events, including birthdays, weddings, and anniversaries. The most important event located at marae is the . are the means by which the dead are farewelled and the surviving family members supported in Māori society. As indicated by Ka&#x27;ai and Higgins, &quot;the importance of the tangihanga and its central place in marae custom is reflected in the fact that it takes precedence over any other gathering on the marae&quot;.

==Cook Islands==

In the Cook Islands, there are many historic marae (tapu or sacred places) that were used for religious ceremonies on the islands. Rarotonga and Aitutaki have some particularly impressive marae. Although many of the carved figures on the marae were either destroyed or confiscated by Christian missionaries, the stones of many of the ancient marae remain to this day. Some marae are in better shape than others, as vegetation grows fast on the islands. In Rarotonga, a few of the marae (Arai-te-Tonga, Vaerota, Taputapuātea) are still maintained, and are quickly tidied up before the investiture of a new ariki.

Rarotongan tradition holds that Taputapuātea marae at Rarotonga, which archaeologists have dated to the 13th century, was built by Tangi&#x27;ia who brought the central stone with him from the ancient marae of the same name at Ra&#x27;iātea. Indeed, it seems that it was quite usual in ancient times to take a stone from this marae. The son of Tetupaia and Teu had not only the right to a seat in the great Marae of Taputapuatea in Raiatea, but he could take his stone from Taputapuatea and set it up in his own district of Pare Arue (Tahiti), so founding a Marae Taputapuatea of his own to wear the Maro-&#x27;ura (red waist girdle of the ariki) in.

Mangaia had a marae named Taputapuatea and an &quot;ariori&quot; (priest) house.

==Rapa Nui/Easter Island==
In the remote southeastern corner of the Polynesian Triangle elements of the traditional Polynesian &quot;marae&quot; evolved into the Rapa Nui/Easter Island &quot;ahu&quot; and their iconic moai (statues).

==Tahiti==

According to Salmond, marae are &quot;portals between Po, the world of the gods and darkness, and the Ao, the everyday world of people and light, so that people could communicate with their ancestors.&quot; Notable marae include Vai&#x27;otaha marae on Borabora, Mataʻireʻa marae on Huahine, and Taputapuātea marae, a UNESCO World Heritage site on Raʻiātea, considered to be one of the most sacred sites in Polynesia.

ʻOro marae on Tahiti included Vaiʻotaha marae at Tautira, the first, followed by Utu-ʻai-mahurau at Paea, Mahaiatea marae at Papara, Tarahoʻi marae at Pare-ʻArue, and Hitiaʻa marae on Hitiaa O Te Ra. 

In Tahiti, &quot;marae&quot; were dedicated to specific deities, and also connected with specific lineages said to have built them. During the 1994 restoration of Taputapuātea marae at Raʻiātea by archaeologists from the Tahiti Museum, human bones were discovered under some of the structures. It is possible they were the remains of human sacrifices to the god ʻOro, revered in Tahiti.

==See also==
*Lists of marae in New Zealand
*Heiau (Hawaii)
*Dap-ay (Philippines)

==Notes==
==References==
*Hirini Moko Mead, 2003. &quot;Tikanga Māori: Living by Māori Values.&quot; Huia Publishers: Wellington.

==External links==

*Māori Maps, a guide to New Zealand marae
*The marae – meeting place, New Zealand in History
*Gérard, Bertrand, &quot;Le marae: description morphologique&quot; in &quot;Cahiers des Sciences Humaines&quot;, 1978, Vol. 15, No 4, pp. 407–448. Architecture and morphology of Society Islands Marae
*John Joseph Knight Hutchin, &quot;E Tuatua no te apai atinga ki mua i te marae, i te tuatau etene anga&quot; (&quot;Tale of the offerings at the marae in heathen time&quot;) in &quot;Collected songs and legends from the southern Cook Islands (c. 1883–1912)&quot;, notebook 2
*Marae Protocols</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="6" end="23" title="Māori language" label="New Zealand Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q36745" start="25" end="43" title="Cook Islands Māori" label="Cook Islands Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="45" end="53" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="60" end="66" title="Tongan language" label="Tongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33781" start="73" end="82" title="Marquesan language" label="Marquesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="91" end="97" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226618" start="174" end="184" title="Polynesian culture" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q186685" start="400" end="455" title="Marae" label="&amp;#x27; in Tahitian and Cook Islands Māori) perhaps with"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="555" end="568" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q852486" start="655" end="663" title="Rapa Nui people" label="Rapa Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="830" end="835" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="839" end="850" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="984" end="996" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392493" start="1856" end="1866" title="tangihanga" label="tangihanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265198" start="2308" end="2315" title="pōwhiri" label="pōwhiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368456" start="2475" end="2489" title="Karanga (Māori culture)" label="Karanga (call)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690996" start="3127" end="3156" title="Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993" label="Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015523" start="4105" end="4148" title="New Zealand Māori Arts and Crafts Institute" label="New Zealand Māori Arts and Crafts Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4499" end="4511" title="Hongoeka Bay" label="Hongoeka Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q510262" start="4513" end="4523" title="Plimmerton" label="Plimmerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q138882" start="4557" end="4571" title="Patricia Grace" label="Patricia Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903066" start="4698" end="4706" title="Maraeroa" label="Maraeroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015773" start="4718" end="4725" title="Porirua" label="Porirua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4981" end="4989" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="4991" end="5003" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5009" end="5017" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q492467" start="5374" end="5396" title="University of Auckland" label="University of Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q139918" start="5774" end="5781" title="Waikato" label="Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q992759" start="5785" end="5803" title="Te Awamutu College" label="Te Awamutu College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430256" start="5808" end="5825" title="Fairfield College" label="Fairfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13039303" start="5901" end="5908" title="carving" label="carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="5913" end="5920" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="6642" end="6654" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11046554" start="6687" end="6691" title="Tapu (Polynesian culture)" label="tapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829193" start="6695" end="6707" title="sacred place" label="sacred place"/>
<link wikidata="Q471793" start="6766" end="6775" title="Rarotonga" label="Rarotonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q223379" start="6780" end="6788" title="Aitutaki" label="Aitutaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="6919" end="6928" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="6929" end="6941" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q167407" start="7219" end="7230" title="investiture" label="investiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861281" start="7240" end="7245" title="ariki" label="ariki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287362" start="7449" end="7471" title="Taputapuātea marae" label="marae of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q847008" start="7475" end="7488" title="Ra&amp;#x27;iātea" label="Ra&amp;#x27;iātea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359323" start="7900" end="7907" title="Mangaia" label="Mangaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668347" start="8050" end="8069" title="Polynesian Triangle" label="Polynesian Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226618" start="8098" end="8108" title="Polynesian culture" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="8144" end="8152" title="Rapa Nui" label="Rapa Nui"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8173" end="8176" title="Easter Island#Ahu (stone platforms)" label="ahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20350" start="8200" end="8204" title="moai" label="moai"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="8396" end="8428" title="veneration of the dead" label="communicate with their ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q183113" start="8482" end="8490" title="Bora Bora" label="Borabora"/>
<link wikidata="Q521020" start="8512" end="8519" title="Huahine" label="Huahine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287362" start="8525" end="8543" title="Taputapuatea marae" label="Taputapuātea marae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031332" start="8648" end="8652" title="ʻOro" label="ʻOro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516204" start="8697" end="8704" title="Tautira" label="Tautira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788505" start="8748" end="8752" title="Paea" label="Paea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970268" start="8773" end="8779" title="Papara" label="Papara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788497" start="8799" end="8803" title="Pirae" label="Pare"/>
<link wikidata="Q716412" start="8804" end="8809" title="Arue, French Polynesia" label="ʻArue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621155" start="8832" end="8846" title="Hitiaa O Te Ra" label="Hitiaa O Te Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="8853" end="8859" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9071" end="9084" title="Tahiti Museum" label="Tahiti Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="9184" end="9199" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25659305" start="9252" end="9281" title="Lists of marae in New Zealand" label="Lists of marae in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097744" start="9283" end="9288" title="Heiau" label="Heiau"/>
<link wikidata="Q110818395" start="9299" end="9305" title="Dap-ay" label="Dap-ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934931" start="9422" end="9437" title="Huia Publishers" label="Huia Publishers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683867" wikidata="Q422170" url="?curid=683867" title="WCS">
<text>WCS may refer to:

==Computing and technology==
*Warehouse control system, a software application 
*Web Coverage Service, interface standard for digital geospatial information 
*WebSphere Commerce Suite, a software platform framework for e-commerce
*Windows Color System, a software color management technology in Windows Vista and onwards
*Writeable Control Store, memory used to load the operating system of the Amiga 1000

==Education==
*Wayne Community School District, or Wayne Community Schools, in Iowa, U.S.
*Whitinsville Christian School, in Whitinsville, Massachusetts, U.S.
*Wichita Collegiate School, in Wichita, Kansas, U.S.
*Wilcox County School District (Georgia), U.S.
*Williamson County Schools, in Tennessee, U.S.
*Wycliffe Christian School, in Warrimoo, New South Wales, Australia

==Other uses==
*Waste collection system, the space toilet on the Space Shuttle
*Waste Control Specialists, a nuclear waste disposal company
*West Coast Swing, a swing dance
*Western Canadian Select, a heavy crude oil stream in North America
*Wildlife Conservation Society, a US-based international wildlife organisation
*Williams–Campbell syndrome, a disease of the airways
*Wireless Communications Service, a US and Canadian set of frequency bands 
*World Cosplay Summit, an annual international cosplay event
*StarCraft II World Championship Series, esports competition for &quot;StarCraft II&quot;

==See also==
* WC (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q422170" start="0" end="3" title="WCS" label="WCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566288" start="49" end="73" title="Warehouse control system" label="Warehouse control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000194" start="100" end="120" title="Web Coverage Service" label="Web Coverage Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969126" start="178" end="196" title="WebSphere Commerce" label="WebSphere Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948364" start="250" end="270" title="Windows Color System" label="Windows Color System"/>
<link wikidata="Q471089" start="414" end="424" title="Amiga 1000" label="Amiga 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q55106674" start="441" end="472" title="Wayne Community School District" label="Wayne Community School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996524" start="517" end="546" title="Whitinsville Christian School" label="Whitinsville Christian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998119" start="586" end="611" title="Wichita Collegiate School" label="Wichita Collegiate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000318" start="639" end="678" title="Wilcox County School District (Georgia)" label="Wilcox County School District (Georgia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021208" start="686" end="711" title="Williamson County Schools" label="Williamson County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q14979514" start="733" end="758" title="Wycliffe Christian School" label="Wycliffe Christian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427765" start="817" end="840" title="Waste collection system" label="Waste collection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972798" start="881" end="906" title="Waste Control Specialists" label="Waste Control Specialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738733" start="942" end="958" title="West Coast Swing" label="West Coast Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987670" start="975" end="998" title="Western Canadian Select" label="Western Canadian Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118246" start="1043" end="1072" title="Wildlife Conservation Society" label="Wildlife Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020956" start="1122" end="1148" title="Williams–Campbell syndrome" label="Williams–Campbell syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637816" start="1176" end="1207" title="Wireless Communications Service" label="Wireless Communications Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300454" start="1252" end="1272" title="World Cosplay Summit" label="World Cosplay Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869946" start="1313" end="1351" title="StarCraft II World Championship Series" label="StarCraft II World Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q114850" start="1418" end="1437" title="WC (disambiguation)" label="WC (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683873" wikidata="Q319458" url="?curid=683873" title="Machine Head (band)">
<text>Machine Head is an American heavy metal band from Oakland, California. The band was formed in 1991 by vocalist/rhythm guitarist Robb Flynn, who remains the only original member of the band. Machine Head&#x27;s aggressive musicianship made it one of the pioneering bands in the new wave of American heavy metal. Its current lineup comprises Flynn, bassist Jared MacEachern, drummer Matt Alston and guitarist Reece Scruggs. Bassist Adam Duce, guitarists Logan Mader, Ahrue Luster, Phil Demmel and Wacław Kiełtyka, and drummers Tony Costanza, Chris Kontos and Dave McClain are former members of the band; Mader and Kontos toured with the band in 2019 and 2020 as part of the 25th anniversary tour for its first album, &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot; (1994).

Machine Head&#x27;s first four albums earned the band a growing fan base in Europe; however, the band would not have success in the United States until later releases. The band drew controversy with its fourth album, &quot;Supercharger&quot; (2001), which was released three weeks after the September 11 attacks; its only single, &quot;Crashing Around You&quot;, and its music video (which featured burning buildings) was pulled from all media outlets. The band nearly disbanded in 2002 after negotiating off its label Roadrunner Records as a result of the controversy, however the band would eventually re-sign with the label.

Having experimented with elements of groove metal and nu metal in its early releases, Machine Head changed to a more traditional thrash metal sound and longer songs with its sixth album, &quot;The Blackening&quot; (2007), which drew critical acclaim and was chosen as Album of the Decade by &quot;Metal Hammer&quot; in 2010; the album&#x27;s first single, &quot;Aesthetics of Hate&quot;, also earned a Grammy Award nomination. The band achieved similar success with its next two albums, &quot;Unto the Locust&quot; (2011) and &quot;Bloodstone &amp; Diamonds&quot; (2014), before again experimenting with nu metal on its ninth album, &quot;Catharsis&quot; (2018). Machine Head reverted to its groove and thrash metal roots with its tenth and most recent album, &quot;Of Kingdom and Crown&quot; (2022), which was its first concept album.

Machine Head has released ten studio albums, two live albums, one video album, 13 singles and 15 music videos. Four of the band&#x27;s studio albums have been certified silver in the United Kingdom, and the band&#x27;s highest peak on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 came with &quot;Bloodstone &amp; Diamonds&quot; at number 21. As of 2013, the band has sold over three million records worldwide.

==History==

===Formation and &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot; (1991–1995)===
On October 12, 1991, vocalist/guitarist Robb Flynn attended the Day on the Green festival in Oakland, California, featuring Metallica, Queensrÿche, Faith No More and Soundgarden. Unhappy with the creative direction of then-current band Vio-lence, he became inspired to form his own band. Later that evening, he asked friend, bassist and longtime Vio-lence fan Adam Duce to join his then-unnamed side project, which became Machine Head. At the point of the band&#x27;s formation, Flynn had written &quot;Death Church&quot; and &quot;Blood for Blood&quot;—both of which Vio-lence had rejected. Four months after the band&#x27;s formation, Flynn parted ways with Vio-lence after a physical fight between the band members and a local gang. Flynn then recruited guitarist Logan Mader and drummer Tony Costanza. Despite the popular belief that it came from the Deep Purple album of the same name, Flynn settled on the name Machine Head purely because he thought it &quot;sounded cool&quot;. The band played their first show at a house party in Oakland on August 15, 1992. The band then started jamming in a local warehouse shared with four punk rock bands. Machine Head recorded a demo in a friend&#x27;s bedroom, funded with US$800. A record executive representing Roadrunner Records listened to the demo and signed the band.

Machine Head entered Fantasy Studios in Berkeley, California to record its debut album &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot;. Not long into production, Constanza left the band and was replaced by Chris Kontos. Most of the songs on the album were songs written by Flynn and Duce during the time Flynn was not in a band, about &quot;being pissed off&quot; from his previous struggles in Vio-lence, as well as both of their battles with illegal drugs. Produced by Colin Richardson, the album was released on August 9, 1994. The album shipped nearly 400,000 copies worldwide, becoming Roadrunner Records&#x27; best-selling debut album. Allmusic reviewer John Franck stated &quot;&quot;Burn My Eyes&quot; is a bone-shattering exercise in brutality&quot;.

Not long after &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot; release Machine Head started touring heavily in support of the album, opening for Slayer in Europe in the latter half of 1994, a tour which ended with their own headline show at the London Astoria. Following the success of the support tour, the band returned to Europe for a headline tour in early 1995, performing in the same venues they opened for Slayer. The band would return to Europe for the summer festival season but Kontos refused to tour and the band drafted Walter Ryan for the festival dates. On the band&#x27;s return to the US, Kontos was fired because he was not keeping to touring commitments, and Kontos went on to play drums with Testament. When Machine Head began auditioning drummers, Flynn received a phone call from Igor Cavalera and music journalist Borivoj Krgin, who recommended him to Dave McClain, then of Sacred Reich. After McClain initially declined, the band began auditioning other potential drummers but received another call from McClain, who accepted the offer. McClain was hired after the audition, leaving Sacred Reich. 

===&quot;The More Things Change...&quot; and &quot;The Burning Red&quot; (1996–2000)===
After touring for &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot;, Machine Head entered the studio on June 10, 1996, to record its second studio album, &quot;The More Things Change...&quot;, with Richardson producing and mixing for a second time. The band expected to release the album in October of that year, but its release was delayed due to McClain breaking his leg and problems with its recording, including guitar and vocal tracks being erased for no apparent reason and a protracted mixing process that lasted four months. The album was ultimately released on March 24, 1997, and debuted at number 138 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 albums chart. By July 1998, the album had sold 400,000 copies worldwide. Machine Head toured in Europe with Napalm Death, Coal Chamber and Skinlab, then went on the first Ozzfest for the first tours in support of the album. Mader showed up to a practice session late, high on methamphetamine, cursing at and insulting the band members; and quit the band later that day. Ahrue Luster replaced him and finished touring, while Mader toured with Soulfly in support of their self-titled debut album. 

After three years of touring and working with producer Ross Robinson, Machine Head released its third studio album, &quot;The Burning Red&quot;, on July 27, 1999. The band added new elements to its music, including rapping vocals, a move which some believe to have been influenced by Ahrue Luster. This album, along with the band&#x27;s change in image and musical direction was highly criticized, with critics and fans alike accusing the band of &quot;selling out&quot;. Nevertheless, McClain stated they weren&#x27;t trying to sound like popular bands but &quot;wanted to sound different&quot;. Rick Anderson of Allmusic stated Machine Head was &quot;sounding a bit looser and less constricted musically than they have in the past&quot;. &quot;The Burning Red&quot; went on to become Machine Head&#x27;s second best-selling album, and debuted at number 88 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200.

===&quot;Supercharger&quot; and &quot;Through the Ashes of Empires&quot; (2001–2005)===
Machine Head finished touring for &quot;The Burning Red&quot; and entered a studio with producer Johnny K to record &quot;Supercharger&quot;. Debuting at number 115 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, the album was released on October 2, 2001. The album met the same criticism as &quot;The Burning Red&quot;, especially for the ever-present rapping vocals. Blabbermouth.net reviewer Borivoj Krgin stated &quot;Supercharger&quot; &quot;is likely to disappoint everyone who is expecting the Bay Area quartet to return to the ultra-testosterone-charged sounds of their first two albums&quot;.

Machine Head released a single for &quot;Crashing Around You&quot; as well as a music video. The video was released several weeks after the September 11 attacks, and was banned from MTV for the depictions of falling buildings. Roadrunner Records, expecting to make a fair profit from album promotions, dropped the band&#x27;s funding, causing Machine Head to leave the label. At the same time the band was leaving Roadrunner, Luster departed from the band for musical differences.

By 2002, Machine Head had sold over 1.3 million albums worldwide, and overall &quot;Supercharger&quot; (mixed by Colin Richardson) would go on to sell 250,000 copies worldwide, which was their lowest selling album to date. Once the tour for the album had been completed, Machine Head and Roadrunner Records mutually decided to sever ties with regards to distribution in North America and around the world, however to fill the ties, the band released &quot;Hellalive&quot; (also mixed by Richardson) which was a recording of a Brixton Academy, London set.

In 2002, Luster left the band and was temporarily replaced by Phil Demmel, who played in thrash band Vio-lence alongside Flynn. Demmel played some festival shows with Machine Head (including a headlining slot at the With Full Force festival in Germany). Then with Demmel not being able to commit to the band, he and Machine Head parted ways. The remainder of the band starting writing songs for the next album (eventually &quot;Through the Ashes...&quot;), and hoping to get signed to a record label. They recorded a short demo, including a radio-style song called &quot;Pins and Needles&quot;, and an Electronic Press Kit for the companies, also hoping they can get signed on the strength of their previous efforts. Nearly every record label in the music industry rejected the four track demo.

After Machine Head&#x27;s European tour, Luster returned to his family business and the band started writing together as a three-piece, while leaving a position open for Demmel. In March 2003, Demmel joined Machine Head as a full-time guitarist and started writing with the band. By June 2003, Machine Head entered a studio with Flynn producing. On October 31, 2003, Machine Head released &quot;Through the Ashes of Empires&quot; in Europe.

The band was turned down by multiple record labels in the United States, until Roadrunner USA, interested in the new album, offered Machine Head another record contract. Machine Head accepted the offer on the grounds that the band owns 100% of the music. On April 20, 2004, &quot;Through the Ashes of Empires&quot; was released in the United States with a bonus track for the Americans&#x27; long wait for the album&#x27;s release. The album debuted at number 88 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. The band released a single for &quot;Imperium&quot;, the video for which received heavy rotation on MTV. Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic stated &quot;Through the Ashes of Empires&quot; &quot;marked a return to form in no uncertain terms&quot;.

Machine Head headlined the True Metal stage at the 2005 Wacken Open Air festival to 40,000 fans—the band&#x27;s largest headlining crowd at the time. The band released a DVD containing a full sold-out concert held at the Brixton Academy in December 2004, a documentary, and music videos. The DVD debuted at number 13 on the U.S. music video charts. They also played in Dubai for the annual Dubai Desert Rock Festival in 2005. This was their first show in the Middle East. The band also played at the farewell concert of Böhse Onkelz on the Euro Speedway Lausitz.

===&quot;The Blackening&quot; (2006–2009)===

Machine Head&#x27;s sixth studio album, titled &quot;The Blackening&quot;, was released in North America on March 27, 2007. It entered the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 at number 53, the highest charting position for the band at that time, with first-week sales of 15,000. It also made the top 20 in several European countries. Robb Flynn stated during an interview that the band are fans of Rush and received a great deal of influence from their album &quot;A Farewell to Kings&quot; while creating &quot;The Blackening&quot;.

The album received positive reviews from music critics, with some labeling it the best metal album of 2007. Blabbermouth.net reviewer Don Kaye awarded the album a 9.5 out of 10, saying &quot;The Blackening&quot; is &quot;one of the purest, finest, most powerful expressions of modern heavy metal released&quot; and compared it to the 1986 Metallica album &quot;Master of Puppets&quot;, while Allmusic editor Thom Jurek described the album as &quot;an over the top rage and pummelfest with all the qualities that earned the group its enormous fan base by touring and recording&quot;, praising the songs &quot;Beautiful Mourning&quot;, &quot;Halo&quot;, and &quot;Now I Lay Thee Down&quot;. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; reviewer Andy Greene, however, responded negatively as he was displeased with the songs running over ten minutes.

Machine Head toured North America with Lamb of God, Trivium and Gojira in early 2007 to promote &quot;The Blackening&quot;, and opened for Megadeth and Heaven &amp; Hell in April 2007. A European tour saw the band make an appearance at the Download Festival in Donington Park. Shortly after, the band announced a co-headlining tour with Trivium of Japan, Europe, and Australia titled The Black Crusade from October to December. Other bands on the bill included Arch Enemy, DragonForce (Europe only) and Shadows Fall (Europe only). On June 12, 2007, at the Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards, the band won the award for &quot;Best Album&quot;, and Flynn won the &quot;Golden God&quot; award. Machine Head won Best Album at the Kerrang! Awards 2007 and went on to be chosen as Album of the Decade by &quot;Metal Hammer&quot; in 2010. The band replaced Bullet for My Valentine supporting Metallica&#x27;s Wembley Stadium show on July 8, 2007, as Bullet For My Valentine&#x27;s vocalist Matt Tuck required a tonsillectomy. Machine Head also toured North America with Hellyeah, Nonpoint and Bury Your Dead in early 2008. Machine Head completed a world tour where they played Bengaluru, India, Israel, and Dubai, UAE in March 2008.

In October 2008, the band toured in Australia with Slipknot. The band then toured Europe with Slipknot and Children of Bodom in November and December. The band recorded a version of Iron Maiden&#x27;s classic, &quot;Hallowed Be Thy Name&quot; for a &quot;Kerrang!&quot; tribute compilation album, entitled &quot;Maiden Heaven: A Tribute to Iron Maiden&quot;; this song was played live multiple times since its release and has become a permanent in their current touring setlists. Amongst other bands who appeared on the album were label mates, Dream Theater and Trivium.

It was announced on August 10, 2008, that Machine Head and Austin, Texas based band The Sword would be opening for Metallica at ten shows in January 2009. In a recent interview conducted with Phil Demmel, he revealed that with Machine Head&#x27;s upcoming touring commitments, the band would not have chance to write a follow-up album until at least 2010, for an expected 2011 release date. Machine Head toured with The Sword in Metallica&#x27;s World Magnetic Tour for the &quot;Death Magnetic&quot; album from 2008 to 2009. Machine Head also opened for Megadeth, Slayer and Suicide Silence on the Canadian Carnage tour in late June. Machine Head reportedly cancelled their appearance at the Sonisphere Festival in the UK because they had disagreements with the staff over their slot. They thought they should play after Limp Bizkit. However, a week before the Sonisphere festival took place on August 1 and 2, Machine Head agreed to take back their slot below Limp Bizkit. Their appearance was kept secret until the day they played. In August 2009, they won the Inspiration Award at the 2009 Kerrang! Awards. It was announced on the August 31, that Machine Head would tour through Europe and UK in 2010 with Hatebreed, Bleeding Through, and All Shall Perish in what will be known as &quot;The Black Procession&quot;, as well as adding dates for an Australian and New Zealand tour cycle in March. This will be the last time the band tour in support of &quot;The Blackening&quot; before writing the next album, as Dave McClain described in an interview, before their Belfast show in Northern Ireland.

===&quot;Unto the Locust&quot; (2010–2012)===
In November 2010, Machine Head began writing and demoing new material for their seventh studio album, &quot;Unto the Locust&quot;. With Robb Flynn acting as producer, Machine Head officially began recording the album on April 16, 2011, at Green Day&#x27;s Jingletown Studios in Oakland, California.

In the summer of 2011, Machine Head toured as a part of the Rockstar Mayhem Festival. During the tour, the band debuted a new song off of &quot;Unto the Locust&quot;, entitled &quot;Locust&quot;. The song was later released on Amazon and iTunes on June 14, 2011. &quot;Unto the Locust&quot; was released on September 27, 2011, to critical acclaim. The album charted in several countries, including number 22 in the US (the first time the band had ever cracked the top 25 in US) and at number 5 in Germany.

After the release of &quot;Unto the Locust&quot;, Machine Head began its Eight Plague Tour and during the first European leg, the band was supported by Bring Me the Horizon, DevilDriver, and Darkest Hour. On the North American leg, Machine Head was supported by Suicide Silence, Darkest Hour, and Rise to Remain (although Rise to Remain was later forced to drop out).

In 2012, Machine Head headlined the Soundwave Festival in Australia. The band also played at the 2012 Download Festival, Metalcamp, and Graspop festivals, as well as headlining both Bloodstock Open Air and the Wacken Festival. Machine Head were also scheduled to be part of the first-ever Mayhem Festival cruise, until it was cancelled.

On September 10, Machine Head announced a North American tour with Dethklok, All That Remains and The Black Dahlia Murder, beginning with a &quot;Warm Up&quot; show on October 24, the tour started on October 30 and ended on December 8. On September 14, Machine Head won the &quot;Best International Band&quot; award at the 2012 Metal Hammer awards in Berlin, Germany. On October 1, Machine Head announced the release of &quot;Machine Fucking Head Live&quot;, the band&#x27;s first live album since 2003&#x27;s Hellalive. The album featured 15 live recordings from the band&#x27;s various 2011-2012 tours and was released on November 13 on a two disc set or download with 4 bonus tracks, with pre-orders of the album having a six track rarities &amp; B-sides EP.

On November 13, Machine Head announced cancellation of their North American tour dates from the 13 to the 23 due to Robb Flynn requiring emergency surgery to treat an inguinal hernia.

In a November 2012 interview, Machine Head guitarist Phil Demmel revealed that the band planned to begin writing new material for their eighth studio album in 2013 and hoped that they would begin recording it before the end of the year.

===&quot;Bloodstone &amp; Diamonds&quot; (2013–2015)===
On February 22, 2013, the band announced that bassist/founding member Adam Duce left the band, albeit on friendly terms. Four days later, Flynn revealed in his online blog that he fired Duce because of ongoing differences. His departure makes Flynn the only remaining original member.
As of March 2013, &quot;Unto the Locust&quot; has sold 100,000 copies in the United States, making it their third quickest-selling album behind &quot;The Blackening&quot; and &quot;Supercharger&quot; which have sold 260,000 in two weeks and 250,000 copies in four months in the United States respectively.

The band began the process of searching for a temporary bassist for the 2013 Rockstar Energy Drink Mayhem Festival in the U.S. For a limited time, the band accepted and reviewed YouTube submissions. On June 24, 2013, the band announced that former Sanctity rhythm guitarist and vocalist Jared MacEachern had joined the band as their new bassist. Robb Flynn said of MacEachern: &quot;Monte Conner recommended Jared since he was already on the tour, and that ended up being a great call. Jared flew out a few days before the tour and rehearsed with us and did great.&quot; Phil Demmel continued: — &quot;There were dozens of amazing players, and it was interesting to watch each one take on our tunes. One of our biggest criteria for this gig was to be able to sing the high harmonies. That was our litmus test. And Jared passed with flying colors.&quot;.

On October 2, 2013, the band announced that they signed with Nuclear Blast. In February 2014, the band entered the studio to record their new album, &quot;Bloodstone &amp; Diamonds&quot;, for a late summer release.

In early 2014, Duce filed a lawsuit against his former band and manager in federal court &quot;for trademark infringement, breach of fiduciary duty, breach of partnership agreement, intentional and negligent interference with prospective economic relations, negligence, defamation and unfair competition, and wanted the band enjoined from using the Machine Head marks.&quot; The lawsuit was settled out of court on July 2 with undisclosed terms. In August 2014, Flynn announced the track listing for &quot;Bloodstone &amp; Diamonds&quot;, consisting of 12 tracks along with its artwork.

&quot;Bloodstone &amp; Diamonds&quot; was released on November 7, 2014, to positive reviews from fans and critics alike, with many saying how the addition of MacEachern brought a sense of rejuvenation to the band. The album debuted at No. 21 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, becoming the band&#x27;s highest-charting album ever. The band embarked on a lengthy world tour in support of the album, including a leg of European shows, two American legs and various others in Japan, Australia and New Zealand. By August 2016, the album had sold 200,000 copies worldwide, allowing the band to recoup the advance they received from Nuclear Blast.

===&quot;Catharsis&quot;, lineup changes and stand-alone singles (2016–2020)===
On June 1, 2016, a stand-alone single titled &quot;Is There Anybody Out There?&quot; premiered on Sirius XM Octane, and on June 3, the single was available for digital download. On March 17, 2017, the band were featured on American horror movie The Devil&#x27;s Candy&#x27;s soundtrack along with Ghost and Slayer. In June 2017, it was reported that Machine Head was in the studio working on new material. In September 2017, the band announced the new album &quot;Catharsis&quot; for a January 2018 release with an accompanying world tour.

On September 28, 2018, Robb Flynn posted a live video on Facebook to explain that Demmel and McClain had left Machine Head earlier in the week, but that they would both complete the band&#x27;s fall tour. The announcement was mistakenly reported on by news sources as a disbandment, due to Flynn&#x27;s referral to the current run of shows as a &quot;farewell tour&quot;. Flynn later clarified that it was &quot;the farewell tour of this lineup, this era of Machine Head. This is not the farewell tour of Machine Head.&quot; Demmel later said in an interview that he left the band because he &quot;didn&#x27;t like [his] job anymore&quot; and did not like the musical direction that Flynn had been taking the band over the last three years.

On March 23, 2019, Flynn posted a live video on Instagram to announce that Machine Head had held auditions to search for replacements for Demmel and McClain. He said that the process had &quot;been awesome, really good; in fact, really confusing. [I] don&#x27;t know where we are going. We&#x27;ve got some thinking to do&quot;, and in regards to the musicians taking part in the auditions, he said, &quot;you might not know some of these guys&quot; while &quot;some of [them] you may.&quot; Two days later, it was announced that early members Logan Mader and Chris Kontos, who both appeared on &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot;, would reunite with the band for a tour celebrating the album&#x27;s 25th anniversary. The band later re-recorded the full album live in the studio and announced plans to release the tracks one by one ahead of the tour. On the possibility of recording new original material with Mader and Kontos, Flynn said, &quot;Nothing&#x27;s certain right now. I&#x27;m not sure what that is at the moment. We&#x27;re really just focused on re-learning how to play the &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot; songs. But we&#x27;ll be out on the road for a while together. I think that I could see Machine Head forward with just a constant flow of new music.&quot;

On September 28, 2019, a year on from announcing the departure of Demmel and McClain, the band announced Decapitated guitarist Wacław Kiełtyka and Devilment drummer Matt Alston as their replacements. A month later, Machine Head digitally released the stand-alone single &quot;Do or Die&quot;. On February 14, 2020, Machine Head released another stand-alone single, &quot;Circle the Drain&quot;. 

Whilst the COVID-19 pandemic made live performances impossible, Robb Flynn established the streaming format &quot;Electric Happy Hour&quot;. As early as March 2020, he had streamed a short performance of just a few songs, using only an acoustic guitar and accompanied by his son Wyatt on the cello. More streamed acoustic performances followed, initially on Facebook and Instagram. Then, in April 2020, Flynn established weekly performances as part of a live stream on Machine Head&#x27;s Facebook page, which he called &quot;Acoustic Happy Hour&quot;. When the social distancing rules were relaxed in September 2020, bassist Jared MacEachern was able to take part in Flynn&#x27;s weekly streaming performances, and the initial acoustic sessions quickly turned into &quot;Electric Happy Hour&quot;, in which the two musicians now used electric guitars and basses, and later added drums from the tape. Some of the drum tracks used were recorded by drummer Matt Alston in England, but he was never seen in the livestreams. In addition to Facebook, streaming was now also done on Twitch and YouTube. The list of songs varied greatly from gig to gig and included a large number of cover versions. On each release day of a Machine Head studio album, Flynn and MacEachern played through the respective album in its entirety. The last streamed performance, on August 5, 2022, featured ex-drummer Chris Kontos on board to perform the record &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot; in its entirety on the occasion of its 28th birthday.

In June 2020, the band put out a dual single known as &quot;Civil Unrest&quot; featuring Jesse Leach of Killswitch Engage on the track &quot;Stop the Bleeding&quot;, a song written about the George Floyd protests, while another song on the B-side known as &quot;Bulletproof&quot;, was also written about the protests. A music video was eventually released for &quot;Stop the Bleeding&quot; after its release. Five months later, another single entitled &quot;My Hands Are Empty&quot; was released. On June 11, 2021, the band released a new three-track single entitled &quot;Arrows in Words from the Sky&quot;. The single included the title track, &quot;Become the Firestorm&quot;, and &quot;Rotten&quot;.

Due to the pandemic, not all band members could participate in the recording process. On both songs for &quot;Civil Unrest&quot; Carlos Cruz from Warbringer can be heard as session drummer. He had already been hired for the single &quot;Do or Die&quot;. The drums on &quot;Circle the Drain&quot;, &quot;My Hands Are Empty&quot; and the three tracks of &quot;Arrows in Words from the Sky&quot; were recorded by Navene Koperweiss.

===&quot;Of Kingdom and Crown&quot; (2021–2023)===
On April 12, 2022, Machine Head released a new single entitled &quot;Choke on the Ashes of Your Hate&quot; with an accompanying music video and announced its tenth studio album, &quot;Of Kingdom and Crown&quot;, released on August 26, 2022, via Nuclear Blast and Imperium Recordings. Along with &quot;Choke on the Ashes of Your Hate&quot; and eight other new songs (three of which are interludes), &quot;Of Kingdom and Crown&quot; includes all three songs off of &quot;Arrows in Words from the Sky&quot;, as well as the &quot;My Hands Are Empty&quot; single released over a year prior. As with the stand-alone singles before, Wacław &quot;Vogg&quot; Kiełtyka and Matt Alston were not in the studio for the recordings. Again Navene Koperweiss can be heard on drums. &quot;Of Kingdom and Crown&quot; is designed as a concept album and tells the story of a blood feud set in a post-apocalyptic future. It is loosely based on the Manga series Attack on Titan. On June 21, the album&#x27;s sixth song &quot;Unhallowed&quot; was released as the next advance single.

On August 12, 2022, Machine Head played ten songs as unannounced surprise guests at Bloodstock Open Air in England, including the two new releases &quot;Become the Firestorm&quot; and &quot;Choke on the Ashes of Your Hate&quot;. It was the band&#x27;s first performance in front of a live audience since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was followed by five concerts in Scotland, called &quot;Electric Happy Hour (Live)&quot; in reference to the streaming performances. They served as Machine Head&#x27;s preparation for the &quot;Vikings and Lionhearts Tour&quot;, a co-headlining tour of Europe with Amon Amarth and The Halo Effect in September and October. In November and December 2022, Machine Head played a total of 39 &quot;Electric Happy Hour (Live)&quot; concerts in the U.S. On November 3, 2022, Reece Scruggs of Havok made his debut as touring guitarist for Machine Head. Scruggs was filling in for Vogg while Vogg honored prior touring commitments with Decapitated. 

In early 2023, Flynn and MacEachern resumed the weekly streaming format &quot;Electric Happy Hour&quot;. On March 14, the band announced the next chapter of their &quot;Electric Happy Hour (Live)&quot; Tour with a total of 18 concerts in the US. Only one month later the entire tour was cancelled without replacement. As a reason Machine Head gave problems with the allocation of U.S. work visas for their European band and crew members. Also the band had little luck with the festival season in the summer of 2023: Machine Head played only three of five planned gigs: May 28 at Milwaukee MetalFest (with R. Scruggs on guitar), June 16 as headliners at the 2023 Graspop Metal Meeting in Belgium, and September 16 at the Metal Injection Festival in Anaheim, CA (again with R. Scruggs). Machine Head was also part of the lineup at Blue Ridge Rock Fest in Alton, Halifax, VA on September 7. However, due to adverse weather conditions, their performance had to be cancelled shortly before the start. An interim announced concert at KIWR Rock Fest in Council Bluffs, IA was also canceled the previous month without explanation (August 4). The &quot;Electric Happy Hour (Live)&quot; concert series continued in October with eleven concerts in South America. For the first time in their history, Machine Head performed in Venezuela and Costa Rica. They also replaced Mudvayne at short notice on November 5 at the Hell &amp; Heaven Metal Fest near Mexico City. 

===&quot;Unatoned&quot; (2024–present)===
On January 19, 2024, the band began its &quot;Slaughter the Martour&quot; world tour with a total of 29 concerts in the U.S. and Canada. This first North America leg featured Fear Factory, Orbit Culture and Gates to Hell as support bands. In mid-March, the tour continued with seven concerts in Australia and New Zealand, again with Fear Factory as support. Machine Head will also be playing various European and US 2024 summer festivals, including Rock am Ring and Rock im Park, Hellfest, Download, Novarock, Greenfield, Graspop, Resurrection Fest, Mystic Festival (Gdansk, Poland), Evil Live (Lisbon), Sonic Temple and Rockville (Daytona).

On February 17, 2024, Vogg announced he had left Machine Head, explaining that Decapitated is his &#x27;absolute No. 1 band&#x27; and that Decapitated and Machine Head are both active bands with overlapping tours, creating important scheduling conflicts. In November 2024, the band announced a North American tour for 2025 with In Flames, Lacuna Coil and Unearth as support acts, and released a single, &quot;These Scars Won&#x27;t Define Us&quot;, which featured vocals from all four bands in what Machine Head described as a &quot;Wu Tang Clan-level thrash collaboration&quot;; in doing so, the band announced its eleventh studio album. The album&#x27;s title, &quot;Unatoned&quot;, and release date of April 25 were announced in February, along with a second single, &quot;Unbound&quot;, and an accompanying music video; the album will be the band&#x27;s first to feature Scruggs, who was being treated as a full member of the band by December.

==Musical style and influences==
Machine Head has been described as groove metal, thrash metal, nu metal, alternative metal, or heavy metal in general. The band is influenced by Californian thrash metal bands such as Exodus, Slayer and Testament, traditional heavy metal bands as Iron Maiden, crossover thrash bands Suicidal Tendencies and Cro-Mags, groove metal bands Pantera, Exhorder and Fear Factory, and grunge bands Nirvana, Soundgarden and Alice in Chains, as well as Biohazard and Rage Against the Machine. Machine Head is considered to be one of the pioneering bands in the new wave of American heavy metal, as well as part of the second wave of thrash metal bands from the 1990s.

Their early albums &quot;Burn My Eyes&quot; and &quot;The More Things Change...&quot; show a groove metal and thrash metal approach, similar to bands like Pantera and Exhorder. The albums also featured technical drumming by Chris Kontos and Dave McClain. The band changed their musical direction for the albums &quot;The Burning Red&quot; (1999) and &quot;Supercharger&quot; (2001), which have been described as displaying a nu metal sound. These albums featured rapping by Robb Flynn and simpler guitar riffs, but retaining part of their aggressive sound. This change in direction resulted in criticism from many fans because of the popularity of nu metal at the time. Machine Head returned to the groove metal and thrash metal sound of the first two albums with &quot;Through the Ashes of Empires&quot; (2003).

Machine Head increased the complexity and technicality in their sound for the next album, &quot;The Blackening&quot;, which partially changes the sound of their first 5 albums in favor of a more classic heavy metal and thrash metal oriented sound, with fully complex song structures and guitar riffs. &quot;Unto the Locust&quot; features heavier, faster and more complex riffs by both Flynn and Phil Demmel, influenced by classical music, and supported by fast and complex drum patterns by McClain. This is also the first Machine Head&#x27;s record to include blast beats.

Flynn makes use of different vocal styles including yelling, raspy singing, clean vocals, screams and death growls; Flynn himself has jokingly called his own singing style &quot;barking in key&quot;.

==Band members==

Current members
* Robb Flynn – lead vocals, guitar 
* Reece Scruggs – guitar, backing vocals 
* Jared MacEachern – bass, backing vocals 
* Matt Alston – drums 

Former members
* Logan Mader – guitar, backing vocals 
* Ahrue Luster – guitar 
* Phil Demmel – guitar, backing vocals 
* Wacław Kiełtyka – guitar 
* Adam Duce – bass, backing vocals 
* Tony Costanza – drums 
* Chris Kontos – drums 
* Dave McClain – drums 
Session musicians
* Carlos Cruz – drums 
* Navene Koperweis – drums 

Touring musicians
* Walter Ryan – drums 
===Timeline===
==Discography==

*&quot;Burn My Eyes&quot; (1994)
*&quot;The More Things Change...&quot; (1997)
*&quot;The Burning Red&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Supercharger&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Through the Ashes of Empires&quot; (2003)
*&quot;The Blackening&quot; (2007)
*&quot;Unto the Locust&quot; (2011)
*&quot;Bloodstone &amp; Diamonds&quot; (2014)
*&quot;Catharsis&quot; (2018)
*&quot;Of Kingdom and Crown&quot; (2022)
*&quot;Unatoned&quot; (2025)

==References==
===Bibliography===

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319458" start="0" end="12" title="Machine Head (band)" label="Machine Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="28" end="39" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="50" end="69" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q352452" start="128" end="138" title="Robb Flynn" label="Robb Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046838" start="277" end="309" title="new wave of American heavy metal" label="new wave of American heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716911" start="355" end="371" title="Jared MacEachern" label="Jared MacEachern"/>
<link wikidata="Q349180" start="430" end="439" title="Adam Duce" label="Adam Duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368616" start="452" end="463" title="Logan Mader" label="Logan Mader"/>
<link wikidata="Q375882" start="465" end="477" title="Ahrue Luster" label="Ahrue Luster"/>
<link wikidata="Q587919" start="479" end="490" title="Phil Demmel" label="Phil Demmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302044" start="495" end="510" title="Wacław Kiełtyka" label="Wacław Kiełtyka"/>
<link wikidata="Q47658754" start="525" end="538" title="Tony Costanza" label="Tony Costanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q281400" start="540" end="552" title="Chris Kontos (musician)" label="Chris Kontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173284" start="557" end="569" title="Dave McClain (musician)" label="Dave McClain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016750" start="721" end="733" title="Burn My Eyes" label="Burn My Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299166" start="972" end="984" title="Supercharger (album)" label="Supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1040" end="1060" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182424" start="1085" end="1104" title="Crashing Around You" label="Crashing Around You"/>
<link wikidata="Q18628" start="1268" end="1286" title="Roadrunner Records" label="Roadrunner Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q241662" start="1415" end="1427" title="groove metal" label="groove metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="1432" end="1440" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="1507" end="1519" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474901" start="1571" end="1585" title="The Blackening" label="The Blackening"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="1675" end="1687" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444278" start="1740" end="1758" title="Aesthetics of Hate" label="Aesthetics of Hate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1780" end="1792" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118007" start="1871" end="1886" title="Unto the Locust" label="Unto the Locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516001" start="1910" end="1935" title="Bloodstone &amp;amp; Diamonds" label="Bloodstone &amp;amp; Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q47462533" start="2017" end="2026" title="Catharsis (Machine Head album)" label="Catharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111597872" start="2144" end="2164" title="Of Kingdom and Crown" label="Of Kingdom and Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="2374" end="2390" title="Music recording sales certification" label="certified silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2454" end="2479" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q352452" start="2721" end="2731" title="Robb Flynn" label="Robb Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243423" start="2745" end="2761" title="Day on the Green" label="Day on the Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="2774" end="2793" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="2805" end="2814" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q462380" start="2816" end="2827" title="Queensrÿche" label="Queensrÿche"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="2829" end="2842" title="Faith No More" label="Faith No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="2847" end="2858" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063903" start="2917" end="2926" title="Vio-lence" label="Vio-lence"/>
<link wikidata="Q349180" start="3041" end="3050" title="Adam Duce" label="Adam Duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368616" start="3448" end="3459" title="Logan Mader" label="Logan Mader"/>
<link wikidata="Q47658754" start="3472" end="3485" title="Tony Costanza" label="Tony Costanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="3536" end="3547" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q211742" start="3561" end="3570" title="Machine Head (album)" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="3769" end="3776" title="Jam (music)" label="jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="3815" end="3824" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18628" start="3941" end="3959" title="Roadrunner Records" label="Roadrunner Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="4043" end="4063" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016750" start="4096" end="4108" title="Burn My Eyes" label="Burn My Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q281400" start="4186" end="4198" title="Chris Kontos (musician)" label="Chris Kontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q970021" start="4451" end="4467" title="Colin Richardson" label="Colin Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="4622" end="4630" title="Allmusic" label="Allmusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="4863" end="4869" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258938" start="4963" end="4977" title="London Astoria" label="London Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="5429" end="5438" title="Testament (band)" label="Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173284" start="5592" end="5604" title="Dave McClain (drummer)" label="Dave McClain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537628" start="5614" end="5626" title="Sacred Reich" label="Sacred Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q771559" start="6063" end="6088" title="The More Things Change..." label="The More Things Change..."/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="6522" end="6547" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q321762" start="6656" end="6668" title="Napalm Death" label="Napalm Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104250" start="6670" end="6682" title="Coal Chamber" label="Coal Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692722" start="6687" end="6694" title="Skinlab" label="Skinlab"/>
<link wikidata="Q722072" start="6719" end="6726" title="Ozzfest" label="Ozzfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="6824" end="6839" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q375882" start="6918" end="6930" title="Ahrue Luster" label="Ahrue Luster"/>
<link wikidata="Q178642" start="6990" end="6997" title="Soulfly" label="Soulfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q680621" start="7018" end="7041" title="Soulfly (Soulfly album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q712244" start="7100" end="7113" title="Ross Robinson" label="Ross Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630118" start="7167" end="7182" title="The Burning Red" label="The Burning Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="7260" end="7267" title="rapping" label="rapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q375882" start="7329" end="7341" title="Ahrue Luster" label="Ahrue Luster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="7498" end="7509" title="selling out" label="selling out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964732" start="8123" end="8131" title="Johnny K" label="Johnny K"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299166" start="8148" end="8160" title="Supercharger (album)" label="Supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q182638" start="8381" end="8397" title="Blabbermouth.net" label="Blabbermouth.net"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182424" start="8656" end="8675" title="Crashing Around You" label="Crashing Around You"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8755" end="8775" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="8797" end="8800" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q612465" start="9553" end="9562" title="Hellalive" label="Hellalive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638982" start="10844" end="10872" title="Through the Ashes of Empires" label="Through the Ashes of Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="11514" end="11522" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157845" start="11687" end="11702" title="Wacken Open Air" label="Wacken Open Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239788" start="11852" end="11867" title="Brixton Academy" label="Brixton Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158900" start="12021" end="12047" title="Dubai Desert Rock Festival" label="Dubai Desert Rock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q163783" start="12151" end="12163" title="Böhse Onkelz" label="Böhse Onkelz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474901" start="12294" end="12308" title="The Blackening" label="The Blackening"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="12629" end="12633" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q300403" start="12696" end="12715" title="A Farewell to Kings" label="A Farewell to Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="13105" end="13114" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q187507" start="13127" end="13144" title="Master of Puppets" label="Master of Puppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474901" start="13406" end="13410" title="Halo (Machine Head song)" label="Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474901" start="13428" end="13447" title="Now I Lay Thee Down" label="Now I Lay Thee Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="13461" end="13474" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q207731" start="13635" end="13646" title="Lamb of God (band)" label="Lamb of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q390684" start="13648" end="13655" title="Trivium (band)" label="Trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011412" start="13660" end="13666" title="Gojira (band)" label="Gojira"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="13735" end="13743" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q742626" start="13748" end="13765" title="Heaven &amp;amp; Hell (band)" label="Heaven &amp;amp; Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544" start="13836" end="13853" title="Download Festival" label="Download Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q173202" start="13857" end="13871" title="Donington Park" label="Donington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q163989" start="14057" end="14067" title="Arch Enemy (band)" label="Arch Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212715" start="14069" end="14080" title="DragonForce" label="DragonForce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353720" start="14099" end="14111" title="Shadows Fall" label="Shadows Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22032280" start="14152" end="14183" title="Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards" label="Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394343" start="14319" end="14339" title="Kerrang! Awards 2007" label="Kerrang! Awards 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="14397" end="14409" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q485385" start="14443" end="14466" title="Bullet for My Valentine" label="Bullet for My Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="14495" end="14510" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q170381" start="14597" end="14610" title="tonsillectomy" label="tonsillectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q281253" start="14656" end="14664" title="Hellyeah" label="Hellyeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849580" start="14666" end="14674" title="Nonpoint" label="Nonpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q910459" start="14679" end="14693" title="Bury Your Dead" label="Bury Your Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="14763" end="14772" title="Bengaluru" label="Bengaluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="14793" end="14798" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q254138" start="14914" end="14922" title="Slipknot (band)" label="Slipknot"/>
<link wikidata="Q171718" start="14927" end="14944" title="Children of Bodom" label="Children of Bodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="15002" end="15013" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007889" start="15036" end="15056" title="Hallowed Be Thy Name (song)" label="Hallowed Be Thy Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="15075" end="15083" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15132" end="15171" title="Maiden Heaven: A Tribute to Iron Maiden" label="Maiden Heaven: A Tribute to Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q162586" start="15364" end="15377" title="Dream Theater" label="Dream Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q390684" start="15382" end="15389" title="Trivium (band)" label="Trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="15451" end="15464" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304600" start="15476" end="15485" title="The Sword" label="The Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304600" start="15808" end="15817" title="The Sword (band)" label="The Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q151657" start="15872" end="15886" title="Death Magnetic" label="Death Magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="15947" end="15955" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="15957" end="15963" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q431700" start="15968" end="15983" title="Suicide Silence" label="Suicide Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="16214" end="16225" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q268359" start="16602" end="16611" title="Hatebreed" label="Hatebreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q302155" start="16613" end="16629" title="Bleeding Through" label="Bleeding Through"/>
<link wikidata="Q430581" start="16635" end="16651" title="All Shall Perish" label="All Shall Perish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118007" start="17148" end="17163" title="Unto the Locust" label="Unto the Locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="17279" end="17288" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459797" start="17400" end="17408" title="Rockstar (drink)" label="Rockstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797266" start="17409" end="17424" title="Mayhem Festival 2011" label="Mayhem Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="17567" end="17573" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="17578" end="17584" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q494784" start="17999" end="18019" title="Bring Me the Horizon" label="Bring Me the Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133406" start="18021" end="18032" title="DevilDriver" label="DevilDriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166257" start="18038" end="18050" title="Darkest Hour (band)" label="Darkest Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q431700" start="18109" end="18124" title="Suicide Silence" label="Suicide Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433132" start="18144" end="18158" title="Rise to Remain" label="Rise to Remain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565015" start="18252" end="18270" title="Soundwave (Australian music festival)" label="Soundwave Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544" start="18318" end="18335" title="Download Festival" label="Download Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388531" start="18337" end="18346" title="Metalcamp" label="Metalcamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543514" start="18352" end="18359" title="Graspop Metal Meeting" label="Graspop"/>
<link wikidata="Q670546" start="18398" end="18417" title="Bloodstock Open Air" label="Bloodstock Open Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q157845" start="18426" end="18441" title="Wacken Open Air" label="Wacken Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144039" start="19484" end="19499" title="inguinal hernia" label="inguinal hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118007" start="20105" end="20120" title="Unto the Locust" label="Unto the Locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474901" start="20231" end="20245" title="The Blackening" label="The Blackening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299166" start="20262" end="20274" title="Supercharger (album)" label="Supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q748820" start="20487" end="20502" title="Mayhem Festival" label="Mayhem Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="20566" end="20573" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715150" start="20636" end="20644" title="Sanctity (band)" label="Sanctity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716911" start="20675" end="20691" title="Jared MacEachern" label="Jared MacEachern"/>
<link wikidata="Q352452" start="20734" end="20744" title="Robb Flynn" label="Robb Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10332002" start="20771" end="20783" title="Monte Conner" label="Monte Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q587919" start="20959" end="20970" title="Phil Demmel" label="Phil Demmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516001" start="21398" end="21423" title="Bloodstone &amp;amp; Diamonds" label="Bloodstone &amp;amp; Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516001" start="22053" end="22078" title="Bloodstone &amp;amp; Diamonds" label="Bloodstone &amp;amp; Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="22296" end="22321" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530391" start="22867" end="22883" title="Sirius XM Octane" label="Sirius XM Octane"/>
<link wikidata="Q26964872" start="23014" end="23036" title="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Candy" label="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355578" start="23066" end="23071" title="Ghost (Swedish band)" label="Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="23076" end="23082" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47462533" start="23233" end="23242" title="Catharsis (Machine Head album)" label="Catharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="23367" end="23375" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="24100" end="24109" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181716" start="25415" end="25426" title="Decapitated (band)" label="Decapitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302044" start="25437" end="25452" title="Wacław Kiełtyka" label="Wacław Kiełtyka"/>
<link wikidata="Q20114952" start="25457" end="25466" title="Devilment" label="Devilment"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="25718" end="25735" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="25999" end="26004" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="26065" end="26073" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="26078" end="26087" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314010" start="26269" end="26286" title="social distancing" label="social distancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555537" start="26784" end="26790" title="Twitch (service)" label="Twitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="26795" end="26802" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350991" start="27309" end="27320" title="Jesse Leach" label="Jesse Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q462709" start="27324" end="27341" title="Killswitch Engage" label="Killswitch Engage"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="27411" end="27432" title="George Floyd protests" label="George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="27460" end="27466" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032001" start="28071" end="28081" title="Warbringer" label="Warbringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982265" start="28335" end="28352" title="Navene Koperweis" label="Navene Koperweiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q111597872" start="28590" end="28610" title="Of Kingdom and Crown" label="Of Kingdom and Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q158886" start="28651" end="28664" title="Nuclear Blast" label="Nuclear Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="29221" end="29234" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="29332" end="29337" title="Manga" label="Manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q586025" start="29345" end="29360" title="Attack on Titan" label="Attack on Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q670546" start="29551" end="29570" title="Bloodstock Open Air" label="Bloodstock Open Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q192863" start="30079" end="30090" title="Amon Amarth" label="Amon Amarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q109555660" start="30095" end="30110" title="The Halo Effect (band)" label="The Halo Effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q955594" start="30300" end="30305" title="Havok (band)" label="Havok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181716" start="30442" end="30453" title="Decapitated (band)" label="Decapitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543514" start="31119" end="31140" title="Graspop Metal Meeting" label="Graspop Metal Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q61633445" start="31286" end="31306" title="Blue Ridge Rock Festival" label="Blue Ridge Rock Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q671183" start="31817" end="31825" title="Mudvayne" label="Mudvayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072553" start="31863" end="31891" title="Hell &amp;amp; Heaven Metal Fest" label="Hell &amp;amp; Heaven Metal Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q128010" start="32129" end="32141" title="Fear Factory" label="Fear Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q107599967" start="32143" end="32156" title="Orbit Culture" label="Orbit Culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32161" end="32174" title="Gates to Hell" label="Gates to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q160109" start="32403" end="32432" title="Rock am Ring and Rock im Park" label="Rock am Ring and Rock im Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q247500" start="32434" end="32442" title="Hellfest" label="Hellfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544" start="32444" end="32452" title="Download Festival" label="Download"/>
<link wikidata="Q544673" start="32454" end="32462" title="Nova Rock Festival" label="Novarock"/>
<link wikidata="Q665227" start="32464" end="32474" title="Greenfield Festival" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543514" start="32476" end="32483" title="Graspop Metal Meeting" label="Graspop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106606" start="32485" end="32502" title="Resurrection Fest" label="Resurrection Fest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32504" end="32519" title="Mystic Festival" label="Mystic Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="32521" end="32535" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdansk, Poland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32538" end="32547" title="Evil Live Festival" label="Evil Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="32549" end="32555" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q97280728" start="32558" end="32570" title="Sonic Temple Art &amp;amp; Music Festival" label="Sonic Temple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32575" end="32584" title="Rockville Festival" label="Rockville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="32586" end="32593" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q258546" start="32925" end="32934" title="In Flames" label="In Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q46573" start="32936" end="32947" title="Lacuna Coil" label="Lacuna Coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425718" start="32952" end="32959" title="Unearth" label="Unearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="33130" end="33142" title="Wu Tang Clan" label="Wu Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132561273" start="33266" end="33274" title="Unatoned" label="Unatoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q241662" start="33614" end="33626" title="groove metal" label="groove metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="33628" end="33640" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="33642" end="33650" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20378" start="33652" end="33669" title="alternative metal" label="alternative metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="33674" end="33685" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q728170" start="33763" end="33769" title="Exodus (band)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="33771" end="33777" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="33782" end="33791" title="Testament (band)" label="Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="33826" end="33837" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q899341" start="33862" end="33881" title="Suicidal Tendencies" label="Suicidal Tendencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140657" start="33886" end="33894" title="Cro-Mags" label="Cro-Mags"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="33915" end="33922" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383759" start="33924" end="33932" title="Exhorder" label="Exhorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q128010" start="33937" end="33949" title="Fear Factory" label="Fear Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="33955" end="33961" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="33968" end="33975" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="33977" end="33988" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="33993" end="34008" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q803876" start="34021" end="34030" title="Biohazard (band)" label="Biohazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="34035" end="34059" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046838" start="34129" end="34161" title="new wave of American heavy metal" label="new wave of American heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="34201" end="34213" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016750" start="34262" end="34274" title="Burn My Eyes" label="Burn My Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q771559" start="34291" end="34316" title="The More Things Change..." label="The More Things Change..."/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="34392" end="34399" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383759" start="34404" end="34412" title="Exhorder" label="Exhorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q281400" start="34461" end="34473" title="Chris Kontos (musician)" label="Chris Kontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173284" start="34478" end="34490" title="Dave McClain (drummer)" label="Dave McClain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630118" start="34554" end="34569" title="The Burning Red" label="The Burning Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299166" start="34593" end="34605" title="Supercharger (album)" label="Supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="34662" end="34670" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="34700" end="34707" title="rapping" label="rapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q352452" start="34711" end="34721" title="Robb Flynn" label="Robb Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638982" start="35007" end="35035" title="Through the Ashes of Empires" label="Through the Ashes of Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474901" start="35147" end="35161" title="The Blackening" label="The Blackening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118007" start="35358" end="35373" title="Unto the Locust" label="Unto the Locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q587919" start="35446" end="35457" title="Phil Demmel" label="Phil Demmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q882054" start="35611" end="35622" title="blast beats" label="blast beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="35701" end="35713" title="singing" label="clean vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206488" start="35715" end="35722" title="screaming (music)" label="screams"/>
<link wikidata="Q335499" start="35727" end="35739" title="death growls" label="death growls"/>
<link wikidata="Q352452" start="35862" end="35872" title="Robb Flynn" label="Robb Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716911" start="35940" end="35956" title="Jared MacEachern" label="Jared MacEachern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368616" start="36022" end="36033" title="Logan Mader" label="Logan Mader"/>
<link wikidata="Q375882" start="36062" end="36074" title="Ahrue Luster" label="Ahrue Luster"/>
<link wikidata="Q587919" start="36087" end="36098" title="Phil Demmel" label="Phil Demmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302044" start="36127" end="36142" title="Wacław Kiełtyka" label="Wacław Kiełtyka"/>
<link wikidata="Q349180" start="36155" end="36164" title="Adam Duce" label="Adam Duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q47658754" start="36191" end="36204" title="Tony Costanza" label="Tony Costanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q281400" start="36216" end="36228" title="Chris Kontos (musician)" label="Chris Kontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173284" start="36240" end="36252" title="Dave McClain (musician)" label="Dave McClain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982265" start="36305" end="36321" title="Navene Koperweis" label="Navene Koperweis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016750" start="36412" end="36424" title="Burn My Eyes" label="Burn My Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q771559" start="36445" end="36470" title="The More Things Change..." label="The More Things Change..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1630118" start="36491" end="36506" title="The Burning Red" label="The Burning Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299166" start="36527" end="36539" title="Supercharger (album)" label="Supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638982" start="36560" end="36588" title="Through the Ashes of Empires" label="Through the Ashes of Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474901" start="36609" end="36623" title="The Blackening" label="The Blackening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118007" start="36644" end="36659" title="Unto the Locust" label="Unto the Locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516001" start="36680" end="36705" title="Bloodstone &amp;amp; Diamonds" label="Bloodstone &amp;amp; Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q47462533" start="36726" end="36735" title="Catharsis (Machine Head album)" label="Catharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111597872" start="36756" end="36776" title="Of Kingdom and Crown" label="Of Kingdom and Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q132561273" start="36797" end="36805" title="Unatoned" label="Unatoned"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683881" wikidata="Q397281" url="?curid=683881" title="Machine head (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[machine head]] is part of the tuning mechanism of some stringed instruments.

Machine Head or Machinehead may also refer to:
== Music ==
* Machine Head (band), an American heavy metal band
* &quot;Machine Head&quot; (album), a 1972 album by Deep Purple
* &quot;Machinehead&quot; (song), a 1996 song by Bush

== Films ==
* &quot;Machine Head&quot; (film), a 2000 independent horror film

== Comics and animation ==
* &quot;Machine Head&quot;, an episode of the anime series &quot;Bubblegum Crisis Tokyo 2040&quot;
* Machine Head, a fictional crime boss in the comic book series &quot;Invincible&quot;

== Video games ==
*&quot;Blam! Machinehead&quot;, released in the United States as &quot;Machine Head&quot;, 1996 video game
== See also ==
* Machin series or &quot;Machin head&quot;, a series of UK postage stamps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397281" start="2" end="18" title="Machine head (disambiguation)" label="[[machine head]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q397281" start="82" end="94" title="Machine head (disambiguation)" label="Machine Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q397281" start="98" end="109" title="Machine head (disambiguation)" label="Machinehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q319458" start="143" end="162" title="Machine Head (band)" label="Machine Head (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211742" start="195" end="227" title="Machine Head (album)" label="&amp;quot;Machine Head&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723734" start="259" end="289" title="Machinehead (song)" label="&amp;quot;Machinehead&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955752" start="326" end="357" title="Machine Head (film)" label="&amp;quot;Machine Head&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="483" end="510" title="Bubblegum Crisis Tokyo 2040#Episode list" label="Bubblegum Crisis Tokyo 2040"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="587" end="597" title="Invincible (comic series)#Enemies" label="Invincible"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126809" start="630" end="647" title="Blam! Machinehead" label="Blam! Machinehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q497949" start="747" end="760" title="Machin series" label="Machin series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683897" wikidata="Q5328546" url="?curid=683897" title="East Hanover">
<text>East Hanover is the name of the following places in the United States of America:

*East Hanover Township, New Jersey
*East Hanover Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania
*East Hanover Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania

==See also==
*Hanover, the German city
*Hanover (disambiguation) for other places called Hanover</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5328546" start="0" end="12" title="East Hanover" label="East Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073947" start="84" end="117" title="East Hanover Township, New Jersey" label="East Hanover Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328548" start="119" end="170" title="East Hanover Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania" label="East Hanover Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902029" start="172" end="223" title="East Hanover Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania" label="East Hanover Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="239" end="246" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q10517292" start="265" end="289" title="Hanover (disambiguation)" label="Hanover (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683899" wikidata="Q4048680" url="?curid=683899" title="S9 (Berlin)">
<text>S9 is a line on the Berlin S-Bahn. It operates from Flughafen BER to Spandau through Berlin Hauptbahnhof (Berlin Central Station) over:
*a very short section of the Outer ring, opened in 1951 and electrified in 1983, 
*a short section of the former Outer freight ring opened in the early 1940s and electrified in 1983,
*the Görlitz line, opened in 1866 and electrified in 1929, 
*the Ring line, completed in 1877 and electrified in 1926 and, via a connecting curve,
*the Berlin–Wrocław railway, which at Berlin Ostbahnhof becomes
*the Berlin Stadtbahn to Charlottenburg,
*the Spandau Suburban Line.

==Service history==
The S9 was created on 2 June 1991, replacing the Blue route of the S3 between Charlottenburg and Flughafen Berlin Schönefeld (now Schönefeld (bei Berlin) station), with the western terminus extended by one stop to Westkreuz.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4048680" start="0" end="2" title="S9 (Berlin)" label="S9"/>
<link wikidata="Q99654" start="20" end="33" title="Berlin S-Bahn" label="Berlin S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q800759" start="52" end="65" title="BER Airport station" label="Flughafen BER"/>
<link wikidata="Q654980" start="69" end="76" title="Berlin Spandau station" label="Spandau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097" start="85" end="104" title="Berlin Hauptbahnhof" label="Berlin Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q563551" start="165" end="175" title="Berlin outer ring" label="Outer ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557485" start="249" end="267" title="Outer freight ring" label="Outer freight ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q162558" start="324" end="336" title="Berlin–Görlitz railway" label="Görlitz line"/>
<link wikidata="Q525056" start="384" end="393" title="Berlin Ringbahn" label="Ring line"/>
<link wikidata="Q317129" start="471" end="493" title="Berlin–Wrocław railway" label="Berlin–Wrocław railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q683239" start="504" end="521" title="Berlin Ostbahnhof" label="Berlin Ostbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q694223" start="535" end="551" title="Berlin Stadtbahn" label="Berlin Stadtbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q702596" start="555" end="569" title="Berlin-Charlottenburg station" label="Charlottenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438088" start="576" end="597" title="Spandau Suburban Line" label="Spandau Suburban Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388282" start="687" end="689" title="S3 (Berlin)" label="S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q702596" start="698" end="712" title="Berlin-Charlottenburg station" label="Charlottenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q661069" start="717" end="744" title="Schönefeld (bei Berlin) station" label="Flughafen Berlin Schönefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q678125" start="834" end="843" title="Berlin Westkreuz station" label="Westkreuz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683901" wikidata="Q258828" url="?curid=683901" title="S9">
<text>S9 may refer to:
==Transportation==
* SIAI S.9, a 1918 Italian flying boat 
* Aircraft registration prefix of São Tomé and Príncipe
* USS &quot;S-9&quot; (SS-114), a 1920 S-class submarine of the United States Navy
* County Route S9 (California)
* Rans S-9 Chaos, a light aerobatic aircraft
* East African Safari Air&#x27;s IATA code

===Rail===
* S9 (Berlin), an S-Bahn line
*S9 (Milan suburban railway service)
* S9 (RER Vaud), an S-Bahn line in Switzerland
* S9 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn)
* S9 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn)
* S9 (St. Gallen S-Bahn), an S-Bahn line in the canton of St. Gallen, Switzerland
* S9 (ZVV), an S-Bahn line in the cantons of Zürich and Zug in Switzerland
* Prussian S 9, a 1908 German steam-locomotive class
* Sri Lanka Railways S9, a diesel multiple-unit train
* S9, a Stadtbahn Karlsruhe line
* Line S9 (Nanjing Metro)

==Other uses==
* Samsung Galaxy S9, a smartphone by Samsung
* Samsung Galaxy Tab S9, a series of high-end Android tablets by Samsung.
* S9 (classification), a disability swimming classification
* S 9 (Abydos), an Ancient Egyptian tomb in Abydos, possibly that of pharaoh Neferhotep I
* S9: Keep container in a well-ventilated place, a safety protocol
* S9 fraction, a postmitochondrial liver fraction
* Cowon S9, a portable media player
* British NVC community S9, a swamps and tall-herb fens community in the British National Vegetation Classification system
* Motorola S9, a Motorola product
* S9, a district of the S postcode area in Sheffield, England
* S9, a termination record in Motorola&#x27;s SREC (file format)
* S9, an allotrope of sulfur

==See also==
* S09, a quantum key distribution protocol
* HMS &quot;Oberon&quot; (S09), a 1961 British Royal Navy &quot;Oberon&quot;-class submarine
* &quot;Brave Fire S09&quot;, an Osamu Tezuka anime
* 9S (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q258828" start="0" end="2" title="S9" label="S9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390262" start="38" end="46" title="SIAI S.9" label="SIAI S.9"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211021" start="78" end="106" title="List of aircraft registration prefixes" label="Aircraft registration prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873652" start="134" end="162" title="USS S-9 (SS-114)" label="USS &amp;quot;S-9&amp;quot; (SS-114)"/>
<link wikidata="Q623753" start="217" end="245" title="County Route S9 (California)" label="County Route S9 (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293449" start="248" end="262" title="Rans S-9 Chaos" label="Rans S-9 Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652981" start="293" end="316" title="East African Safari Air" label="East African Safari Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048680" start="348" end="359" title="S9 (Berlin)" label="S9 (Berlin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56920" start="377" end="412" title="Line S9 (Milan suburban railway service)" label="S9 (Milan suburban railway service)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110265757" start="415" end="428" title="S9 (RER Vaud)" label="S9 (RER Vaud)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388395" start="462" end="484" title="S9 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn)" label="S9 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q508402" start="487" end="509" title="S9 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn)" label="S9 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108602243" start="512" end="534" title="S9 (St. Gallen S-Bahn)" label="S9 (St. Gallen S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388394" start="594" end="602" title="S9 (ZVV)" label="S9 (ZVV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q879262" start="669" end="681" title="Prussian S 9" label="Prussian S 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074537" start="722" end="743" title="Sri Lanka Railways S9" label="Sri Lanka Railways S9"/>
<link wikidata="Q874436" start="782" end="801" title="Stadtbahn Karlsruhe" label="Stadtbahn Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47471478" start="809" end="832" title="Line S9 (Nanjing Metro)" label="Line S9 (Nanjing Metro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50102300" start="851" end="868" title="Samsung Galaxy S9" label="Samsung Galaxy S9"/>
<link wikidata="Q120966666" start="896" end="917" title="Samsung Galaxy Tab S9" label="Samsung Galaxy Tab S9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388396" start="970" end="989" title="S9 (classification)" label="S9 (classification)"/>
<link wikidata="Q38252217" start="1030" end="1042" title="S 9 (Abydos)" label="S 9 (Abydos)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1120" end="1165" title="S9: Keep container in a well-ventilated place" label="S9: Keep container in a well-ventilated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204663" start="1187" end="1198" title="S9 fraction" label="S9 fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179783" start="1237" end="1245" title="Cowon S9" label="Cowon S9"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1273" end="1297" title="British NVC community S9" label="British NVC community S9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970539" start="1344" end="1386" title="British National Vegetation Classification" label="British National Vegetation Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253466" start="1411" end="1427" title="List of Motorola products" label="Motorola product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395395" start="1452" end="1467" title="S postcode area" label="S postcode area"/>
<link wikidata="Q947746" start="1536" end="1554" title="SREC (file format)" label="SREC (file format)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094078" start="1564" end="1583" title="Allotropes of sulfur" label="allotrope of sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027298" start="1600" end="1603" title="S09" label="S09"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351305" start="1643" end="1671" title="HMS Oberon (S09)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Oberon&amp;quot; (S09)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593137" start="1767" end="1785" title="List of Osamu Tezuka anime" label="Osamu Tezuka anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646376" start="1788" end="1807" title="9S (disambiguation)" label="9S (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683903" wikidata="Q245906" url="?curid=683903" title="S3">
<text>S3, S-3 or S03 may refer to:

==Entertainment==
* &quot;Si3&quot; (film), originally titled &quot;S III&quot; and also known as &quot;Singam 3&quot;, the third film in the &quot;Singam&quot; franchise
* &quot;Expedition to the Barrier Peaks&quot;, code S3, a 1980 &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; adventure module
* S3 Plan, a fictitious program in the &quot;Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty&quot; video game
*SABC 3, South African public television channel, stylised as S3

==Transportation==
===Airlines===
* Ashland Municipal Airport, FAA Location identifier S03, in Oregon, US
* SBA Airlines, IATA code S3, based in Caracas, Venezuela

===Locomotives===
* ALCO S-3, an American diesel switching (shunting) locomotive; see ALCO S-1 and S-3
* NER Class S3, a North Eastern Railway steam locomotive class
* Prussian S 3, a steam locomotive

===Rail lines===
* S3 (Berlin), an S-Bahn line
* S3 (Munich), an S-Bahn line in Bavaria, Germany
* S3 (Nuremberg), an S-Bahn line in Bavaria, Germany
* S3 (RER Vaud), an S-Bahn line in Switzerland
* S3 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn), an S-Bahn line in Frankfurt Rhine-Main, Germany
* S3 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn), an S-Bahn line in North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany
* S3 (St. Gallen S-Bahn), an S-Bahn line in Switzerland
* S3 (ZVV), a line of the S-Bahn Zürich in Switzerland
* Line S3 (Milan suburban railway service), an Italian commuter rail route
* S3, a Dresden S-Bahn line
* S3, a Hamburg S-Bahn line
* S3, a Hanover S-Bahn line
* S3, a Rhein-Neckar S-Bahn line
* S3, a Rostock S-Bahn line
* S3, a Stuttgart S-Bahn line
* S3, a S-Bahn Steiermark line

===Cars===
* Audi S3, a version of the Audi A3 small family car
* Bentley S3, a four-door luxury car produced by Bentley from late 1962 until 1965
* Luxgen S3, a sedan produced by Taiwanese-based manufacturer Luxgen starting from 2016
* S3 Roadster, a car produced by South African-based manufacturer Birkin Cars

===Roads===
* S3 Shanghai–Fengxian Highway, a planned expressway in Shanghai, China
* S-3 Strategic Highway, operated by the Pakistan Ministry of Defence; see National Highways of Pakistan (even though it is not actually a National Highway)
* Expressway S3 (Poland), a major road in Poland
* California County Route S3, from State Route 78 to Borrego Springs over the Yaqui Pass; see California county routes in zone S
* S3, a British term for a road with a Suicide lane.

===Others===
* Stagecoach Gold bus route S3, a bus route in Oxfordshire, England
* AJS S3 V-twin, a British motorcycle

==Organizations==
* Swiss Space Systems (S-3), an aerospace company in Switzerland
* S3 Safe Sex Store, an assumed name of Michigan corporation BAK
* SThree, a British recruitment agency

==Military==
* S3 (missile), a French nuclear missile now out of commission
* Lockheed S-3 Viking, an American anti-submarine aircraft developed in the 1970s
* S.3 Springbok, a British aerial reconnaissance aircraft of the 1920s; see Short Springbok
* USS &quot;S-3&quot; (SS-107), a U.S. Navy submarine
* Norrland Signal Battalion, designation S 3, a Swedish signal unit
* S3, the operations officer in military units; see Staff (military)

==Science and technology==
* Trisulfur, chemical formula (S3), an allotrope of sulfur
* S-phrase 3, also referred to as S3, &quot;Keep in a cool place&quot;, a safety phrase in chemistry; see List of S-phrases
* British NVC community S3, &quot;Carex paniculata swamp&quot;; see Swamps and tall-herb fens in the British National Vegetation Classification system

===Computing===
* S3 Graphics, a computer-hardware company
* S3 Group, an Irish software company
* S3 Texture Compression, a group of lossy texture compression algorithms
* Amazon S3, also known as Amazon Simple Storage Service, an online data-storage service
* S3 (programming language), a language used to write the VME operating system and much other system software on the ICL 2900 Series
* S3, a standby mode in the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI) specification
* Snapdragon S3, a Qualcomm ARM system-on-a-chip; see List of Qualcomm Snapdragon systems-on-chip

===Electronics===
* Canon PowerShot S3 IS, a 2006 digital camera; see Canon PowerShot S
* FinePix S3 Pro, a 2004 interchangeable lens digital single-lens reflex camera by Fujifilm 
* Infinix Hot S3, a smartphone released in 2018
* Nikon S3, a 1953 35 mm film camera
* Nikon Coolpix S3, a digital camera
* Samsung Galaxy S III, or Samsung Galaxy S3, a smartphone: the successor to the Samsung Galaxy S II
** Samsung Galaxy S III Mini, or Samsung Galaxy S3 Mini, the mini version of the Samsung Galaxy S III
* Samsung Galaxy Tab S3, an Android tablet 
* Samsung Gear S3, a 2016 smartwatch
* Samsung YP-S3, often referred to as the Samsung S3, an MP3 Player
* Siemens S3, a Siemens Mobile phone

===Mathematics===
* S3, the symmetric group of degree 3; see Dihedral group of order 6
* S3, the 3-sphere (a 3-manifold in four-dimensional space)

===Medicine and anatomy===
* Sacral spinal nerve 3, a spinal nerve of the sacral segment
* Third heart sound, or S3, a rare extra heart sound
* ATC code S03, &quot;Ophthalmological and otological preparations&quot;, a subgroup of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System

==Other uses==
* S3 Asia MBA, a selective dual-degree, tri-city, tri-university global MBA program
* S3 (classification), a classification for swimmers based on their level of disability
* Form S-3, a registration form used by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
* Postcode district S3, part of the S postcode area of the UK, covering part of Sheffield
* Third year, also known as S3, Scottish secondary education for pupils aged about 14
* Junior Secondary Education Assessment, a standardized examination from 1981 to 1987

==See also==
* 3S (disambiguation)
* Schedule 3 (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q245906" start="0" end="2" title="S3" label="S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q245906" start="4" end="7" title="S3" label="S-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q245906" start="11" end="14" title="S3" label="S03"/>
<link wikidata="Q20463713" start="50" end="72" title="Si3 (film)" label="&amp;quot;Si3&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420972" start="209" end="240" title="Expedition to the Barrier Peaks" label="Expedition to the Barrier Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="" start="361" end="396" title="Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty" label="Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459137" start="415" end="421" title="SABC 3" label="SABC 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900686" start="516" end="541" title="Ashland Municipal Airport" label="Ashland Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q930943" start="588" end="600" title="SBA Airlines" label="SBA Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652300" start="731" end="747" title="ALCO S-1 and S-3" label="ALCO S-1 and S-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953563" start="750" end="762" title="NER Class S3" label="NER Class S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q319087" start="813" end="825" title="Prussian S 3" label="Prussian S 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388282" start="866" end="877" title="S3 (Berlin)" label="S3 (Berlin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56996474" start="896" end="907" title="S3 (Munich)" label="S3 (Munich)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388284" start="946" end="960" title="S3 (Nuremberg)" label="S3 (Nuremberg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115446633" start="999" end="1012" title="S3 (RER Vaud)" label="S3 (RER Vaud)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781002" start="1046" end="1068" title="S3 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn)" label="S3 (Rhine-Main S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388285" start="1120" end="1142" title="S3 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn)" label="S3 (Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108602119" start="1196" end="1218" title="S3 (St. Gallen S-Bahn)" label="S3 (St. Gallen S-Bahn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388286" start="1252" end="1260" title="S3 (ZVV)" label="S3 (ZVV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q600028" start="1307" end="1347" title="Line S3 (Milan suburban railway service)" label="Line S3 (Milan suburban railway service)"/>
<link wikidata="Q513745" start="1388" end="1402" title="Dresden S-Bahn" label="Dresden S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q693956" start="1416" end="1430" title="Hamburg S-Bahn" label="Hamburg S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q481504" start="1444" end="1458" title="Hanover S-Bahn" label="Hanover S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q526319" start="1472" end="1491" title="Rhein-Neckar S-Bahn" label="Rhein-Neckar S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q481501" start="1505" end="1519" title="Rostock S-Bahn" label="Rostock S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q81001" start="1533" end="1549" title="Stuttgart S-Bahn" label="Stuttgart S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q163036" start="1563" end="1580" title="S-Bahn Steiermark" label="S-Bahn Steiermark"/>
<link wikidata="Q161880" start="1626" end="1633" title="Audi A3" label="Audi A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343401" start="1653" end="1663" title="Bentley S3" label="Bentley S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q24514423" start="1736" end="1745" title="Luxgen S3" label="Luxgen S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916492" start="1888" end="1899" title="Birkin Cars" label="Birkin Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388292" start="1915" end="1943" title="S3 Shanghai–Fengxian Highway" label="S3 Shanghai–Fengxian Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q115943723" start="2060" end="2089" title="National Highways of Pakistan" label="National Highways of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q954514" start="2144" end="2166" title="Expressway S3 (Poland)" label="Expressway S3 (Poland)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2285" end="2319" title="California county routes in zone S#S3" label="California county routes in zone S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046430" start="2359" end="2371" title="Suicide lane" label="Suicide lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060810" start="2389" end="2417" title="Stagecoach Gold bus route S3" label="Stagecoach Gold bus route S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652082" start="2457" end="2470" title="AJS S3 V-twin" label="AJS S3 V-twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658911" start="2514" end="2533" title="Swiss Space Systems" label="Swiss Space Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881525" start="2579" end="2596" title="S3 Safe Sex Store" label="S3 Safe Sex Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394933" start="2644" end="2650" title="SThree" label="SThree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294075" start="2697" end="2709" title="S3 (missile)" label="S3 (missile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q249890" start="2760" end="2779" title="Lockheed S-3 Viking" label="Lockheed S-3 Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501916" start="2916" end="2931" title="Short Springbok" label="Short Springbok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873636" start="2934" end="2962" title="USS S-3 (SS-107)" label="USS &amp;quot;S-3&amp;quot; (SS-107)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053365" start="2988" end="3013" title="Norrland Signal Battalion" label="Norrland Signal Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3106" end="3122" title="Staff_(military)#Continental_Staff_System" label="Staff (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844240" start="3153" end="3162" title="Trisulfur" label="Trisulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051206" start="3316" end="3333" title="List of S-phrases" label="List of S-phrases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653388" start="3402" end="3484" title="Swamps and tall-herb fens in the British National Vegetation Classification system" label="Swamps and tall-herb fens in the British National Vegetation Classification system"/>
<link wikidata="Q632336" start="3504" end="3515" title="S3 Graphics" label="S3 Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388290" start="3547" end="3555" title="S3 Group" label="S3 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q820933" start="3585" end="3607" title="S3 Texture Compression" label="S3 Texture Compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593067" start="3659" end="3668" title="Amazon S3" label="Amazon S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388288" start="3748" end="3773" title="S3 (programming language)" label="S3 (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q379523" start="3907" end="3949" title="Advanced Configuration and Power Interface" label="Advanced Configuration and Power Interface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4025" end="4068" title="List_of_Qualcomm_Snapdragon_systems-on-chip#Snapdragon_S3" label="List of Qualcomm Snapdragon systems-on-chip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4140" end="4157" title="Canon_PowerShot_S#S3_IS" label="Canon PowerShot S"/>
<link wikidata="Q775713" start="4160" end="4174" title="FinePix S3 Pro" label="FinePix S3 Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640040" start="4253" end="4267" title="Infinix Hot S3" label="Infinix Hot S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7036542" start="4301" end="4309" title="Nikon S3" label="Nikon S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q587946" start="4338" end="4354" title="Nikon Coolpix S3" label="Nikon Coolpix S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q140944" start="4375" end="4395" title="Samsung Galaxy S III" label="Samsung Galaxy S III"/>
<link wikidata="Q490473" start="4477" end="4502" title="Samsung Galaxy S III Mini" label="Samsung Galaxy S III Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q29578329" start="4578" end="4599" title="Samsung Galaxy Tab S3" label="Samsung Galaxy Tab S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q27890205" start="4622" end="4637" title="Samsung Gear S3" label="Samsung Gear S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q12607698" start="4659" end="4672" title="Samsung YP-S3" label="Samsung YP-S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q639440" start="4741" end="4755" title="Siemens Mobile" label="Siemens Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204630" start="4824" end="4849" title="Dihedral group of order 6" label="Dihedral group of order 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274197" start="4860" end="4868" title="3-sphere" label="3-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396924" start="4940" end="4961" title="Sacral spinal nerve 3" label="Sacral spinal nerve 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785063" start="5002" end="5019" title="Third heart sound" label="Third heart sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q434316" start="5055" end="5067" title="ATC code S03" label="ATC code S03"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388289" start="5217" end="5228" title="S3 Asia MBA" label="S3 Asia MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388287" start="5301" end="5320" title="S3 (classification)" label="S3 (classification)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469920" start="5389" end="5397" title="Form S-3" label="Form S-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395395" start="5507" end="5522" title="S postcode area" label="S postcode area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785096" start="5563" end="5573" title="Third year" label="Third year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5649" end="5686" title="Junior Secondary Education Assessment" label="Junior Secondary Education Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207181" start="5749" end="5768" title="3S (disambiguation)" label="3S (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431043" start="5771" end="5798" title="Schedule 3 (disambiguation)" label="Schedule 3 (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683907" wikidata="Q467556" url="?curid=683907" title="Jouissance">
<text>Jouissance () is a French language term held untranslatable into English.

In continental philosophy and psychoanalysis, &quot;jouissance&quot; is the of a subject&#x27;s regulation of pleasure. It is linked to the division and splitting of the subject involved, which spontaneously compels the subject to transgress the prohibitions imposed on enjoyment and to go beyond the pleasure principle. Beyond this limit, pleasure then becomes pain, before this, initial &quot;painful principle&quot; develops into what Jacques Lacan called &quot;jouissance&quot;; it is suffering, epitomized in Lacan&#x27;s remark about &quot;the recoil imposed on everyone, in so far as it involves terrible promises, by the approach of &quot;jouissance&quot; as such&quot;. He linked &quot;jouissance&quot; to the castration complex, and especially to the aggression of the death drives.

In feminist theory, &quot;jouissance&quot; describes a form of women&#x27;s pleasure or sexual rapture, which is a fusion of mental, physical, and spiritual aspects bordering on mystical communion. &quot;Jouissance&quot; is considered the source of a woman&#x27;s creative power.

== In Lacanian psychoanalysis ==
English editions of the works of Jacques Lacan have generally left &quot;jouissance&quot; untranslated in order to help convey its specialised usage. Lacan first developed his concept of an opposition between &quot;jouissance&quot; and the pleasure principle in his Seminar &quot;The Ethics of Psychoanalysis&quot; (1959–1960). Lacan considered that &quot;there is a &quot;jouissance&quot; beyond the pleasure principle&quot; linked to the partial drive. Yet according to Lacan, the result of transgressing the pleasure principle is not more pleasure, but instead pain, since there is only a certain amount of pleasure that the subject can bear. In his later seminar &quot;The Other Side of Psychoanalysis&quot; (1969–1970), Lacan introduced the concept of &quot;surplus-&quot;enjoyment&quot;&quot; (French &quot;plus-de-jouir&quot;) inspired by Marx&#x27;s concept of surplus-value: he considered &quot;objet petit a&quot; as the excess of &quot;jouissance&quot;, which has no use value, and which persists for the mere sake of &quot;jouissance&quot;.

Lacan considered that &quot;jouissance&quot; is essentially phallic, meaning that it does not relate to the &quot;Other&quot; as such. In his seminar &quot;Encore&quot; (1972–1973), however, Lacan introduced the idea of specifically feminine &quot;jouissance&quot;, saying that women have &quot;in relation to what the phallic function designates of &quot;jouissance&quot;, a supplementary &quot;jouissance&quot;...a &quot;jouissance&quot; of the body which is...&quot;beyond the phallus&quot;&quot;. This feminine &quot;jouissance&quot; is ineffable, for both women and men may experience it, yet know nothing about it. Jane Gallop has noted that &quot;it is impossible to give an adequate translation of &quot;jouissance&quot;&quot;, adding that it is crucial &quot;not to assimilate it, but to retain its foreignness.&quot;

==In philosophy and literary theory==
The Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Žižek, a known Lacanian theorist, has adopted the term in his philosophy; it also plays an important role in the work of Julia Kristeva and Roland Barthes.

In his 1973 literary theory book &quot;The Pleasure of the Text&quot;, Barthes divides the effects of texts into two: &quot;plaisir&quot; (translated as &quot;pleasure&quot;) and &quot;jouissance&quot;. The distinction corresponds to a further distinction Barthes makes between &quot;readerly&quot; and &quot;writerly&quot; texts. The pleasure of the text corresponds to the readerly text, which does not challenge the reader&#x27;s position as a subject. The writerly text provides bliss, which explodes literary codes and allows the reader to break out of his or her subject position.

For Barthes &quot;plaisir&quot; is, &quot;a pleasure... linked to cultural enjoyment and identity, to the cultural enjoyment of identity, to a homogenising movement of the ego.&quot; As Richard Middleton puts it, &quot;&quot;Plaisir&quot; results, then, from the operation of the structures of signification through which the subject knows himself or herself; &quot;jouissance&quot; fractures these structures.&quot;

===In feminist theory===

The French feminist writer Hélène Cixous uses the term &quot;jouissance&quot; to describe a form of women&#x27;s pleasure or sexual rapture that combines mental, physical and spiritual aspects of female experience, bordering on mystical communion: &quot;explosion, diffusion, effervescence, abundance...takes pleasure (jouit) in being limitless&quot;. Cixous maintains that &quot;jouissance&quot; is the source of a woman&#x27;s creative power and that the suppression of &quot;jouissance&quot; prevents women from finding their own fully empowered voice. The concept of &quot;jouissance&quot; is explored by Cixous and other authors in their writings on &quot;Écriture féminine&quot;, a strain of feminist literary theory that originated in France in the early 1970s.

Other feminists have argued that Freudian &quot;hysteria&quot; is &quot;jouissance&quot; distorted by patriarchal culture and say that &quot;jouissance&quot; is a transcendent state that represents freedom from oppressive linearities. In her introduction to Cixous&#x27; &quot;The Newly Born Woman&quot;, literary critic Sandra Gilbert writes: &quot;to escape hierarchical bonds and thereby come closer to what Cixous calls &quot;jouissance&quot;, which can be defined as a virtually metaphysical fulfillment of desire that goes far beyond [mere] satisfaction... [It is a] fusion of the erotic, the mystical, and the political.&quot;

==See also==
==References==
==External links==

*What Does Lacan Say About Jouissance? Article on LacanOnline.com
*Marie-Christine Laznik, &quot;Jouissance&quot; (Lacan) 
*Slavoj Zizek: Lacan&#x27;s Formulas of Sexuation
*Josefina Ayerza: &quot;Comme des garçons&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="19" end="34" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706268" start="45" end="59" title="Untranslatability" label="untranslatable"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="78" end="100" title="continental philosophy" label="continental philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="105" end="119" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="156" end="163" title="Subject (philosophy)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756222" start="376" end="394" title="Pleasure principle (psychology)" label="pleasure principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="513" end="526" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="564" end="573" title="suffering" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877008" start="794" end="812" title="castration complex" label="castration complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q191797" start="836" end="846" title="aggression" label="aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570600" start="854" end="865" title="death drive" label="death drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810748" start="872" end="887" title="feminist theory" label="feminist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="1216" end="1229" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756222" start="1423" end="1441" title="Pleasure principle (psychology)" label="pleasure principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="2029" end="2033" title="Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q332425" start="2052" end="2065" title="surplus-value" label="surplus-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011742" start="2087" end="2100" title="objet petit a" label="objet petit a"/>
<link wikidata="Q168552" start="2297" end="2304" title="phallic" label="phallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="2351" end="2356" title="Other (philosophy)" label="Other"/>
<link wikidata="Q866081" start="2470" end="2478" title="Femininity" label="feminine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184750" start="3129" end="3141" title="Slavoj Žižek" label="Slavoj Žižek"/>
<link wikidata="Q159876" start="3257" end="3271" title="Julia Kristeva" label="Julia Kristeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="3276" end="3290" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q459381" start="3305" end="3320" title="literary theory" label="literary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214641" start="3332" end="3356" title="The Pleasure of the Text" label="The Pleasure of the Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="3740" end="3747" title="subject (philosophy)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431042" start="4067" end="4084" title="Richard Middleton (musicologist)" label="Richard Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q234964" start="4352" end="4365" title="Hélène Cixous" label="Hélène Cixous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621549" start="4986" end="5003" title="Écriture féminine" label="Écriture féminine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092684" start="5023" end="5073" title="Feminism in France" label="feminist literary theory that originated in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="5128" end="5136" title="Freudian" label="Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q144119" start="5143" end="5151" title="hysteria" label="hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="5197" end="5208" title="Patriarchy" label="patriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q252000" start="5306" end="5316" title="Oppression" label="oppressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416620" start="5416" end="5430" title="Sandra Gilbert" label="Sandra Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438403" start="5455" end="5467" title="Dominance hierarchy" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q775842" start="5607" end="5613" title="desire" label="desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q352126" start="5642" end="5654" title="Contentment" label="satisfaction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683914" wikidata="Q356846" url="?curid=683914" title="Laurence Luckinbill">
<text>Laurence George Luckinbill (born November 21, 1934) is an American actor, playwright and director. He has worked in television, film, and theatre, doing triple duty in the theatre by writing, directing, and starring in stage productions. He is known for penning and starring in one-man shows based upon the lives of U.S. president Theodore Roosevelt, author Ernest Hemingway, and famous American defense attorney Clarence Darrow; starring in a one-man show based upon the life of U..S president Lyndon B. Johnson; and for his portrayal of Spock&#x27;s half-brother Sybok in the film &quot;Star Trek V: The Final Frontier&quot;.

==Personal life==
Luckinbill was born in Fort Smith, Arkansas, the son of Agnes (née Nulph) and Laurence Benedict Luckinbill. He is the uncle of film directors Lana and Lilly Wachowski, the children of his sister, Lynne. He is Roman Catholic.

He attended Fort Smith Junior College from 1951 to 1952, received a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Arkansas in 1956, received a Master of Fine Arts degree from the Catholic University of America in 1958, attended New York University in 1980, and studied acting at HB Studio in New York City.

He is married to actress Lucie Arnaz, daughter of Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz. They have three children together: Simon, Joseph, and Katharine. Arnaz and Luckinbill have toured together in theatrical productions such as &quot;They&#x27;re Playing Our Song&quot;. He also has two sons from his previous marriage to actress Robin Strasser, Nicholas and Benjamin.

==Career==
On television, he started out with roles on the American soap operas &quot;Where the Heart Is&quot; and &quot;The Secret Storm&quot;. He starred as espionage agent Glenn Garth Gregory in the 1972–1973 ABC dramatic television series, &quot;The Delphi Bureau&quot;. He has performed in numerous episodes of television series, including &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot;, &quot;Barnaby Jones&quot;, &quot;Columbo&quot; (episode &quot;Make Me a Perfect Murder&quot;), &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot;, and &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot;. He also played Lillian Hellman&#x27;s lawyer Joseph L. Rauh in the television film &quot;Dash and Lilly&quot; (1999).

His 1961 Broadway debut was in &quot;A Man for All Seasons&quot;. He starred in Pavel Kohout&#x27;s 1976 Broadway play &quot;Poor Murderer&quot; at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre, Michael Cristofer&#x27;s &quot;The Shadow Box&quot; (1977) at the Morosco Theater, for which he received a nomination for the Best Featured Actor in a Play, and in Thomas Babe&#x27;s &quot;A Prayer for My Daughter&quot; (1978) at the Public Theater. His theatre career has included writing and directing. Luckinbill has written and performed in several one-man shows, including, &quot;Hemingway&quot;, &quot;Teddy&quot;, and &quot;An Evening with Clarence Darrow&quot;. He has also starred in numerous productions of &quot;Lyndon&quot;, which he did not write. One production was at the LBJ Museum in Austin, Texas, where Lady Bird Johnson was among attendees.

He appeared in the drama film &quot;The Boys in the Band&quot; (1970), reprising the role of Hank, which he originated on stage. He portrayed Spock&#x27;s half-brother Sybok in &quot;Star Trek V: The Final Frontier&quot; (1989). Sean Connery was originally contacted to star in the role but was busy with &quot;Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade&quot;. William Shatner discovered Luckinbill by chance by channel-surfing late one night and seeing him perform as Johnson. When Shatner called to offer him the role, Luckinbill accepted immediately.

Other film appearances include &quot;Such Good Friends&quot; (1971), &quot;The Promise&quot; (1979), and &quot;Cocktail&quot; (1988). He also narrated the documentary &quot;Moonwalk One&quot;. In the early 1970s, Luckinbill was the commercial spokesperson for Trans World Airlines, appearing in several television spots for the airline.

==Filmography==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356846" start="0" end="26" title="Laurence Luckinbill" label="Laurence George Luckinbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319401" start="278" end="291" title="one-person show" label="one-man shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="331" end="349" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="358" end="374" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q449791" start="413" end="428" title="Clarence Darrow" label="Clarence Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="495" end="512" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="539" end="544" title="Spock" label="Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341051" start="565" end="570" title="Sybok" label="Sybok"/>
<link wikidata="" start="589" end="620" title="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" label="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q79535" start="670" end="690" title="Fort Smith, Arkansas" label="Fort Smith, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="789" end="813" title="The Wachowskis" label="Lana and Lilly Wachowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="856" end="870" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495828" start="885" end="910" title="University of Arkansas–Fort Smith" label="Fort Smith Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="941" end="957" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070333" start="974" end="996" title="University of Arkansas" label="University of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175466" start="1017" end="1036" title="Master of Fine Arts" label="Master of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="1053" end="1083" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="1102" end="1121" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629067" start="1153" end="1162" title="HB Studio" label="HB Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q469401" start="1207" end="1218" title="Lucie Arnaz" label="Lucie Arnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="1232" end="1244" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q472535" start="1249" end="1259" title="Desi Arnaz" label="Desi Arnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823275" start="1408" end="1437" title="They&amp;#x27;re Playing Our Song" label="They&amp;#x27;re Playing Our Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112357" start="1504" end="1518" title="Robin Strasser" label="Robin Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226543" start="1630" end="1648" title="Where the Heart Is (1969 TV series)" label="Where the Heart Is"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763104" start="1665" end="1681" title="The Secret Storm" label="The Secret Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1756" end="1759" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q520058" start="1794" end="1811" title="The Delphi Bureau" label="The Delphi Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="1895" end="1910" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q808420" start="1924" end="1937" title="Barnaby Jones" label="Barnaby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q371207" start="1951" end="1958" title="Columbo" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="2019" end="2044" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="2062" end="2079" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226560" start="2176" end="2190" title="Dash and Lilly" label="Dash and Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779414" start="2243" end="2264" title="A Man for All Seasons (play)" label="A Man for All Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q163557" start="2286" end="2298" title="Pavel Kohout" label="Pavel Kohout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228803" start="2331" end="2344" title="Poor Murderer" label="Poor Murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403074" start="2358" end="2381" title="Ethel Barrymore Theatre" label="Ethel Barrymore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q503452" start="2383" end="2400" title="Michael Cristofer" label="Michael Cristofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522670" start="2414" end="2428" title="The Shadow Box" label="The Shadow Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913281" start="2449" end="2464" title="Morosco Theater" label="Morosco Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474410" start="2509" end="2538" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play" label="Best Featured Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787279" start="2547" end="2558" title="Thomas Babe" label="Thomas Babe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658997" start="2572" end="2596" title="A Prayer for My Daughter" label="A Prayer for My Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="2617" end="2631" title="Public Theater" label="Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853779" start="2970" end="2980" title="Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum" label="LBJ Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="2984" end="2997" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q233648" start="3005" end="3022" title="Lady Bird Johnson" label="Lady Bird Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565223" start="3081" end="3101" title="The Boys in the Band (1970 film)" label="The Boys in the Band"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3228" end="3259" title="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" label="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="3274" end="3286" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q185658" start="3356" end="3390" title="Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade" label="Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="3398" end="3413" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648111" start="3629" end="3646" title="Such Good Friends" label="Such Good Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988861" start="3667" end="3678" title="The Promise (1979 film)" label="The Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105359" start="3703" end="3711" title="Cocktail (1988 film)" label="Cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908010" start="3765" end="3777" title="Moonwalk One" label="Moonwalk One"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="3852" end="3872" title="Trans World Airlines" label="Trans World Airlines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683917" wikidata="Q14491" url="?curid=683917" title="Torosaurus">
<text>Torosaurus (meaning &quot;perforated lizard&quot;, in reference to the large openings in its frill) is a genus of herbivorous chasmosaurine ceratopsian dinosaur that lived during the late Maastrichtian age of the Late Cretaceous period, between 68 and 66 million years ago, though it is possible that the species range might extend to as far back as 69 million years ago. Fossils have been discovered across the Western Interior of North America, from as far north as Saskatchewan to as far south as Texas.

&quot;Torosaurus&quot; possessed the largest skulls of any known land animal, with the frilled skull reaching in length. &quot;Torosaurus&quot; is thought to have been the same size as the contemporary &quot;Triceratops&quot;, but is distinguished by an elongated frill with large oval shaped openings, long squamosal bones of the frill with a trough on their upper surface, and the presence of five or more pairs of hornlets on the back of the frill. &quot;Torosaurus&quot; also lacked the long nose horn seen in &quot;Triceratops prorsus.&quot; It instead resembled the earlier and more basal &quot;Triceratops horridus&quot;, thanks to having a short nose horn. Three species have been named so far: &quot;Torosaurus latus&quot;, &quot;T. gladius&quot;, and &quot;T. utahensis&quot;. &quot;T. gladius&quot; is no longer considered a valid species, however.

In 2010, the validity of &quot;Torosaurus&quot; was disputed. A study of fossil bone histology combined with an investigation of frill shape concluded that &quot;Torosaurus&quot; probably represented the mature form of &quot;Triceratops&quot;, with the bones of typical &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimens still immature and showing signs of a first development of distinct &quot;Torosaurus&quot; frill holes. During maturation, the skull frill would have been greatly lengthened and holes would have appeared in it. In 2011, 2012, and 2013, however, studies of external features of known specimens have claimed that morphological differences between the two genera preclude their synonymy. The main problems are a lack of good transitional forms, the apparent existence of authentic &quot;Torosaurus&quot; subadults, different skull proportions independent of maturation, and hole formation at an adult stage not being part of a normal ceratopsian maturation sequence. Consequently, it is still heavily debated whether &quot;Torosaurus&quot; truly is an adult &quot;Triceratops&quot; or a separate genus, though most researchers currently favor the latter interpretation.

== Discovery and species ==
In 1891, two years after the naming of &quot;Triceratops&quot;, a pair of ceratopsian skulls with elongated frills bearing holes were found by John Bell Hatcher in Niobrara County in southeastern Wyoming. Hatcher&#x27;s employer, paleontologist Professor Othniel Charles Marsh, coined the genus &quot;Torosaurus&quot; for them.

The name &quot;Torosaurus&quot; is frequently translated as &quot;bull lizard&quot; from the Latin noun &quot;&quot; or the Spanish word &quot;toro&quot;, but is much more likely derived from the Greek verb (&quot;toreo)&quot;, which means &quot;to perforate&quot;. The allusion is to the &quot;fenestrae&quot;, &quot;window-like&quot; holes, in the elongated frill, which have traditionally served to distinguish it from the solid frill of &quot;Triceratops&quot;. Much of the confusion over etymology of the name results from the fact that Marsh never explicitly explained it in his papers.

Two &quot;Torosaurus&quot; species have been identified:
* &quot;T. latus&quot; (type species). &quot;Latus&quot; means &quot;the wide one&quot; in Latin, in reference to the frill.
* &quot;T. utahensis&quot; () 

Another species was subsequently regarded as identical to &quot;T. latus&quot;:
* &quot;T. gladius&quot; . &quot;Gladius&quot; is &quot;sword&quot; in Latin, in reference to the elongated shape of the squamosal.

&quot;T. latus&quot; was based on holotype YPM 1830, which is a partial skull. The holotype of &quot;T. gladius&quot; was specimen YPM 1831, which is an even larger skull. Both fossils were found in the Lance Formation of the late Maastrichtian. Similar specimens found in Wyoming, Montana, South Dakota, North Dakota, Colorado, Utah, and Saskatchewan have since been referred to &quot;Torosaurus&quot;. Those that can be identified with some certainty include ANSP 15192 (a smaller individual in South Dakota uncovered by Edwin Harris Colbert in 1944), MPM VP6841 (a partial skeleton with a skull mounted at the Milwaukee Public Museum), SMM P97.6.1 (a skull lacking the snout), and two partial skulls from the Hell Creek Formation reported in 2002: MOR 981 (discovered in 1998) and MOR 1122 (from 2001). Fragmentary remains that could possibly be identified as &quot;Torosaurus&quot; have been found in the Big Bend Region of Texas and the San Juan Basin of New Mexico. Paleontologists have observed that &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens are uncommon in the fossil record, with specimens of &quot;Triceratops&quot; being much more abundant.

&quot;Torosaurus utahensis&quot; was originally described as &quot;Arrhinoceratops utahensis&quot; by Charles Whitney Gilmore in 1946, based on specimen USNM 15583 (a frill fragment from Emery County, Utah). In 1976, it was renamed to &quot;Torosaurus utahensis&quot; by Douglas Lawson. Review by Robert Sullivan &quot;et al.&quot; in 2005 left it as &quot;Torosaurus utahensis&quot; and somewhat older than &quot;T. latus&quot;. In 2008, Rebecca Hunt referred considerable additional material to this species. Research has not yet been published on whether &quot;T. utahensis&quot; should be regarded as a new genus or, as has been suggested for &quot;T. latus&quot;, the mature growth stage of a species of &quot;Triceratops&quot;.

== Description ==
The individuals referred to &quot;Torosaurus&quot; are all large, comparable to the largest &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimens, measuring long and weighing . Due to the elongated frill, the skull length is especially considerable. Hatcher estimated the skull of YPM 1830 at and that of YPM 1831 at . In 1933, Richard Swann Lull increased this to and , respectively. Based on this, &quot;Torosaurus&quot; was seen as having the longest skull of any known land animal. In 1998, however, Thomas Lehman claimed that a &quot;Pentaceratops&quot; specimen possessed a partial skull that would have been long in life. This was again doubted by Nicholas Longrich who, in 2011, named this exemplar as a separate genus, &quot;Titanoceratops&quot;, and concluded its skull had been reconstructed as too long. Furthermore, in 2006, Andrew Farke had pointed out that the new skulls described by him were even longer on average than Hatcher&#x27;s original two. MOR 1122 has a length of and MOR 981 has a length of . The well preserved skull of the &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimen nicknamed &quot;Adam&quot;, first put on display in 2023, is the largest known at long.

In 2006, Farke established some diagnostic traits of &quot;Torosaurus&quot;. The frill is extremely long in comparison to the remainder of the skull. The rear edge of the frill bears ten or more epiperietals, or triangular osteoderms. A midline triangular osteoderm is absent. Likewise, no osteoderm straddles the parietal-squamosal boundary. The parietal bone is thin and pierced by parietal &quot;fenestrae&quot; in the form of circular or transversely ovalur openings. The parietal bone is about 20% wider than it is long. Farke identified a single trait in which &quot;T. latus&quot; differed from both &quot;Triceratops horridus&quot; and &quot;T. utahensis&quot;. Its squamosal bore a conspicuous ridge on the edge with the parietal combined with a deep longitudinal trough parallel to it.
Farke pointed out that the known &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens are rather variable. The orbital &quot;brow&quot; horns are sometimes large and curved to the front, as with MOR 981, or sometimes short and straight, as shown by MOR 1122 and ANSP 15191. Also, the position of these horns differs, as they are often located directly on top of the eye socket. With YPM 1831, however, they originate at the rear edge of the orbit. Likewise, there is a variation in the form of the nose horn. YPM 1831 and, to a lesser extent, YPM 1830 have a straight, upright nasal horn, but MOR 981, ANSP 15192, and especially MOR 1122 possess a low bump at most. The frill differs too, as ANSP 15192 and YPM 1830 have a shield curving upwards at the rear, but the frill of YPM 1831 is nearly flat, though this could be an artefact of restoration. The frill of YPM 1831 is also heart-shaped, with a clear midline notch, whereas the rear edge of the other specimens is straight. The frill proportions are quite variable. With YPM 1831, the length-width ratio is 1.26, but MOR 981 has a shield 2.28 times longer than it is wide. The number of triangular osteoderms is difficult to assess, as most fossils seem to have lost them. MOR 981 and MOR 1122 have ten and twelve epiparietals, respectively. YPM 1831 has been restored with a fontanelle in the skull roof, which is possibly authentic. Farke also concluded that the degree of variability did not exceed that shown by related genera.

Farke stressed that, apart from the frill, no systematic differences could be found between &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops&quot;. All &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens are similar in that they lack a truly long nasal horn and a horizontal arterial groove at the front base of said horn, but &quot;Triceratops&quot; fossils with the same combination of traits are not uncommon. In 2008, Hunt concluded that &quot;T. utahensis&quot;, contrary to &quot;T. latus&quot;, but similar to &quot;Triceratops&quot;, possessed a midline epiparietal.

== Classification ==
Below is a ceratopsid cladogram based on the phylogenetic analysis conducted by Sampson &quot;et al.&quot; in 2010:

In 1891, Marsh placed &quot;Torosaurus&quot; in the Ceratopsidae family of Ceratopsia (Greek: &quot;horned faces&quot;), a group of herbivorous dinosaurs with parrot-like beaks that thrived in North America and Asia during the Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods.

&quot;Torosaurus&quot; has, with its long frill, traditionally been classified in Chasmosaurinae. It was seen as a late member of a line descending from &quot;Anchiceratops&quot; or &quot;Arrhinoceratops&quot;. It was thus placed in a different branch from &quot;Triceratops&quot; which, well into the 1980s, was seen as a member of Centrosaurinae because of its short frill. However, in the 1990s, exact cladistic analysis showed that both genera were chasmosaurines. Recent analyses invariably show a close relationship between &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops&quot;.

=== Possible synonymy with &quot;Triceratops&quot; ===

A debate has sparked over the possibility that &quot;Torosaurus&quot; might be identical to &quot;Triceratops&quot;. In the Maastrichtian age of Laramidia, two closely related chasmosaurines shared the same habitat. The only discernible difference between them was the form of the frill. No &quot;Torosaurus&quot; juveniles are known, but a considerable number of &quot;Triceratops&quot; juveniles have been found. &quot;Triceratops&quot; differs from other chasmosaurines in the retention as an adult of a juvenile trait. Adults retain the short squamosals, a case of paedomorphosis. In 2009, John Scannella, investigating dinosaur ontogeny in the Hell Creek Formation of Montana, concluded that this situation could be best explained by the hypothesis that &quot;Triceratops&quot; and &quot;Torosaurus&quot; were growth stages of a single genus. The &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens would be fully mature individuals of &quot;Triceratops&quot;. &quot;Torosaurus&quot; would be a junior synonym of &quot;Triceratops&quot;, the latter name having priority.
In 2010, Scanella and Jack Horner, Scannella&#x27;s mentor at Montana State University, published research on the growth patterns in thirty-eight skull specimens (twenty-nine of &quot;Triceratops&quot;, nine of &quot;Torosaurus&quot;) from the Hell Creek formation. They concluded that &quot;Torosaurus&quot; indeed represents the mature form of &quot;Triceratops&quot;. Horner stressed that the frill of ceratopsian skulls consisted of metaplastic bone. A characteristic of metaplastic bone is that it can lengthen and shorten over time, extending and resorbing to form new shapes. Significant development is seen even in those skulls already identified as &quot;Triceratops&quot;, Horner observed, &quot;where the horn orientation is backwards in juveniles and forward in adults&quot;. Approximately 50% of all subadult &quot;Triceratops&quot; skulls have two thin areas in the frill that correspond with the placement of the &quot;holes&quot; in &quot;Torosaurus&quot; skull frills, which are surrounded by mature granular bone, suggesting that these developed to offset the weight that would otherwise have been added as maturing &quot;Triceratops&quot; individuals grew longer frills. Horner made this part of a larger argument that, in general, many purported dinosaur species might have been growth stages of other known species. With old &quot;Triceratops&quot; individuals, the frill would have begun to lengthen considerably, causing it to flatten and widen at its rear edge. At the same time, parietal &quot;fenestrae&quot; would have appeared, resulting in the typical chasmosaurine frill shape.

Scanella and Horner recognised that not all data were easily explained by their hypothesis. For these, they advanced auxiliary hypotheses. One problem was that if &quot;Torosaurus&quot; were the normal last maturation phase of &quot;Triceratops&quot;, which they called the &quot;toromorph phase&quot;, it would be expected that &quot;Torosaurus&quot; fossils were quite common, whereas in fact they are fairly rare. They explained this by a high mortality of subadults and the possibility that old animals preferentially lived on heights where erosion prevented fossilization . A second problem was the size range of &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens, which seems to suggest the existence of authentic &quot;Torosaurus&quot; subadults. Of these, they claimed that the bone structure indicated a fully mature age, with the size difference being the apparent result of individual variation. A third possible objection was the seeming lack of transitional forms between individuals with and without parietal holes. These &quot;fenestrae&quot; are always perfectly shaped, not like incipient perforations. To counter it, they pointed to specimen USNM 2412, the holotype of the contentious &quot;Nedoceratops&quot;, as an example of precisely such a transitional form. The problematic traits of this genus would simply reflect its being in the first stages of transforming into a &quot;toromorph&quot;. A last problem was offered by the number of osteoderms on the frill edge. With &quot;Triceratops&quot;, there are typically five epiparietals, including a midline osteoderm. With &quot;Torosaurus&quot;, there are ten or twelve, a midline epiparietal being absent. Also the number of episquamosals on the side edge of the frill differs (five with &quot;Triceratops&quot;, six or seven with &quot;Torosaurus&quot;). This was explained by the assumption that the number of epoccipitals increased during maturation. Also, it was pointed out that both number and position of the osteoderms are variable with &quot;Triceratops&quot;. This is shown through specimen MOR 2923, which has six epiparietals, but lacks a midline one.

Scannella and Horner&#x27;s conclusions have not been unanimously accepted. Several experts, though admitting the possibility that the &quot;toromorph&quot; hypothesis is correct, have denied that this is probable. The hypothesis was directly challenged by a 2011 paper by Andrew Farke and a 2012 paper by Nicholas Longrich. In 2011, Farke redescribed the problematic &quot;Nedoceratops hatcheri&quot; as an aged or diseased individual of its own genus. Scannella and Horner argued for its identification with &quot;Triceratops&quot;. Farke pointed out that the irregular holes in the &quot;Nedoceratops&quot; frill, far from piercing thinning bone, were surrounded by thick swellings. Farke further concluded that several facts were difficult to reconcile with the proposed development of a &quot;Triceratops&quot; into a &quot;Torosaurus&quot;. In general, the number of epoccipitals in ceratopsians does not increase when the frill grows. Even though the number of episquamosals is often variable, there seems to be no relation with size because some juveniles already show the maximum number. Apparently, this is a matter of individual variation, not ontogeny. Likewise, with Ceratopia in general, the formation of holes in the frill is not related to age, as even the youngest individuals often possess the parietal &quot;fenestrae&quot;. Farke explained the thin bone areas on the frill of &quot;Triceratops&quot;, the purported location of incipient holes, to be muscle attachment sites. There would be no consistent relation between holes and a granular bone structure. Many &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimens have frills with a deeply veined surface, indicating considerable age. The bone of their frills would have to be rejuvenated and then become granulated again in order for hole formation to begin, which Farke considered to be an unlikely sequence. Finally, Farke pointed out that specimen YPM 1831, despite its enormous size, was apparently not yet fully-grown, as shown by its unfused sutures and smooth bone texture. Thus, it seemed to represent an authentic &quot;Torosaurus&quot; subadult.

The same year, Scanella and Horner responded to some of Farke&#x27;s critique. They admitted that USNM 2412, in view of its pathologies, was not an ideal candidate for a transitional form, but stressed that, apart from swellings, the holes in its frill were also bordered by granular and thinning bone. Taking all the evidence into consideration, they thought it much more likely that &quot;Nedoceratops&quot; represented a diseased individual of &quot;Triceratops&quot; than a genus of its own. They also pointed to &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimens showing the precise combination of veined, granular, and young striated bone that Farke had considered to be improbable. The idea that the thin areas on &quot;Triceratops&quot; frills were muscle attachment sites was rejected by them because the bone at these points did not show the rugose surface typical for such an attachment. For the difference in the number of epoccipitals, they offered two additional explanations. The osteoderm tips of old individuals might have eroded during life in such a way that each osteoderm gave the impression of two being present. In this way, the normal number of five or six &quot;Triceratops&quot; epiparietals could have doubled to ten or twelve, precisely the amount seen with the &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens. Alternatively, the &quot;Torosaurus latus&quot; specimens, having been found in older layers, might, in a process of anagenesis, represent an early stage of &quot;Triceratops&quot; evolution. The oldest specimen that can be dated, MOR 1122, has twelve epiparietals, while the younger MOR 981 possesses ten, seeming to indicate an evolutionary sequence in which the number of epiparietals gradually decreased.

In 2012, Longrich investigated the problem by applying the principle of falsification. From any valid scientific hypothesis, predictions can be derived by which it can be tested. Longrich argued that the &quot;toromorph&quot; hypothesis implied three such predictions. Firstly, if &quot;Torosaurus&quot; were identical to &quot;Triceratops&quot;, their fossils should be found in the same locations. In fact, their geographical ranges do not perfectly coincide. In the very north, no &quot;Torosaurus&quot; fossils have been found, while from the south, only &quot;Torosaurus utahensis&quot; is known. However, this situation could be an artefact of the relative scarcity of &quot;Torosaurus&quot; remains and imperfect sampling. Longrich therefore concluded that the hypothesis was corroborated by the first prediction. Secondly, the hypothesis predicted that all &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens would be adults, while no &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimens would be very old. According to Longrich, this last point had not yet been established. Admittedly, in 2011, Horner had published a histological study showing that all &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimens investigated possessed a subadult bone structure, but the sample had been too small to allow for a valid generalisation to all &quot;Triceratops&quot; fossils. To better test the prediction, Longrich proposed a list of twenty-four external skull traits, by which specimens could be checked regarding their level of skull element fusion and their maturation. Thirty-six specimens were investigated upon applying these criteria. It transpired that the fusion typically took place in a certain sequence, providing additional information about their age. Indeed, by these criteria, most &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens were very old. However, there were two exceptions. The small individual ANSP 15192 was a relatively young adult, as shown by the lack of fusion of the snout bones. The youngest specimen was YPM 1831, with an unfused snout, epijugal, and occipital condyle. Furthermore, it had lost all of its frill osteoderms because they apparently had not been fused yet, while the frill edge had the external appearance of growing, young bone. On the other hand, Longrich found that ten of the &quot;Triceratops&quot; skulls investigated had attained the same level of maturation as the most aged &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens. Longrich concluded that the test of the second prediction refuted the hypothesis. The third prediction was that transitional forms could be found between &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops&quot;. Longrich considered the claim that the thin areas on &quot;Triceratops&quot; frills were precursors of parietal &quot;fenestrae&quot;, as the strongest proof of a transitional phase. However, he pointed out that these structures differed in position. The &quot;Triceratops&quot; depressions are partly located on the squamosal, while the &quot;Torosaurus&quot; holes are fully surrounded by the parietal. Furthermore, the depressions are bordered by much thicker bone, while the &quot;Torosaurus&quot; holes are surrounded by thin bone. Longrich concluded that the hypothesis failed regarding the third prediction. Being refuted in two of the three predictions, the hypothesis should be rejected.

Longrich also suggested some additional objections to the &quot;toromorph&quot; hypothesis. There are no transitional forms known regarding the number of epiparietals. Also, it is hard to see how their number could have increased, as they occupied the full frill edge and would, in a metaplastic growth process, simply have increased their size and the remainder of the frill. The proposed splitting of osteoderms by erosion has only been established with episquamosals, never with epiparietals. &quot;Torosaurus&quot; has a squamosal that is thickened at the inner side and concave at the outer surface, while the &quot;Triceratops&quot; squamosal is concave at the inner side and flat on top. Transitional forms are unknown. The &quot;Torosaurus&quot; squamosal is also, independent from absolute size, much more elongated. Longrich pointed out that when &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimens are combined to create a single growth sequence, as Scanella and Horner had done, &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens ANSP 15192 and YPM 1831 were outliers relative to the regression line because their squamosals were more elongated than could be explained by allometry. Longrich admitted that the fact that Horner, in his histological study, could only find &quot;Triceratops&quot; subadults was suggestive, but offered the alternative explanation that &quot;Triceratops&quot; differed from its relatives in retaining a relative young bone structure until old age. On the other hand, bone remodelling is not a reliable estimator of maturity in view of experimental studies demonstrating that differences in the mechanical strain conditions of various bones can significantly alter the rate or degree of such remodelling and may generate the illusion of old bone tissue. Longrich foresaw that Scanella and Horner would respond to his second test of their hypothesis by claiming that its results were caused by individual variation. According to Longrich, the importance of this factor was limited however: e.g. the size difference between ANSP 15192 and YPM 1831 had better been explained by sexual dimorphism, the former possibly being a young adult female and the latter being a subadult male.
In 2013, Farke and Leonardo Maiorino published morphometric research, a statistical analysis of the morphospace (shape space) describing the variation of the &quot;Torosaurus&quot;, &quot;Triceratops horridus&quot;, &quot;Triceratops prorsus&quot;, and &quot;Nedoceratops&quot; skulls correlated with maturation. They concluded that &quot;Torosaurus latus&quot; skulls throughout maturation retained a different form from &quot;T. horridus&quot; and &quot;T. prorsus&quot;, the last two species showing an overlapping in their proportions. This is even true when the frill shape is disregarded. &quot;Nedoceratops&quot; proved, except for size, not to be a plausible transitional form between &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops horridus&quot;. Farke and Maiorino admitted that the low number of &quot;Torosaurus&quot; specimens reduced the reliability of these results, but concluded that &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops&quot; were separate taxa, though allowing for the possibility of anagenesis, i.e. the several taxa forming a single chronospecies line of descent, given the lack of good stratigraphic data.

The hypothesis that the &quot;Torosaurus latus&quot; specimens might represent a &quot;toromorph&quot; phase of &quot;Triceratops&quot; maturation has raised the question of whether the second &quot;Torosaurus&quot; species, &quot;Torosaurus utahensis&quot;, is a &quot;toromorph&quot; as well. This issue has been complicated by the lack of good fossil material, as most specimens consist of isolated bones. &quot;T. utahensis&quot; was largely referred to &quot;Torosaurus&quot; because of elongated squamosals, indicating a long frill. The number of epiparietals and the size, location, or even existence of parietal &quot;fenestrae&quot; are unknown. Researchers have claimed that distinct juvenile &quot;Torosaurus&quot; have been excavated from a bonebed in the Javelina Formation of Big Bend National Park, basing their identification as &quot;Torosaurus&quot; cf. &quot;utahensis&quot; on their proximity to an adult with a characteristic &quot;Torosaurus&quot; parietal. Scanella and Horner concluded that only future finds could solve this problem. They suggested that this taxon, which extends the &quot;Torosaurus&quot; range southwards of that of &quot;Triceratops&quot;, might represent a separate chasmosaurine genus or a third &quot;Triceratops&quot; species. Farke&#x27;s 2013 morphometric study was inconclusive on this point, with &quot;T. utahensis&quot; morphospace falling in between &quot;Triceratops&quot; and &quot;Torosaurus latus&quot; and not well separated from either.

In 2022, Mallon &quot;et al.&quot; argued that two specimens found in Canada&#x27;s Frenchman and Scollard Formations, EM P16.1. (at Eastend Historical Museum in Saskatchewan) and UALVP 1646 (at the University of Alberta), are subadults and can be referred to &quot;Torosaurus&quot;, this indicating that it is a valid taxon. The same study also noted that &quot;Torosaurus&quot; indeed lived during the Late Maastrichtian.

== See also ==
* Timeline of ceratopsian research

== References ==

* Dodson, P. (1996). &quot;The Horned Dinosaurs&quot;. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, pp. xiv-346

== External links ==

* Kids Zone - &quot;Torosaurus&quot;
* Dinosaurier Web - &quot;Torosaurus&quot;
* Chart showing Triceratops/Torosaur growth and development (New Scientist)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="105" end="110" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q137441" start="126" end="139" title="Chasmosaurinae" label="chasmosaurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="140" end="151" title="Ceratopsia" label="ceratopsian"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="152" end="160" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q278141" start="188" end="201" title="Maastrichtian" label="Maastrichtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="213" end="228" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="468" end="480" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="500" end="505" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14384" start="716" end="727" title="Triceratops" label="Triceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="1454" end="1463" title="histology" label="histology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14384" start="1594" end="1605" title="Triceratops" label="Triceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="2048" end="2056" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14384" start="2614" end="2625" title="Triceratops" label="Triceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041829" start="2712" end="2729" title="John Bell Hatcher" label="John Bell Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q485641" start="2733" end="2748" title="Niobrara County, Wyoming" label="Niobrara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="2765" end="2772" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="2824" end="2845" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2991" end="2996" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3094" end="3099" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q14384" start="3345" end="3356" title="Triceratops" label="Triceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="3573" end="3585" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3640" end="3645" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727623" start="3907" end="3916" title="squamosal" label="squamosal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="3953" end="3961" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483389" start="4122" end="4137" title="Lance Formation" label="Lance Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q278141" start="4150" end="4163" title="Maastrichtian" label="Maastrichtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="4192" end="4199" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="4201" end="4208" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="4210" end="4222" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="4224" end="4236" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="4238" end="4246" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="4248" end="4252" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="4258" end="4270" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822400" start="4380" end="4384" title="Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University" label="ANSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="4416" end="4428" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q580301" start="4442" end="4462" title="Edwin Harris Colbert" label="Edwin Harris Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861802" start="4532" end="4555" title="Milwaukee Public Museum" label="Milwaukee Public Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777245" start="4558" end="4561" title="Science Museum of Minnesota" label="SMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q917642" start="4631" end="4651" title="Hell Creek Formation" label="Hell Creek Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628366" start="4703" end="4706" title="Museum of the Rockies" label="MOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494060" start="4828" end="4836" title="Big Bend, Texas" label="Big Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="4847" end="4852" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="4879" end="4889" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q131595" start="5130" end="5145" title="Arrhinoceratops" label="Arrhinoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206510" start="5165" end="5188" title="Charles Whitney Gilmore" label="Charles Whitney Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q26738" start="5250" end="5262" title="Emery County" label="Emery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="5264" end="5268" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301718" start="5334" end="5348" title="Douglas Lawson" label="Douglas Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5360" end="5375" title="Robert Sullivan (paleontologist)" label="Robert Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48872145" start="5502" end="5514" title="ReBecca Hunt-Foster" label="Rebecca Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465858" start="6124" end="6142" title="Richard Swann Lull" label="Richard Swann Lull"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6300" end="6313" title="Thomas Lehman" label="Thomas Lehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131253" start="6335" end="6348" title="Pentaceratops" label="Pentaceratops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6451" end="6468" title="Nicholas Longrich" label="Nicholas Longrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q134986" start="6530" end="6544" title="Titanoceratops" label="Titanoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6634" end="6646" title="Andrew Farke" label="Andrew Farke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513527" start="7193" end="7203" title="osteoderms" label="osteoderms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298" start="7317" end="7330" title="parietal bone" label="parietal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48872145" start="9634" end="9638" title="ReBecca Hunt-Foster" label="Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="9831" end="9840" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="9854" end="9875" title="phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q263925" start="9978" end="9990" title="Ceratopsidae" label="Ceratopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="10001" end="10011" title="Ceratopsia" label="Ceratopsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31431" start="10085" end="10091" title="parrot" label="parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="10119" end="10132" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="10137" end="10141" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="10153" end="10161" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="10166" end="10176" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q137441" start="10269" end="10283" title="Chasmosaurinae" label="Chasmosaurinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131580" start="10346" end="10359" title="Anchiceratops" label="Anchiceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q131595" start="10375" end="10390" title="Arrhinoceratops" label="Arrhinoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q132304" start="10520" end="10534" title="Centrosaurinae" label="Centrosaurinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="10592" end="10601" title="cladistic" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14384" start="10750" end="10761" title="Triceratops" label="Triceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q278141" start="10950" end="10963" title="Maastrichtian" label="Maastrichtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q775183" start="10971" end="10980" title="Laramidia" label="Laramidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="11033" end="11040" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q603178" start="11395" end="11409" title="paedomorphosis" label="paedomorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193603" start="11459" end="11467" title="ontogeny" label="ontogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q917642" start="11475" end="11495" title="Hell Creek Formation" label="Hell Creek Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="11499" end="11506" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="11807" end="11821" title="junior synonym" label="junior synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q247264" start="11905" end="11916" title="Jack Horner (paleontologist)" label="Jack Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495887" start="11945" end="11969" title="Montana State University System" label="Montana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q660713" start="12320" end="12336" title="metaplastic bone" label="metaplastic bone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13609" end="13629" title="auxiliary hypothesis" label="auxiliary hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="14037" end="14044" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="14055" end="14068" title="fossilisation" label="fossilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q132602" start="14683" end="14695" title="Nedoceratops" label="Nedoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q132602" start="15987" end="15999" title="Nedoceratops" label="Nedoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="16486" end="16497" title="epoccipital" label="epoccipital"/>
<link wikidata="Q179440" start="19148" end="19158" title="anagenesis" label="anagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="19513" end="19526" title="Falsifiability" label="falsification"/>
<link wikidata="Q748250" start="19566" end="19576" title="prediction" label="prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149495" start="19612" end="19618" title="testability" label="tested"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720909" start="20079" end="20087" title="Artifact (error)" label="artefact"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964998" start="20224" end="20236" title="corroboration" label="corroborated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21454" end="21471" title="occipital condyle#In dinosaurs" label="occipital condyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861030" start="23825" end="23840" title="regression line" label="regression line"/>
<link wikidata="Q519888" start="23913" end="23922" title="allometry" label="allometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="24845" end="24862" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24968" end="24985" title="Leonardo Maiorino" label="Leonardo Maiorino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851434" start="24996" end="25008" title="morphometric" label="morphometric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25049" end="25060" title="morphospace" label="morphospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088349" start="26009" end="26022" title="chronospecies" label="chronospecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890319" start="26852" end="26870" title="Javelina Formation" label="Javelina Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427197" start="26874" end="26896" title="Big Bend National Park" label="Big Bend National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874947" start="27668" end="27677" title="Frenchman Formation" label="Frenchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434305" start="27682" end="27700" title="Scollard Formation" label="Scollard Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q640694" start="27783" end="27804" title="University of Alberta" label="University of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q278141" start="27993" end="28006" title="Maastrichtian" label="Maastrichtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25346347" start="28026" end="28058" title="Timeline of ceratopsian research" label="Timeline of ceratopsian research"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683925" wikidata="Q373770" url="?curid=683925" title="Simon Mayr">
<text>Johann(es) Simon Mayr (also spelled Majer, Mayer, Maier), also known in Italian as Giovanni Simone Mayr or Simone Mayr (14 June 1763 – 2 December 1845), was a German composer. His music reflects the transition from the Classical to the Romantic musical era. In 1805 he founded the Bergamo Conservatory. He was an early inspiration to Rossini and taught and advocated for Donizetti.

== Life ==
He was born in Mendorf near Altmannstein, Landkreis Eichstätt, Bavaria, and studied theology at the University of Ingolstadt, continuing his studies in Italy from 1787. He was closely associated with the Illuminati of Adam Weishaupt while a student in Ingolstadt, and the ideals of the French Enlightenment were a strong influence on his philosophy as a musician as corroborated by his famed &quot;Zibaldone&quot; or &quot;Notebooks&quot; compiled toward the end of his career.

Shortly thereafter, he took music lessons with Carlo Lenzi, and later with Ferdinando Bertoni. He moved to Bergamo in 1802 and was appointed &quot;maestro di cappella&quot; at the Cathedral of Bergamo, succeeding his old teacher Lenzi. He held the post until his death, and became a central figure in the city&#x27;s musical life, organizing concerts and introducing Ludwig van Beethoven&#x27;s music there. In 1805 he founded the Bergamo Conservatory; then known as the Lezioni Caritatevoli di Musica. One of his pupils at the conservatory was Gaetano Donizetti. By the end of his life, he was blind. He died in Bergamo and is buried in the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore there, just in front of the tomb of his famous pupil.

Mayr&#x27;s works, among which there are almost seventy operas, are rarely performed today.

== Works ==
See List of compositions by Simon Mayr and List of operas by Simon Mayr

==Recordings==
*&quot;Ginevra di Scozia&quot; - Elizabeth Vidal (soprano); Daniela Barcellona (mezzo-soprano); Antonino Siragusa (tenor); Luca Grassi (baritone); Giuseppina Piunti (soprano); Marco Lazzara (countertenor); Orchestra del Teatro Verdi di Trieste; Tiziano Severini (conductor). Label: Opera Rara ORC23
*&quot;Fedra&quot; (Chiaudani, Nelsen, Zagorski, Lee; Schaller) OEHMS Classics 920
*&quot;Verter&quot; (Herrmann, Gemmabella, Cicchetti, Salsi, Zarelli; Terracini). Bongiovanni GB 2343–4.
*&quot;Medea in Corinto&quot; (Eaglen, Kenny, Ford, Miles; Parry), Opera Rara ORC11 [1993]
* &quot;Konzert mit Schnitte von Werken von Johann Simon Mayr.&quot; Wilhelm Schmailzl, Karlskron [1996]
* &quot;Samuele&quot; Fono-Schallplattengesellschaft, Laer [1997]
* &quot;Grande messa da requiem&quot; Orchestra Stabile di Bergamo, Agora [1997]
* &quot;Stabat Mater No.3 in C-minor&quot; Incontri Europei con la Musica, Bongiovanni [1999]
* &quot;Che Originali! ossia La Musicomania&quot; Georgisches Kammerorchester, Guild [1999]
* &quot;Mass in C-minor&quot; Guild [2001]
* &quot;La Passione&quot; Kammerorchester Ingolstadt, Guild [2002]
* &quot;Atalia&quot; Neue Düsseldorfer Hofmusik Guild [2003]
* &quot;Vespri per il Corpus Domini 1802&quot; Orchestra da Camera Milano Classica, Bongiovanni [2004]
* &quot;Sisara&quot; Accademia I Filarmonici di Verona, Simon Mayr Chor conducted by Franz Hauk Guild GmbH 2004
* &quot;L&#x27;Armonia&quot; and &quot;Cantata for the Death of Beethoven&quot;. Ingolstadt Georgian Chamber Orchestra and Simon Mayr Choir, Naxos [2006]
*&quot;La Rosa Bianca e la Rosa Rossa&quot; (Antonacci, Anselmi, Serraicocca, Canonici, Facini; Briccetti) Fonit Cetra RFCD 2007
* &quot;David in Spelunca Engaddi&quot;, Naxos [2008]
* &quot;L&#x27;amor coniugale&quot;, Naxos, [2008]
* &quot;Tobiae matrimonium&quot; Simon Mayr Chor + Ensemble, Naxos [2009]
* &quot;Medea in Corinto&quot; Theater St. Gallen, Oehmsclassic [2010]
* &quot;La Lodoiska&quot; Münchner Rundfunkorchester, Oehmsclassic [2011]
* &quot;Amor ingegnoso&quot;, Bongiovanni GB 2456-2 [2012]
* &quot;Samuele&quot;, Naxos [2012]
* &quot;Demetrio, Re di Siria&quot;, Oehmsclassic [2012]
* &quot;Innalzamento al trono del giovane re Gioas&quot;. Cantata, Naxos [2012]
* &quot;Il sagrifizio di Jefte&quot;, Oratorio, Naxos [2013]
* &quot;Piano Concerto in C-major&quot;
* &quot;Ginevra di Scozia&quot;, Oehmsclassic [2014]
* &quot;Gran messa di requiem in G-minor&quot;, Naxos [2015]
* &quot;Messa di Gloria in E-minor&quot;, Naxos [2021]
* &quot;Messa di Gloria in F-minor&quot;, Naxos [2021]
* &quot;L&#x27;accademia di musica&quot;, Naxos [2022]

== References ==

;Sources
* Heinrich Bauer: &quot;Simon Mayr 1763–1845, Meister der italienischen Oper aus der bayerischen Oberpfalz&quot;. Munich: Bayer. Vereinsbank, 1983
* Franz Hauk: &quot;Johann Simon Mayr und Venedig&quot;. (Munich: Katzbichler), 1999. - 
* John Stewart Allitt: &quot;Giovanni Simone Mayr: Vita, musica, pensiero&quot;. (Villa di Serio (BG), Edizioni Villadiseriane), 1995
* Mahan Esfahani, &quot;Giovanni Simone Mayr&#x27;s &#x27;Ginevra di Scozia&#x27; and the Classical Aesthetic in Early Nineteenth-Century Italian Opera Seria&quot;. (BA thesis, Stanford University), 2005

==Film==
* Martin Pfeil: &quot;Der vergessene Musiker: Johann Simon Mayer (1763–1845)&quot;. INTV Media Ingolstadt, 1995 (VHS, 30 Min.)

== External links ==
* Simon-Mayr-Gesellschaft
* 
* Simon Mayr Chor
* John A. Rice, &quot;Gli Siiti: Voltaire&#x27;s Play, Beretti&#x27;s Ballet, Mayr&#x27;s Opera&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q373770" start="0" end="21" title="Simon Mayr" label="Johann(es) Simon Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q373770" start="83" end="103" title="Simon Mayr" label="Giovanni Simone Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q373770" start="107" end="118" title="Simon Mayr" label="Simone Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="166" end="174" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q85852136" start="199" end="209" title="Transition from Classical to Romantic music" label="transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="219" end="228" title="Classical period (music)" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="236" end="244" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122973449" start="281" end="301" title="Bergamo Conservatory" label="Bergamo Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="334" end="341" title="Rossini" label="Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q101698" start="371" end="380" title="Donizetti" label="Donizetti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="409" end="416" title="Mendorf" label="Mendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q442666" start="422" end="434" title="Altmannstein" label="Altmannstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q10491" start="436" end="455" title="Eichstätt (district)" label="Landkreis Eichstätt"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="457" end="464" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="478" end="486" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q462039" start="494" end="518" title="University of Ingolstadt" label="University of Ingolstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="598" end="608" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q159481" start="612" end="626" title="Adam Weishaupt" label="Adam Weishaupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="680" end="700" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="French Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="920" end="931" title="Carlo Lenzi" label="Carlo Lenzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384693" start="948" end="966" title="Ferdinando Bertoni" label="Ferdinando Bertoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="980" end="987" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="1020" end="1039" title="maestro di cappella" label="maestro di cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081902" start="1053" end="1073" title="Cathedral of Bergamo" label="Cathedral of Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="1240" end="1260" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q122973449" start="1304" end="1324" title="Bergamo Conservatory" label="Bergamo Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q101698" start="1418" end="1435" title="Gaetano Donizetti" label="Gaetano Donizetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="1468" end="1473" title="blindness" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="1486" end="1493" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001128" start="1515" end="1547" title="Santa Maria Maggiore, Bergamo" label="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="1659" end="1664" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613016" start="1712" end="1746" title="List of compositions by Simon Mayr" label="List of compositions by Simon Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631732" start="1751" end="1779" title="List of operas by Simon Mayr" label="List of operas by Simon Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136482" start="1803" end="1820" title="Ginevra di Scozia" label="Ginevra di Scozia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16511848" start="1829" end="1844" title="Elizabeth Vidal" label="Elizabeth Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5798802" start="1856" end="1874" title="Daniela Barcellona" label="Daniela Barcellona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290108" start="1972" end="1985" title="Marco Lazzara" label="Marco Lazzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294135" start="2016" end="2039" title="Teatro Lirico Giuseppe Verdi" label="Teatro Verdi di Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025864" start="2078" end="2088" title="Opera Rara Records" label="Opera Rara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742528" start="2102" end="2107" title="Fedra (Mayr)" label="Fedra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2232" end="2237" title="Salsi (opera singer)" label="Salsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571629" start="2290" end="2306" title="Medea in Corinto" label="Medea in Corinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823652" start="2314" end="2320" title="Jane Eaglen" label="Eaglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645468" start="2329" end="2333" title="Bruce Ford (tenor)" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030843" start="3359" end="3389" title="La rosa bianca e la rosa rossa" label="La Rosa Bianca e la Rosa Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q961443" start="3397" end="3406" title="Anna Caterina Antonacci" label="Antonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264964" start="3430" end="3438" title="Luca Canonici" label="Canonici"/>
<link wikidata="Q287282" start="3543" end="3564" title="L&amp;#x27;amor coniugale" label="L&amp;#x27;amor coniugale"/>
<link wikidata="Q30694022" start="3594" end="3612" title="Tobiae matrimonium" label="Tobiae matrimonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571629" start="3668" end="3684" title="Medea in Corinto" label="Medea in Corinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415961" start="3691" end="3709" title="Theater St. Gallen" label="Theater St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q52657320" start="3739" end="3750" title="La Lodoiska" label="La Lodoiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611992" start="3813" end="3827" title="Amor ingegnoso (Mayr)" label="Amor ingegnoso"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683928" wikidata="Q2800811" url="?curid=683928" title="Simon Mayer">
<text>Simon Mayer may be an alternate spelling of:

* Simon Marius (1573–1624), German astronomer
* Johann Simon Mayr (1763-1845), German composer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76684" start="48" end="60" title="Simon Marius" label="Simon Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q373770" start="94" end="111" title="Johann Simon Mayr" label="Johann Simon Mayr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683935" wikidata="Q453530" url="?curid=683935" title="Edson">
<text>Edson may refer to:
==Places==
===Canada===
* Edson, Alberta

===United States===
* Edson, Kansas, an unincorporated community
* Edson, South Dakota, a ghost town
* Edson, Wisconsin, a town
** Edson (community), Wisconsin, an unincorporated community

==People==
===Given name===
* Édson, a Portuguese given name, often written as Edson
* Edson (footballer, born 1977), Brazilian footballer
* Edson (footballer, born 1987), Brazilian footballer
* Edson (footballer, born 1990), Brazilian footballer
* Edson (footballer, born 1991), Brazilian footballer
* Edson (footballer, born 1998), Brazilian footballer
* Edson Álvarez (born 1997), Mexican footballer
* Edson Arantes do Nascimento (1940–2022), Brazilian footballer, better known by his nickname Pelé
* Edson Braafheid (born 1983), Dutch footballer
* Edson Buddle (born 1981), American soccer player
* Edson Minga (born 1979), Congolese born Hong Kong footballer
* Edson B. Olds (1802–1869), American politician
* Edson Olf (born 1986), Dutch politician
* Edson A. Putnam (1832–1917), American politician
* Edson Warner (1930–2019), Canadian sports figure
* Edson White (1849–1928), American Seventh-day Adventist and publisher

===Surname===
* Allan Edson (1846–1888), Canadian painter
* Billy Edson (1874–1965), football player, lawyer, and politician in Iowa
* C. L. Edson (1881–1975), American newspaper columnist, humorist, and poet
* Carroll A. Edson (1891–1986), early leader in the Boy Scouts of America; co-founder of the Order of the Arrow scouting honor society
* Charles Edson (1864–1936), American composer
* Evelyn Edson (born 1940), American medievalist and historian of cartography
* Fanny Carter Edson (1887–1952), American geologist
* Franklin Edson (1832–1904), 85th Mayor of New York
* Gary R. Edson, president of Conservation International
* Gus Edson (1901–1966), American cartoonist (originally &quot;Edelstein&quot;)
* Hilary Edson (born 1965), American soap opera actress
* Hiram Edson (1806–1882), pioneer of the Seventh-day Adventist Church
* J. T. Edson (1928–2014), English author of American Westerns
* Jerrod Edson (born 1974), Canadian novelist
* Job A. Edson (1854–1928), president of the Kansas City Southern Railway
* John Joy Edson, American banker
* Katherine Philips Edson (1870–1933), American labor and women&#x27;s rights activist
* Lewis Edson (1748–1820), early American composer
* Marcellus Gilmore Edson (1849–1940), Canadian pharmacist who was the first person to patent peanut butter
* Margaret Edson (born 1961), American playwright
* Merritt A. Edson (1897–1955), U.S. Marine Corps General
* Mike Edson (born 1942), British Church of England clergyman
* Norman Lowther Edson (1904–1970), New Zealander biochemist
* Rich Edson (born 1981), American journalist
* Richard Edson (born 1954), American actor
* Russell Edson (1935–2014), American poet, novelist, writer and illustrator
* Susan Ann Edson (1823–1897), American doctor and personal physician to James A. Garfield
* William Alden Edson (1912–2012), American scientist and engineer

==Other==
* Edson Range, a rifle range at Camp Pendleton, near Oceanside, California
* , a destroyer of the United States Navy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q453530" start="0" end="5" title="Edson" label="Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q493025" start="46" end="60" title="Edson, Alberta" label="Edson, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340290" start="84" end="97" title="Edson, Kansas" label="Edson, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24061508" start="129" end="148" title="Edson, South Dakota" label="Edson, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659169" start="165" end="181" title="Edson, Wisconsin" label="Edson, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659169" start="193" end="221" title="Edson (community), Wisconsin" label="Edson (community), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324309" start="282" end="287" title="Édson" label="Édson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801372" start="339" end="368" title="Edson (footballer, born 1977)" label="Edson (footballer, born 1977)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989294" start="393" end="422" title="Edson (footballer, born 1987)" label="Edson (footballer, born 1987)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340337" start="447" end="476" title="Edson (footballer, born 1990)" label="Edson (footballer, born 1990)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16337384" start="501" end="530" title="Edson (footballer, born 1991)" label="Edson (footballer, born 1991)"/>
<link wikidata="Q99658802" start="555" end="584" title="Edson (footballer, born 1998)" label="Edson (footballer, born 1998)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27859514" start="609" end="622" title="Edson Álvarez" label="Edson Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="657" end="684" title="Edson Arantes do Nascimento" label="Edson Arantes do Nascimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q210919" start="756" end="771" title="Edson Braafheid" label="Edson Braafheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q370741" start="804" end="816" title="Edson Buddle" label="Edson Buddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017284" start="855" end="866" title="Edson Minga" label="Edson Minga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340294" start="918" end="931" title="Edson B. Olds" label="Edson B. Olds"/>
<link wikidata="Q122648642" start="967" end="976" title="Edson Olf" label="Edson Olf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975086" start="1009" end="1024" title="Edson A. Putnam" label="Edson A. Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19518528" start="1060" end="1072" title="Edson Warner" label="Edson Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340333" start="1111" end="1122" title="Edson White" label="Edson White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837691" start="1198" end="1209" title="Allan Edson" label="Allan Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912512" start="1242" end="1253" title="Billy Edson" label="Billy Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069757" start="1317" end="1328" title="C. L. Edson" label="C. L. Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046506" start="1393" end="1409" title="Carroll A. Edson" label="Carroll A. Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q97991605" start="1528" end="1541" title="Charles Edson" label="Charles Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q115474107" start="1575" end="1587" title="Evelyn Edson" label="Evelyn Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27689779" start="1653" end="1671" title="Fanny Carter Edson" label="Fanny Carter Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082937" start="1706" end="1720" title="Franklin Edson" label="Franklin Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525015" start="1759" end="1772" title="Gary R. Edson" label="Gary R. Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555315" start="1816" end="1825" title="Gus Edson" label="Gus Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760957" start="1896" end="1908" title="Hilary Edson" label="Hilary Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769136" start="1952" end="1963" title="Hiram Edson" label="Hiram Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107176" start="2023" end="2034" title="J. T. Edson" label="J. T. Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183098" start="2086" end="2098" title="Jerrod Edson" label="Jerrod Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206634" start="2132" end="2144" title="Job A. Edson" label="Job A. Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242298" start="2206" end="2220" title="John Joy Edson" label="John Joy Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376509" start="2240" end="2263" title="Katherine Philips Edson" label="Katherine Philips Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485538" start="2327" end="2338" title="Lewis Edson" label="Lewis Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756457" start="2378" end="2401" title="Marcellus Gilmore Edson" label="Marcellus Gilmore Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q516100" start="2486" end="2500" title="Margaret Edson" label="Margaret Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124830" start="2536" end="2552" title="Merritt A. Edson" label="Merritt A. Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25706641" start="2594" end="2604" title="Mike Edson" label="Mike Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052187" start="2656" end="2676" title="Norman Lowther Edson" label="Norman Lowther Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315633" start="2717" end="2727" title="Rich Edson" label="Rich Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377218" start="2763" end="2776" title="Richard Edson" label="Richard Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381485" start="2807" end="2820" title="Russell Edson" label="Russell Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43813055" start="2884" end="2899" title="Susan Ann Edson" label="Susan Ann Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004235" start="2975" end="2994" title="William Alden Edson" label="William Alden Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340327" start="3053" end="3064" title="Edson Range" label="Edson Range"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683942" wikidata="Q14271" url="?curid=683942" title="Horsehead Nebula">
<text>The Horsehead Nebula (also known as Barnard 33 or B33) is a small dark nebula in the constellation Orion. The nebula is located just to the south of Alnitak, the easternmost star of Orion&#x27;s Belt, and is part of the much larger Orion molecular cloud complex. It appears within the southern region of the dense dust cloud known as Lynds 1630, along the edge of the much larger, active star-forming H II region called IC 434.

The Horsehead Nebula is approximately 422 parsecs or 1,375 light-years from Earth. It is one of the most identifiable nebulae because of its resemblance to a horse&#x27;s head.

==History==
The nebula was discovered by Scottish astronomer Williamina Fleming in 1888 on a photographic plate taken at the Harvard College Observatory. One of the first descriptions was made by E. E. Barnard, describing it as: &quot;Dark mass, diam. 4′, on nebulous strip extending south from ζ Orionis&quot;, cataloguing the dark nebula as Barnard 33.

==Structure==

The dark cloud of dust and gas is a region in the Orion molecular cloud complex, where star formation is taking place. It is located in the constellation of Orion, which is prominent in the winter evening sky in the Northern Hemisphere and the summer evening sky in the Southern Hemisphere.

Colour images reveal a red colour that originates from ionised hydrogen gas (Hα) predominantly behind the nebula, and caused by the nearby bright star Sigma Orionis. Magnetic fields channel the gases, leaving the nebula into streams, shown as foreground streaks against the background glow. A glowing strip of hydrogen gas marks the edge of the enormous cloud, and the densities of nearby stars are noticeably different on either side.

Heavy concentrations of dust in the Horsehead Nebula region and neighbouring Orion Nebula are localized into interstellar clouds, resulting in alternating sections of nearly complete opacity and transparency. The darkness of the Horsehead is caused mostly by thick dust blocking the light of stars behind it. The lower part of the Horsehead&#x27;s neck casts a shadow to the left. The visible dark nebula emerging from the gaseous complex is an active site of the formation of &quot;low-mass&quot; stars. Bright spots in the Horsehead Nebula&#x27;s base are young stars just in the process of forming.

==See also==
*List of Hubble anniversary images

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* SOFIA/upGREAT [C II] Velocity Resolved Map of the Horsehead Nebula
* The Horsehead Nebula @ The Electronic Sky
* Hubble Observes the Horsehead Nebula
* The discovery of early photographs of the Horsehead nebula, by Waldee and Hazen
* The Horsehead Nebula in the 19th Century, by Waldee
* Detection of new nebulae by photography, by Pickering
* Horsehead Nebula at ESA/Hubble
* The Horsehead Nebula at the Astro-Photography site of Mr. T. Yoshida.
* The Horsehead-Nebula and neighboring structures in a classical view
* The Horsehead Nebula on interactive astro-photography survey at Wikisky.org
* The Horsehead Nebula at Constellation Guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14271" start="4" end="20" title="Horsehead Nebula" label="Horsehead Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14271" start="36" end="53" title="Horsehead Nebula" label="Barnard 33 or B33"/>
<link wikidata="Q204194" start="66" end="77" title="dark nebula" label="dark nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="99" end="104" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13076" start="149" end="156" title="Alnitak" label="Alnitak"/>
<link wikidata="Q324312" start="182" end="199" title="Orion&amp;#x27;s Belt" label="Orion&amp;#x27;s Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16742" start="232" end="261" title="Orion molecular cloud complex" label="Orion molecular cloud complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="401" end="412" title="H II region" label="H II region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355660" start="420" end="426" title="IC 434" label="IC 434"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="488" end="498" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="587" end="604" title="horse" label="horse&amp;#x27;s head"/>
<link wikidata="Q284180" start="668" end="686" title="Williamina Fleming" label="Williamina Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q637936" start="732" end="759" title="Harvard College Observatory" label="Harvard College Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="803" end="816" title="E. E. Barnard" label="E. E. Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13076" start="902" end="911" title="Alnitak" label="ζ Orionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247327" start="919" end="930" title="Barnard Catalogue" label="cataloguing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="1135" end="1140" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1333" end="1341" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q585943" start="1347" end="1349" title="H-alpha" label="Hα"/>
<link wikidata="Q14224" start="1421" end="1434" title="Sigma Orionis" label="Sigma Orionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="1436" end="1450" title="Magnetic field" label="Magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="1731" end="1735" title="Cosmic dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054444" start="1816" end="1834" title="interstellar cloud" label="interstellar cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405823" start="2324" end="2357" title="List of Hubble anniversary images" label="List of Hubble anniversary images"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683945" wikidata="Q207431" url="?curid=683945" title="Louis van Gaal">
<text>Aloysius Paulus Maria &quot;Louis&quot; van Gaal (; born 8 August 1951) is a Dutch former football player and former manager who currently serves as an advisor for Ajax. At club level, he served as manager of Ajax, Barcelona, AZ Alkmaar, Bayern Munich and Manchester United, as well as having three spells in charge of the Netherlands national team. Van Gaal is one of the most decorated managers in the history of the game, having won 20 major honours in his managerial career at club level, contrasting with his mediocre results coaching the Dutch national team. He is sometimes nicknamed the &quot;Iron Tulip&quot;.

Before his career as a coach, Van Gaal played as a midfielder for Royal Antwerp, Telstar, Sparta Rotterdam, Ajax and AZ Alkmaar. He is also a qualified physical education teacher, and worked at high schools during his career as a semi-professional footballer. After a brief spell as an assistant coach at AZ, Van Gaal served as an assistant under Leo Beenhakker at Ajax, and eventually took over as head coach in 1991. Under his lead, the club won three Eredivisie titles, the UEFA Cup and the UEFA Champions League. He moved to Barcelona in 1997 and won two league titles and one Copa del Rey, but left after disagreements with the club&#x27;s hierarchy.

Van Gaal was then appointed at the Netherlands, but failed to qualify for the 2002 FIFA World Cup. This preceded another brief spell at Barcelona, before he returned to AZ, where he won an Eredivisie title, the club&#x27;s second ever in its history. He moved to Bayern Munich in 2009, and in Germany won the Bundesliga, the DFB-Pokal and reached the final of the UEFA Champions League. He returned to manage the Netherlands for a second time, where he led the nation to a third-place finish at the 2014 FIFA World Cup. He was hired by Manchester United later that summer, where he won the FA Cup, before being dismissed in 2016. Despite announcing his retirement due to family reasons in 2019, Van Gaal returned to management in August 2021, when he was appointed as head coach of the Netherlands for a third time. He retired from management after the 2022 FIFA World Cup.

==Playing and early coaching career==
Van Gaal was born in Amsterdam. As a youngster, he started playing for the Amsterdam amateur side RKSV de Meer. At the age of 20, he joined the second team of Ajax, but was never chosen to play in the first team, which at the time boasted players such as Johan Cruyff and Johan Neeskens in the midfield positions. He was loaned to Belgian First Division side Royal Antwerp playing under Guy Thys with whom he was runner-up in the Belgian top division in 1974 and 1975. During his time with Antwerp, Van Gaal suffered a broken nose in a friendly against Kortrijk. After four years spent in Belgium, he returned to his homeland and made his Eredivisie debut for Telstar under the guidance of manager, Mircea Petescu, whom he followed to Sparta Rotterdam. He later joined AZ, where he also became assistant coach in 1986. After a short career at AZ, he returned to Ajax to become Leo Beenhakker&#x27;s assistant. When Beenhakker left in 1991, Van Gaal took over as manager.

==Management career==

===Ajax (1991–1997)===

Van Gaal was Ajax manager from 1991 until 1997 and had a very successful tenure. Under Van Gaal, Ajax became the Eredivisie champions three times, in 1994, 1995 (notably going the entire 1994–95 season unbeaten in both the league and the Champions League) and 1996. He also led Ajax to the KNVB Cup in 1993 and the Johan Cruyff Shield in 1993, 1994, and 1995. On the European scene, Ajax captured the UEFA Cup in 1992 and the UEFA Champions League in 1995 after beating Milan in the final. The latter win was followed by a 5–1 aggregate win over Real Zaragoza in the 1995 UEFA Super Cup. Late in 1995, Ajax beat Brazilian side Grêmio on penalties to win the Intercontinental Cup. Ajax were also Champions League runners-up in 1996 after losing to Juventus on penalties.

Ajax was so successful under Van Gaal&#x27;s leadership that during the 1990s, the Netherlands national team was dominated by Ajax players such as Patrick Kluivert, Marc Overmars, Dennis Bergkamp, Frank and Ronald de Boer, Edgar Davids, Clarence Seedorf, Winston Bogarde, Michael Reiziger and Edwin van der Sar.

After serving out his contract at Ajax in 1997, Van Gaal received his knighthood in the Order of Orange-Nassau.

===Barcelona (1997–2000)===
Van Gaal moved to Barcelona in 1997, taking over from Bobby Robson, and helped the team win two La Liga titles (1997–98, 1998–99) and the Copa del Rey once. Despite this success, he clashed with the media and came under criticism. He expressed that it was difficult to implement his football philosophy at Barcelona due to cultural differences, and that he struggled hard as some players were unwilling to follow his lead. His rows with Rivaldo are an example of this: Van Gaal insisted Rivaldo play as a left winger, whereas Rivaldo argued that he wanted to play in the centre, in effect undermining Van Gaal.

Van Gaal eventually left the Catalan side on 20 May 2000, days after losing the league title to Deportivo de La Coruña, uttering the immortal line: &quot;&quot;Amigos de la prensa. Yo me voy. Felicidades&quot;.&quot; (&quot;Friends of the press. I am leaving. Congratulations.&quot;) He returned to the Netherlands to manage the Netherlands national team in preparation for the 2002 FIFA World Cup.

===Netherlands national team (2000–2002)===
Under Van Gaal, the Netherlands started their campaign to qualify for the 2002 World Cup poorly. Placed in Group 2, an injury-hit side could only manage to secure a late 2–2 draw at home to the Republic of Ireland, having been 2–0 down with 20 minutes to go. A 4–0 win over Cyprus was followed by a 2–0 defeat to Portugal.

In 2001, the Netherlands beat Andorra, Cyprus and Estonia, but despite leading group leaders Portugal 2–0 with seven minutes left, drew 2–2 and fell three points behind second-place Republic of Ireland, who were unbeaten. When the sides met in Dublin, Van Gaal boasted before the match that his squad was so much more talented, even the Irish fans would want them to qualify. Ireland went down to ten men after 58 minutes but scored nine minutes later and won 1–0. The Netherlands fell seven points behind them with two games left to play, meaning that they failed to qualify for the World Cup for the first time since 1986. Van Gaal stepped down as manager on 31 January 2002 to be replaced by Dick Advocaat. After this, speculation began that Van Gaal would succeed Sir Alex Ferguson at Manchester United once Ferguson claimed he would retire that year. According to Van Gaal, Ferguson decided against retiring and the deal fell through.

===Return to Barcelona (2002–2003)===
Van Gaal returned to Barcelona for the start of the 2002–03 season on a contract until June 2005, but results were inconsistent. The club won a record-equalling ten successive matches in the Champions League but struggled in La Liga. After four wins, four draws and three defeats from their opening 11 league matches, Barcelona lost three matches in a row, to Real Sociedad, relegation-threatened Rayo Vallecano and Sevilla. Two wins and a draw improved things but after successive defeats to Valencia and Celta Vigo, he left by mutual consent on 28 January 2003 with the club in 12th place, just three points above the relegation zone and 20 points behind leaders Real Sociedad.

His transfers, particularly the signings of goalkeeper Robert Enke, midfielder Gaizka Mendieta and playmaker Juan Román Riquelme, all disappointed. Riquelme had been bought to replace Rivaldo, whom Van Gaal had released on a free transfer, despite having a year left on his contract. The two had fallen out during Van Gaal&#x27;s previous tenure and after Van Gaal returned, Rivaldo said: &quot;Van Gaal is the main cause of my departure. I don&#x27;t like Van Gaal, and I am sure that he doesn&#x27;t like me, either.&quot; Van Gaal replied that Rivaldo&#x27;s lack of commitment was the reason he was released, saying that he &quot;was only interested in making more money and playing less. He was chosen as the best player in 1999, but he has not handled himself well since then and has not behaved like a footballer should. He had illusions about Barca and was requesting to take holidays when important Champions League games were approaching. He then hides back home in Brazil. He plays for Brazil like we needed him to at Barcelona, and he has proved this in the World Cup finals, showing he reserved himself for Japan.&quot; Rivaldo joined A.C. Milan and won that season&#x27;s Champions League. However, due to his poor performances throughout the season, he won the Bidone d&#x27;Oro Award in 2003, which is given to the worst Serie A player during a particular season.

===Return to Ajax (2004)===
In 2004, Van Gaal returned to Ajax as a technical director, but resigned later that year due to an internal conflict with Ronald Koeman.

===AZ (2005–2009)===

In January 2005, it was announced that Van Gaal would replace Co Adriaanse as AZ manager on 1 July 2005. Under Van Gaal, AZ finished second in the Eredivisie in 2005–06 and third in 2006–07. Van Gaal also led AZ to a runners-up finish in the 2006–07 KNVB Cup and lost a 2007–08 Champions League qualification play-off to Ajax 4–2 on aggregate.

Van Gaal initially announced he would leave AZ at the end of the 2007–08 season due to disappointing results, with the club finishing 11th in the Eredivisie. When several players of the AZ squad said that they would like him to stay with AZ, however, Van Gaal said he would give the players a chance to prove themselves.

AZ started the 2008–09 season with two losses: 2–1 to NAC Breda and 0–3 to ADO Den Haag, but after that the Alkmaar-based club remained unbeaten until 18 April, topping the table ahead of Twente and Ajax for the entire season, despite being predicted to finish as low as 13th by pundits. AZ had the best defensive record in the Eredivisie and the second-best goalscoring record, behind Ajax, thanks to its offensive duo of league topscorer Mounir El Hamdaoui and Brazilian Ari. They were crowned league champions on 19 April, one day after AZ suffered an unexpected loss at home to Vitesse, which ended a string of 28 unbeaten games (surpassing the team&#x27;s 1980–81 record of 25 unbeaten games). That same day Ajax, which was the only opponent that would have been able to surpass AZ given a win, lost 6–2 to PSV.

===Bayern Munich (2009–2011)===

On 1 July 2009, Van Gaal took over as coach of Bayern Munich. He referred to his new employer as a &quot;dream club&quot;. On 28 August 2009, he strengthened his team by signing compatriot Arjen Robben from Real Madrid; this reunited the two, with Van Gaal selecting Robben for his debut in the Netherlands U20 team.

Van Gaal got off to a poor start as Bayern coach, winning only one of his first four matches in charge, and by November the club was on the brink of a Champions League group stage exit following two losses to Bordeaux. With Bayer Leverkusen at the top of the Bundesliga, speculation was rampant that he was on the brink of a departure from Bayern even earlier than his predecessor Jürgen Klinsmann. Van Gaal, however, kept insisting he is a &quot;prozesstrainer&quot;, meaning that his team needs time to play the way he imagines.
Van Gaal installed many youth players as fixtures in the starting 11, including Thomas Müller and Holger Badstuber, and also converted the winger Bastian Schweinsteiger into a defensive midfielder. A feud with Italian striker Luca Toni, who had played an important role in Bayern&#x27;s 2007–08 league and cup double, led to Toni&#x27;s move to Roma. Bayern Munich&#x27;s form, however, improved with two Champions League victories including an impressive 4–1 victory over Juventus in Turin, which allowed them to progress from their group in second position behind Bordeaux. By March, Bayern had moved to the semi-finals of the DFB-Pokal and were top of the Bundesliga, ahead of Bayer Leverkusen.

On 8 May 2010, Bayern were crowned Bundesliga champions following a 3–1 win at Hertha Berlin, making Van Gaal the first ever Dutch coach to win the Bundesliga. On 15 May 2010, Bayern won the DFB-Pokal with a 4–0 victory over Werder Bremen, thus securing the domestic double.

In the Champions League, Bayern won 4–4 on the away goals rule in the quarter-final against Manchester United and 4–0 on aggregate against Lyon in the semi-final, securing them a spot in the final, where Van Gaal was to meet his former pupil and assistant at Barcelona, Internazionale coach José Mourinho. Bayern, however, lost the final 2–0, handing Inter a first Italian treble and thus failing to secure the treble themselves. On 25 May 2010, Karl-Heinz Rummenigge expressed his desire to extend Van Gaal&#x27;s contract as the club was very happy with his performance, despite Van Gaal still having one year of his contract to fulfil. At the end of the season, Van Gaal was voted Manager of the Year in the yearly poll organized by VDV (professional players&#x27; union in Germany) and German magazine &quot;kicker&quot;.

Van Gaal&#x27;s Bayern started the 2010–11 season by winning the DFL-Supercup, which had been officially reinstated after a 14-year absence.

On 7 March 2011, Bayern Munich declared that Van Gaal&#x27;s contract was to be cancelled after the end of the 2010–11 season. However, he was instead sacked on 10 April 2011 after losing the third place in the Bundesliga.

===Return to Netherlands national team (2012–2014)===

On 6 July 2012, Van Gaal was presented as the new Netherlands coach. &quot;I am happy that the KNVB approached me&quot;, said Van Gaal, who was assisted by former Dutch internationals Danny Blind and Patrick Kluivert, both part of his successful Ajax squad from 1995. &quot;This is the challenge which I have been waiting for.&quot;

Van Gaal led the Netherlands through its 2014 World Cup qualification group as the team won nine and drew one of their ten matches with a goal difference of 34–5. Qualification was secured with two matches to spare, following a 2–0 away win against Andorra on 10 September 2013.

Despite their successful qualifying campaign, expectations surrounding the Netherlands national team were comparatively low due to mixed pre-tournament friendly performances and the failure of the Dutch squad in Euro 2012, where they suffered three defeats out of three in the group stages in that tournament. In their first group game at the World Cup, at the Estádio Fonte Nova in Salvador, however, Van Gaal&#x27;s Dutch team came from behind to defeat reigning champions Spain 5–1. The Dutch victory over Spain was attributed in part to Van Gaal&#x27;s use of counter-attacking tactics which disrupted the &quot;tiki-taka&quot; possession-based football of the Spanish team. His use of a 3–5–2 formation was notable, as opposed to the typical Dutch 4–3–3 and this helped the Netherlands to tactically take advantage of Spain&#x27;s weaknesses.
In their next match, the Dutch were trailing 2–1 to Australia in the second half of their second group game, before winning 2–3 with the winning goal from young substitute Memphis Depay.

Ahead of the last game in the group, Van Gaal accused FIFA of &quot;playing tricks&quot; in the scheduling of matches to advantage the home nation, as Brazil were to play their last group match four hours after the Dutch, who they could meet in the round of 16 depending on their result. Brazil manager Luiz Felipe Scolari reacted by saying: &quot;It was FIFA who chose the kick-off time. Some people expressed a view that we were going to choose who we were going to play. Those sorts of comments are either stupid or ill-intentioned.&quot; Van Gaal also criticised the referees who had awarded penalties against the Dutch in both of their matches, calling the decisions &quot;unjustified&quot; and &quot;incorrect&quot;.

The Dutch won their last group match against Chile 2–0 to advance through as group winners. They then defeated Mexico 2–1 in the round of 16, coming behind from a Giovani dos Santos goal in the 45th minute, with Wesley Sneijder and Klaas-Jan Huntelaar scoring in the 89th and 90+2 minutes respectively.

During their quarter-final match against Costa Rica in the World Cup, Van Gaal made the decision to substitute first-choice goalkeeper Jasper Cillessen for Tim Krul in the final minute of extra time; as Krul had not played at all in the Netherlands&#x27; four prior matches at the tournament, Van Gaal saved one of his three allowed substitutions to bring Krul on. This decision paid off, as Krul saved two of the Costa Rican penalties to send the Netherlands through to the semi-finals to face Argentina. The Dutch team lost to Argentina in another penalty shootout. Van Gaal ended his tenure as Netherlands manager on 12 July 2014 when the Dutch beat the hosts Brazil 3–0 in the third/fourth place play-off match with goals from Robin van Persie, Daley Blind and Georginio Wijnaldum.

===Manchester United (2014–2016)===
Van Gaal was confirmed to replace David Moyes as the new manager for Manchester United on 19 May 2014, becoming the club&#x27;s first manager from outside the British Isles. He signed a three-year contract coming into effect after the 2014 World Cup. He named Ryan Giggs as his assistant manager, Marcel Bout as assistant coach, specialising in oppositional scouting and Frans Hoek as goalkeeping coach. Albert Stuivenberg was appointed as assistant coach. Van Gaal said he had inherited a &quot;broken&quot; United squad, and that he would give youth a chance. Ed Woodward said Van Gaal had &quot;impressed everyone around the club&quot; and that there was &quot;a real positive energy and buzz around the place&quot;.

====2014–15 season====

Van Gaal&#x27;s first signings were midfielder Ander Herrera for £29 million, and defender Luke Shaw for £30 million. On 20 August, Argentine defender Marcos Rojo was bought for €20 million from Sporting CP and, on 26 August, United signed Argentine winger Ángel Di María from Real Madrid on a five-year contract. Di María&#x27;s £59.7 million fee set a new record for a signing by an English club, and took the club&#x27;s summer spending to a reported £130 million. On transfer deadline day, Van Gaal signed Daley Blind from Ajax for a fee of £14 million and was granted an extension to sign Radamel Falcao on loan from Monaco for a reported £6 million.

On 24 July, Van Gaal managed United for the first time as they beat the LA Galaxy 7–0 in a pre-season friendly, using a 3–5–2 formation. Manchester United won the 2014 International Champions Cup under Van Gaal, winning the final 3–1 against rivals Liverpool on 4 August.

Van Gaal lost his first competitive game in charge, a 2–1 home defeat to Swansea City in the opening match of the 2014–15 Premier League season. On 26 August, United lost 4–0 to League One side Milton Keynes Dons in the second round of the League Cup; it was United&#x27;s earliest League Cup exit. He won his first competitive game in United&#x27;s fourth match of the league season, a 4–0 home victory over Queens Park Rangers, with goals from Di María, Herrera, Wayne Rooney and Juan Mata.

After ten league matches, United were in ninth place with 13 points and three victories, their worst start to the season since 1986–87 under Ron Atkinson. Their poor run included a 5–3 defeat to newly promoted Leicester City. The squad was suffering from injuries, including to new signings Herrera, Rojo and Falcao. Van Gaal reacted to the poor form by saying that it would take three years to take his United team to their full potential.

On 4 February 2015, Van Gaal was charged by The Football Association over comments he made about the referee Chris Foy, saying: &quot;Every aspect of a match is against us – the pitch, the referee&quot; during United&#x27;s goalless draw in an FA Cup fourth-round match against Cambridge United. After a requested hearing with the FA, Van Gaal was cleared of his charges, but was warned of future conduct. On 8 February, Van Gaal was criticised by West Ham United manager Sam Allardyce for his long ball tactics after the Hammers conceded a late equaliser to United. Van Gaal responded to the criticism with statistics which seemed to show that West Ham played more long balls than his side. His tactics were defended by fellow managers Arsène Wenger and Garry Monk.

United&#x27;s form improved as the season progressed. A run of seven consecutive Premier League wins was part of a ten-match unbeaten run that started with a 1–0 home win over Crystal Palace on 8 November 2014 and was ended by Southampton, who won 1–0 at Old Trafford on 11 January 2015. United completed another sequence of seven league wins in a row between 28 February and 12 April, concluding with an impressive 4–2 defeat of champions and local rivals Manchester City. This was followed by three consecutive losses to Chelsea, Everton and West Bromwich Albion. United were also knocked out at the quarter-final stage of the 2014–15 FA Cup by holders and eventual winners Arsenal, who inflicted a 2–1 home defeat on Van Gaal&#x27;s team on 9 March.

In his first season, Van Gaal led Manchester United to a fourth-place finish, three places and six points higher than the previous season.

====2015–16 season====

During the summer transfer window, Van Gaal strengthened his squad by bringing in Memphis Depay from PSV, Matteo Darmian from Torino, Sergio Romero from Sampdoria, Morgan Schneiderlin from Southampton, Bastian Schweinsteiger from Bayern Munich and Anthony Martial from Monaco.

United comfortably defeated Club Brugge in the qualifying round of the 2015–16 Champions League to earn a place in the group stage. Domestically, United were solid in defence and went top of the Premier League at the end of September; however, mixed results followed, leaving them in fourth position going into November. They were eliminated from the League Cup by Championship club Middlesbrough and were eliminated from the Champions League at the group stage on 8 December after a 3–2 loss away to VfL Wolfsburg. They finished third in their group and subsequently dropped down to the UEFA Europa League. Fifteen days later, Van Gaal walked out of a press conference after being questioned about his future, amid speculations of dismissal following a six-game run without a win. He concluded: &quot;I wish you a merry Christmas and maybe also a happy new year when I see you.&quot;

The new year began well for the Dutchman with wins against Swansea City, Sheffield United and Liverpool, and a draw against Newcastle United. Manchester United, however, lost to Southampton on 23 January, rekindling rumors about Van Gaal offering to resign, but having his resignation rejected by United executive Ed Woodward.

After a 3–0 defeat away to Tottenham Hotspur on 10 April, several United players reportedly turned on Van Gaal in the dressing room, calling him &quot;clueless&quot; and questioning his tactics after he openly criticized young striker Marcus Rashford and several other players and made several questionable decisions during the match, a result which left United four points off fourth-placed Manchester City.

On 21 May 2016, Van Gaal won his only trophy with Manchester United, the FA Cup, when his side defeated Crystal Palace 2–1 after extra time; Jesse Lingard&#x27;s winning goal made United match Arsenal&#x27;s then-record of 12 FA Cups. Two days later, Van Gaal and the Dutch members of his staff were sacked by the club.

===Hiatus from managing (2016–2021)===
On 17 January 2017, it was announced that Van Gaal had retired &quot;for family reasons&quot;. He later said that it was only a sabbatical. He announced his official retirement from football on 12 March 2019. Telstar announced that during the 2021–22 Eerste Divisie, Van Gaal would be managing the Telstar squad for one single match as a charity event.

===Third stint at the Netherlands national team (2021−2022)===
On 4 August 2021, Van Gaal came out of retirement to take charge of the Netherlands national team for a third time. He replaced Frank de Boer, who left the position in June following the team&#x27;s disappointing Euro 2020 campaign.

Van Gaal&#x27;s first match in his third stint at the Netherlands national team was a 1–1 draw against Norway on 1 September 2021.

In the 2022 FIFA World Cup, the Netherlands finished top of Group A, then they defeated the United States 3–1 in the round of 16. On 9 December, Van Gaal and his Netherlands side lost again to Argentina on penalties, this time in the quarter-finals. Following their exit from the World Cup, Van Gaal resigned as head coach of the Netherlands national team, after 20 matches without defeat in his third stint.

Van Gaal later claimed that the 2022 World Cup was rigged in favour of eventual champions Argentina (and in particular Argentinian captain Lionel Messi).

==Style of management==
Van Gaal is considered to be one of the greatest and most successful managers of all time. He served as an inspiration for several other coaches due to his teams&#x27; style of play and his use of a back–three defensive line, including Gian Piero Gasperini and Alberto Malesani, as well as influencing his former assistant José Mourinho, and his former players Pep Guardiola and Luis Enrique. Due to his rigorous, stern, authoritative style, and strong personality he was occasionally nicknamed the &quot;Iron Tulip&quot; throughout his career, a nickname which Van Gaal himself despised, as he always believed that he had been &quot;fair&quot; as a coach. Although he had several controversial conflicts with his players, the press, and members of his teams&#x27; management staff throughout his career, he was known for his leadership, and often saw himself as a &quot;relationship&quot; manager, who saw the importance of the mental aspect of the game, and was known for his ability develop young players, promote his philosophy, and create strong relationships with them, as was the case during his time at Ajax in the 90s.

In an interview with &quot;FIFA&quot; in January 2008, Van Gaal spoke of the importance of his football philosophy rather than the systems he used, as well as the need for flexibility as a coach, as demonstrated by his use of several formations throughout his career, such as the 4–3–3 and 3–3–1–3/3–4–3 with Ajax, the 2–3–2–3 at Barcelona, the 4–4–2 at AZ Alkmaar, and the 4–2–3–1 with Bayern Munich. He also believed that it was imperative to prepare the game well from a tactical standpoint as a coach, and for his teams&#x27; players to be disciplined and hard-working in their approach to training.

At Ajax, Van Gaal&#x27;s style of using set patterns of play was inspired by Dutch &quot;total football&quot;, which was popularised by fellow former Ajax manager Rinus Michels; his players were therefore known for their quick passing as well as their versatility. He brought in experts from different sports as part of his coaching staff to improve the players&#x27; athletic qualities through rigorous training, including physiologist Jos Geysel, running coach and ex-basketball player Laszlo Jambor, and the club’s strength and conditioning coach Rene Wormhoudt. Van Gaal also used Van der Sar as a sweeper keeper, who would not only rush out of his area to clear the ball away from danger, but also build-up plays from the back with his passing and ability with his feet; his defenders, in particular the sweeper in the centre of the back–three, were also required to be comfortable controlling and distributing the ball out from the back. The team were not only known for their technical ability, tactical sense, and exciting playing style, but for their athletic and physical qualities as well. Defensively, Van Gaal also made use of a high defensive line and pressing off the ball when not in possession.

Van Gaal believed in playing attractive attacking football based on possession, with which his teams became associated in his early career; however, he also believed that success was imperative above all. At AZ Alkmaar, although he initially retained his traditional Dutch style, he later also adopted a more counter-attacking style en route to winning the league title in 2009. He also deviated from the traditional Dutch style as head coach of the Netherlands during the 2014 World Cup; he played in a more defensive–minded counter-attacking style, using a 5–3–2/3–5–2 formation, which used aspects of man-marking and overlapping wing-backs. The system proved to be successful against defending champions Spain&#x27;s &quot;tiki-taka&quot; possession-based style in the team&#x27;s first-round victory, and complemented the qualities of the team&#x27;s forwards. Van Gaal also used a similar counter-attacking tactical approach during his third spell as head coach of the Netherlands at the 2022 World Cup, using a 3–4–1–2 formation, which divided critics. During his time as manager of Manchester United, he also drew criticism from other managers and pundits for his perceived use of &quot;long ball&quot; tactics to Marouane Fellaini, something which Van Gaal himself denied, fielding Marouane Fellaini as a deep-lying target man up-front on occasion in a 4–3–3, in order to utilise his ability in the air.

Despite his achievements, Cruyff was often critical of what he perceived as being Van Gaal&#x27;s more rigid coaching style, in comparison to his own more intuitive approach, commenting: &quot;Van Gaal has a good vision on football. But it&#x27;s not mine. He wants to gel winning teams and has a militaristic way of working with his tactics. I don&#x27;t. I want individuals to think for themselves and take the decision on the pitch that is best for the situation... I don&#x27;t have anything against computers, but you judge football players intuitively and with your heart. On the basis of the criteria which are now in use at Ajax [recommended by Van Gaal] I would have failed the test. When I was 15, I could barely kick the ball 15 metres with my left and with the right maybe 20 metres. I would not have been able to take a corner. Besides, I was physically weak and relatively slow. My two qualities were great technique and insight, which happen to be two things you cannot measure with a computer.&quot;

==Personal life==
The youngest of nine brothers and sisters, Van Gaal was brought up as a Catholic. His father, a salesman, died when Van Gaal was 11. At the age of 18, Van Gaal met Fernanda Obbes at a Catholic youth group. They married three years later, and had two daughters, Brenda and Renate. In 1994, Obbes died of liver and pancreatic cancer. Van Gaal was mocked by fans of Ajax&#x27;s opponents for her illness. In 2008, Van Gaal married his current wife, Truus, with whom he shares a holiday home near Albufeira, Algarve, Portugal.

According to &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, it emerged in 2009 that Van Gaal had lost millions of pounds investing in fraudster Bernie Madoff&#x27;s Ponzi scheme.

On 3 April 2022, Van Gaal said that he was receiving treatment for prostate cancer. On 12 April 2022, he said that his treatment was successful.

==In media==
In 2000, Van Gaal appeared in Nike&#x27;s &quot;The Mission&quot; campaign advertising their Total 90 range of football equipment. In the advert, Van Gaal sends a team of Nike-sponsored players to retrieve a Nike Geo Merlin ball being held in a secure facility by robot ninjas. Oliver Bierhoff protests, &quot;It&#x27;s just a ball&quot;, to which Van Gaal responds, &quot;No! It&#x27;s rounder!&quot; After the players retrieve the ball, Van Gaal pilots the escape helicopter to safety.

In 2022, Geertjan Lassche made a two-hour documentary about Louis van Gaal, entitled &quot;Louis&quot;, with the tagline &quot;The man behind the legend&quot;. It premiered on 11 April at the Tuschinski Theatre in Amsterdam. It was released on 14 April 2022.

==Career statistics==

===Club===

==Managerial statistics==


==Honours==
===Manager===
Ajax
*Eredivisie: 1993–94, 1994–95, 1995–96
*KNVB Cup: 1992–93
*Johan Cruyff Shield: 1993, 1994, 1995
*UEFA Champions League: 1994–95; runner-up: 1995–96
*UEFA Cup: 1991–92
*UEFA Super Cup: 1995
*Intercontinental Cup: 1995

Barcelona
*La Liga: 1997–98, 1998–99
*Copa del Rey: 1997–98
*UEFA Super Cup: 1997

AZ
*Eredivisie: 2008–09

Bayern Munich
*Bundesliga: 2009–10
*DFB-Pokal: 2009–10
*DFL-Supercup: 2010
*UEFA Champions League runner-up: 2009–10

Manchester United
*FA Cup: 2015–16

Netherlands
*FIFA World Cup third place: 2014

===Awards and achievements===
*World Soccer Manager of the Year: 1995
*Onze d&#x27;Or Coach of the Year: 1995
*El País Manager of the Year: 1995
*Rinus Michels Award: 2007, 2009
*Dutch Sports Coach of the Year: 2009, 2014
*Die Sprachwahrer des Jahres (3rd place): 2009
*Football Manager of the Year (Germany): 2010
*VDV Bundesliga Coach of the Season: 2009–10&lt;ref name=&quot;2009/10&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
*Anton Geesink Award: 2015
*Dutch Lifetime Achievement Award: 2017
*France Football 18th Greatest Manager of All Time: 2019
*Eredivisie Oeuvre Award: 2023

===Orders===
*Knight of the Order of Orange-Nassau: 1997

==Publications==
* &quot;De trainer en de totale mens&quot;, Leipzig, Leibniz-Blätter-Verlag, 2021.

==See also==
* List of European Cup and UEFA Champions League winning managers
* List of UEFA Cup winning managers
*List of investors in Bernard L. Madoff Securities

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Profile and stats at Voetbal International 
* CV Louis van Gaal 
* Van Gaal: My football philosophy, from FIFA.com
* Profile and stats on RAFC History </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="0" end="21" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Aloysius Paulus Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="28" end="33" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="40" end="48" title="Louis van Gaal" label="van Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="90" end="98" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="164" end="168" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="209" end="213" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="215" end="224" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q191264" start="226" end="236" title="AZ Alkmaar" label="AZ Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="238" end="251" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="256" end="273" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="323" end="348" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q732002" start="686" end="699" title="Royal Antwerp F.C." label="Royal Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071713" start="701" end="708" title="Stormvogels Telstar" label="Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q209895" start="710" end="726" title="Sparta Rotterdam" label="Sparta Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="772" end="790" title="physical education" label="physical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q158647" start="967" end="981" title="Leo Beenhakker" label="Leo Beenhakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="1074" end="1084" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569520" start="1085" end="1091" title="List of Dutch football champions" label="titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1097" end="1105" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1114" end="1135" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q734242" start="1179" end="1192" title="List of Spanish football champions" label="league titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="1201" end="1213" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="1312" end="1323" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="1355" end="1374" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="1586" end="1596" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q150880" start="1602" end="1611" title="DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="1776" end="1795" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20119002" start="1867" end="1873" title="2015–16 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q284163" start="2130" end="2149" title="2022 FIFA World Cup" label="2022 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2211" end="2220" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="2349" end="2353" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="2445" end="2457" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q233819" start="2462" end="2476" title="Johan Neeskens" label="Johan Neeskens"/>
<link wikidata="Q216022" start="2521" end="2543" title="Belgian First Division" label="Belgian First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q732002" start="2549" end="2562" title="Royal Antwerp FC" label="Royal Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q579497" start="2577" end="2585" title="Guy Thys" label="Guy Thys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541824" start="2644" end="2648" title="1973–74 Belgian First Division" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q959487" start="2653" end="2657" title="1974–75 Belgian First Division" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q618620" start="2743" end="2751" title="K.V. Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="2829" end="2839" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071713" start="2850" end="2857" title="Telstar (football club)" label="Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q513826" start="2889" end="2903" title="Mircea Petescu" label="Mircea Petescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q209895" start="2925" end="2941" title="Sparta Rotterdam" label="Sparta Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q191264" start="2959" end="2961" title="AZ Alkmaar" label="AZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q158647" start="3067" end="3081" title="Leo Beenhakker" label="Leo Beenhakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="3322" end="3332" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349853" start="3359" end="3363" title="1993–94 Eredivisie" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349857" start="3365" end="3369" title="1994–95 Eredivisie" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589918" start="3396" end="3403" title="1994–95 AFC Ajax season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="3447" end="3463" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q741595" start="3469" end="3473" title="1995–96 Eredivisie" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q216858" start="3499" end="3507" title="KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q644569" start="3511" end="3515" title="1992–93 KNVB Cup" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q591412" start="3524" end="3543" title="Johan Cruyff Shield" label="Johan Cruyff Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="3610" end="3618" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q751828" start="3622" end="3626" title="1991–92 UEFA Cup" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="3635" end="3656" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q455985" start="3660" end="3664" title="1994–95 UEFA Champions League" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="3679" end="3684" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080061" start="3692" end="3697" title="1995 UEFA Champions League Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q10308" start="3755" end="3768" title="Real Zaragoza" label="Real Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192930" start="3776" end="3795" title="1995 UEFA Super Cup" label="1995 UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q221695" start="3836" end="3842" title="Grêmio Foot-Ball Porto Alegrense" label="Grêmio"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="3867" end="3887" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q26170" start="3935" end="3939" title="1995–96 UEFA Champions League" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="3956" end="3964" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334022" start="3968" end="3977" title="Penalty shootout" label="penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="4063" end="4088" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q189686" start="4127" end="4143" title="Patrick Kluivert" label="Patrick Kluivert"/>
<link wikidata="Q219248" start="4145" end="4158" title="Marc Overmars" label="Marc Overmars"/>
<link wikidata="Q185389" start="4160" end="4175" title="Dennis Bergkamp" label="Dennis Bergkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q219657" start="4177" end="4182" title="Frank de Boer" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q270075" start="4187" end="4201" title="Ronald de Boer" label="Ronald de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185115" start="4203" end="4215" title="Edgar Davids" label="Edgar Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q484909" start="4217" end="4233" title="Clarence Seedorf" label="Clarence Seedorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q125796" start="4235" end="4250" title="Winston Bogarde" label="Winston Bogarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q34658" start="4252" end="4268" title="Michael Reiziger" label="Michael Reiziger"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="4273" end="4290" title="Edwin van der Sar" label="Edwin van der Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q139425" start="4381" end="4403" title="Order of Orange-Nassau" label="Order of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="4452" end="4461" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q189587" start="4488" end="4500" title="Bobby Robson" label="Bobby Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="4530" end="4537" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q223368" start="4546" end="4553" title="1997–98 La Liga" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q644045" start="4555" end="4562" title="1998–99 La Liga" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q615973" start="4572" end="4584" title="1997–98 Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q483577" start="4871" end="4878" title="Rivaldo" label="Rivaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488480" start="5126" end="5138" title="1999–2000 La Liga" label="league title"/>
<link wikidata="Q8760" start="5142" end="5164" title="Deportivo de La Coruña" label="Deportivo de La Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="5424" end="5443" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4403313" start="5597" end="5604" title="2002 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 2" label="Group 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="5684" end="5703" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188791" start="5764" end="5770" title="Cyprus national football team" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="5803" end="5811" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180798" start="5844" end="5851" title="Andorra national football team" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q188791" start="5853" end="5859" title="Cyprus national football team" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186914" start="5864" end="5871" title="Estonia national football team" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="6058" end="6064" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="6398" end="6407" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="6433" end="6437" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q11949" start="6509" end="6522" title="Dick Advocaat" label="Dick Advocaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="6582" end="6599" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Sir Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="6603" end="6620" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364922" start="6845" end="6859" title="2002–03 FC Barcelona season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q455978" start="6980" end="7000" title="2002–03 UEFA Champions League" label="the Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q603403" start="7018" end="7025" title="2002–03 La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="7153" end="7166" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10300" start="7190" end="7204" title="Rayo Vallecano" label="Rayo Vallecano"/>
<link wikidata="Q10329" start="7209" end="7216" title="Sevilla FC" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="7286" end="7294" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8749" start="7299" end="7309" title="Celta de Vigo" label="Celta Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q107089" start="7529" end="7540" title="Robert Enke" label="Robert Enke"/>
<link wikidata="Q295410" start="7553" end="7568" title="Gaizka Mendieta" label="Gaizka Mendieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192965" start="7583" end="7602" title="Juan Román Riquelme" label="Juan Román Riquelme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="8622" end="8632" title="A.C. Milan" label="A.C. Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192635" start="9005" end="9018" title="Ronald Koeman" label="Ronald Koeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q469750" start="9105" end="9117" title="Co Adriaanse" label="Co Adriaanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071057" start="9204" end="9211" title="2005–06 Eredivisie" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070937" start="9225" end="9232" title="2006–07 Eredivisie" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756986" start="9285" end="9301" title="2006–07 KNVB Cup" label="2006–07 KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q186489" start="9313" end="9337" title="2007–08 UEFA Champions League" label="2007–08 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070918" start="9453" end="9467" title="2007–08 Eredivisie" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q592761" start="9725" end="9732" title="2008–09 Eredivisie" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q332642" start="9764" end="9773" title="NAC Breda" label="NAC Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q24904" start="9785" end="9797" title="ADO Den Haag" label="ADO Den Haag"/>
<link wikidata="Q19603" start="9898" end="9904" title="FC Twente" label="Twente"/>
<link wikidata="Q62869" start="10150" end="10168" title="Mounir El Hamdaoui" label="Mounir El Hamdaoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q654041" start="10183" end="10186" title="Ari (footballer, born 1985)" label="Ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q219233" start="10292" end="10299" title="SBV Vitesse" label="Vitesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349791" start="10371" end="10378" title="1980-81 Eredivisie" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="10522" end="10525" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="10608" end="10621" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q43913" start="10750" end="10762" title="Arjen Robben" label="Arjen Robben"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="10768" end="10779" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184182" start="11030" end="11046" title="2009–10 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q923609" start="11047" end="11058" title="2009–10 UEFA Champions League group stage" label="group stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q172476" start="11088" end="11096" title="FC Girondins de Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q104761" start="11103" end="11119" title="Bayer Leverkusen" label="Bayer Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57079" start="11260" end="11276" title="Jürgen Klinsmann" label="Jürgen Klinsmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q43666" start="11490" end="11503" title="Thomas Müller" label="Thomas Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q151278" start="11508" end="11524" title="Holger Badstuber" label="Holger Badstuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q44298" start="11556" end="11578" title="Bastian Schweinsteiger" label="Bastian Schweinsteiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q186478" start="11636" end="11645" title="Luca Toni" label="Luca Toni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755326" start="11697" end="11704" title="2007–08 FC Bayern Munich season" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q161072" start="11705" end="11711" title="2007–08 Bundesliga" label="league"/>
<link wikidata="Q520047" start="11716" end="11719" title="2007–08 DFB-Pokal" label="cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="11720" end="11726" title="Double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="11755" end="11759" title="A.S. Roma" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="11883" end="11891" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="11895" end="11900" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q835773" start="12039" end="12048" title="2009–10 DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q121318" start="12069" end="12079" title="2009–10 Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q104761" start="12090" end="12106" title="Bayer 04 Leverkusen" label="Bayer Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q647080" start="12144" end="12164" title="List of German football champions" label="Bundesliga champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q102720" start="12188" end="12201" title="Hertha BSC" label="Hertha Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51976" start="12334" end="12347" title="SV Werder Bremen" label="Werder Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="12376" end="12382" title="double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q208679" start="12432" end="12447" title="away goals rule" label="away goals rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q704" start="12524" end="12528" title="Olympique Lyonnais" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="12655" end="12669" title="Inter Milan" label="Internazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q79983" start="12676" end="12689" title="José Mourinho" label="José Mourinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q751782" start="12717" end="12722" title="2010 UEFA Champions League Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q845101" start="12758" end="12764" title="Treble (association football)" label="treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q152871" start="12831" end="12852" title="Karl-Heinz Rummenigge" label="Karl-Heinz Rummenigge"/>
<link wikidata="Q570775" start="13069" end="13088" title="Football Manager of the Year (Germany)" label="Manager of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q481190" start="13197" end="13203" title="kicker (sports magazine)" label="kicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q135528" start="13247" end="13261" title="2010–11 FC Bayern Munich season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038506" start="13277" end="13289" title="2010 DFL-Supercup" label="DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q434702" start="13817" end="13828" title="Danny Blind" label="Danny Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q189686" start="13833" end="13849" title="Patrick Kluivert" label="Patrick Kluivert"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="14008" end="14022" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q591184" start="14023" end="14042" title="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group D" label="qualification group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191717" start="14608" end="14626" title="Estádio Fonte Nova" label="Estádio Fonte Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="14630" end="14638" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580095" start="14863" end="14872" title="tiki-taka" label="tiki-taka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14939" end="14944" title="Formation (association football)#3–5–2" label="3–5–2"/>
<link wikidata="Q871403" start="14945" end="14954" title="formation (association football)" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15000" end="15005" title="Formation (association football)#4–3–3" label="4–3–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q268208" start="15147" end="15156" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894" start="15267" end="15280" title="Memphis Depay" label="Memphis Depay"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="15337" end="15341" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="15434" end="15440" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q191634" start="15586" end="15605" title="Luiz Felipe Scolari" label="Luiz Felipe Scolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172025" start="16052" end="16057" title="Chile national football team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="16118" end="16124" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q562337" start="16170" end="16188" title="Giovani dos Santos" label="Giovani dos Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q124086" start="16219" end="16234" title="Wesley Sneijder" label="Wesley Sneijder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26069" start="16239" end="16258" title="Klaas-Jan Huntelaar" label="Klaas-Jan Huntelaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194387" start="16352" end="16362" title="Costa Rica national football team" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="16435" end="16445" title="Goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q128719" start="16446" end="16462" title="Jasper Cillessen" label="Jasper Cillessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q296979" start="16467" end="16475" title="Tim Krul" label="Tim Krul"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="16499" end="16509" title="Overtime (sports)" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="16806" end="16815" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339" start="17042" end="17058" title="Robin van Persie" label="Robin van Persie"/>
<link wikidata="Q128912" start="17060" end="17071" title="Daley Blind" label="Daley Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q372379" start="17076" end="17095" title="Georginio Wijnaldum" label="Georginio Wijnaldum"/>
<link wikidata="Q297252" start="17168" end="17179" title="David Moyes" label="David Moyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="17203" end="17220" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q10524" start="17394" end="17404" title="Ryan Giggs" label="Ryan Giggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13814320" start="17431" end="17442" title="Marcel Bout" label="Marcel Bout"/>
<link wikidata="Q580044" start="17505" end="17515" title="Frans Hoek" label="Frans Hoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9144353" start="17538" end="17556" title="Albert Stuivenberg" label="Albert Stuivenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966741" start="17696" end="17707" title="Ed Woodward" label="Ed Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639968" start="17926" end="17939" title="Ander Herrera" label="Ander Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q93563" start="17970" end="17979" title="Luke Shaw" label="Luke Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q507890" start="18030" end="18041" title="Marcos Rojo" label="Marcos Rojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="18074" end="18085" title="Sporting Clube de Portugal" label="Sporting CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q251683" start="18136" end="18150" title="Ángel Di María" label="Ángel Di María"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="18156" end="18167" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q128912" start="18389" end="18400" title="Daley Blind" label="Daley Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q138172" start="18473" end="18487" title="Radamel Falcao" label="Radamel Falcao"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="18501" end="18507" title="AS Monaco FC" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q204357" start="18608" end="18617" title="LA Galaxy" label="LA Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242071" start="18699" end="18731" title="2014 International Champions Cup" label="2014 International Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q543576" start="18778" end="18784" title="Liverpool F.C.–Manchester United F.C. rivalry" label="rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="18785" end="18794" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="18882" end="18894" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011788" start="18923" end="18952" title="2014–15 Premier League" label="2014–15 Premier League season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="18987" end="18997" title="EFL League One" label="League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q248188" start="19003" end="19021" title="Milton Keynes Dons F.C." label="Milton Keynes Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973398" start="19049" end="19059" title="2014–15 Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="19218" end="19237" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="19274" end="19286" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q168740" start="19291" end="19300" title="Juan Mata" label="Juan Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583443" start="19430" end="19437" title="1986–87 Manchester United F.C. season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q344875" start="19444" end="19456" title="Ron Atkinson" label="Ron Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="19513" end="19527" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="19789" end="19813" title="The Football Association" label="The Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314712" start="19854" end="19863" title="Chris Foy (referee)" label="Chris Foy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18509" start="20023" end="20039" title="Cambridge United F.C." label="Cambridge United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="20193" end="20208" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q334388" start="20217" end="20230" title="Sam Allardyce" label="Sam Allardyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740814" start="20239" end="20248" title="long ball" label="long ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q47576" start="20482" end="20495" title="Arsène Wenger" label="Arsène Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340803" start="20500" end="20510" title="Garry Monk" label="Garry Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="20689" end="20703" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="20740" end="20751" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q670390" start="20957" end="20969" title="Manchester derby" label="local rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="20970" end="20985" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="21036" end="21043" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="21045" end="21052" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="21057" end="21077" title="West Bromwich Albion" label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987294" start="21142" end="21156" title="2014–15 FA Cup" label="2014–15 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="21189" end="21196" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16726285" start="21274" end="21286" title="2014–15 Manchester United F.C. season" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894" start="21513" end="21526" title="Memphis Depay" label="Memphis Depay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44788" start="21537" end="21551" title="Matteo Darmian" label="Matteo Darmian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2768" start="21557" end="21563" title="Torino F.C." label="Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q215463" start="21565" end="21578" title="Sergio Romero" label="Sergio Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457" start="21584" end="21593" title="U.C. Sampdoria" label="Sampdoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361462" start="21595" end="21614" title="Morgan Schneiderlin" label="Morgan Schneiderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44298" start="21633" end="21655" title="Bastian Schweinsteiger" label="Bastian Schweinsteiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091463" start="21679" end="21694" title="Anthony Martial" label="Anthony Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190916" start="21737" end="21748" title="Club Brugge KV" label="Club Brugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416183" start="21780" end="21804" title="2015–16 UEFA Champions League" label="2015–16 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19346732" start="21904" end="21918" title="2015–16 Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q20118529" start="22060" end="22070" title="2015–16 Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="22074" end="22086" title="Football League Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="22092" end="22105" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q20873097" start="22159" end="22170" title="2015–16 UEFA Champions League group stage" label="group stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q101859" start="22210" end="22223" title="VfL Wolfsburg" label="VfL Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699191" start="22297" end="22315" title="2015–16 UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="22668" end="22684" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="22719" end="22735" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966741" start="22909" end="22920" title="Ed Woodward" label="Ed Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="22950" end="22967" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q22951255" start="23158" end="23173" title="Marcus Rashford" label="Marcus Rashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="23406" end="23412" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807520" start="23452" end="23455" title="2016 FA Cup Final" label="2–1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186603" start="23474" end="23487" title="Jesse Lingard" label="Jesse Lingard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141246" start="23821" end="23831" title="sabbatical" label="sabbatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071713" start="23902" end="23909" title="SC Telstar" label="Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105094196" start="23936" end="23958" title="2021–22 Eerste Divisie" label="2021–22 Eerste Divisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="24182" end="24207" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q219657" start="24238" end="24251" title="Frank de Boer" label="Frank de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="24323" end="24332" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="Euro 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q284163" start="24483" end="24502" title="2022 FIFA World Cup" label="2022 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="24568" end="24581" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="24976" end="24985" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q615" start="25025" end="25037" title="Lionel Messi" label="Lionel Messi"/>
<link wikidata="Q367846" start="25301" end="25321" title="Gian Piero Gasperini" label="Gian Piero Gasperini"/>
<link wikidata="Q957291" start="25326" end="25342" title="Alberto Malesani" label="Alberto Malesani"/>
<link wikidata="Q164038" start="25426" end="25439" title="Pep Guardiola" label="Pep Guardiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q222789" start="25444" end="25456" title="Luis Enrique" label="Luis Enrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="26221" end="26225" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q738761" start="26888" end="26902" title="Total Football" label="total football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154479" start="26962" end="26975" title="Rinus Michels" label="Rinus Michels"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="27401" end="27415" title="sweeper keeper" label="sweeper keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="27608" end="27615" title="Sweeper (association football)" label="sweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="27623" end="27629" title="centre-back" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580095" start="28738" end="28747" title="tiki-taka" label="tiki-taka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740814" start="29206" end="29215" title="long ball" label="long ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q275169" start="29233" end="29250" title="Marouane Fellaini" label="Marouane Fellaini"/>
<link wikidata="Q275169" start="29302" end="29319" title="Marouane Fellaini" label="Marouane Fellaini"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="29336" end="29346" title="target man" label="target man"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="30763" end="30768" title="Liver cancer" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="30773" end="30790" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q373813" start="30953" end="30962" title="Albufeira" label="Albufeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="30964" end="30971" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="31003" end="31022" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="31084" end="31090" title="pound sterling" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043" start="31114" end="31127" title="Bernie Madoff" label="Bernie Madoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q219407" start="31135" end="31147" title="Ponzi scheme" label="Ponzi scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="31339" end="31343" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="31402" end="31410" title="Nike Total 90" label="Total 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q152844" start="31587" end="31602" title="Oliver Bierhoff" label="Oliver Bierhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335472" start="31807" end="31823" title="Geertjan Lassche" label="Geertjan Lassche"/>
<link wikidata="Q599272" start="31990" end="32008" title="Tuschinski Theatre" label="Tuschinski Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="32153" end="32163" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349853" start="32165" end="32172" title="1993–94 Eredivisie" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349857" start="32174" end="32181" title="1994–95 Eredivisie" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q741595" start="32183" end="32190" title="1995–96 Eredivisie" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q216858" start="32192" end="32200" title="KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q644569" start="32202" end="32209" title="1992–93 KNVB Cup" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q591412" start="32211" end="32230" title="Johan Cruyff Shield" label="Johan Cruyff Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q586167" start="32232" end="32236" title="1993 PTT Telecom Cup" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011380" start="32238" end="32242" title="1994 Dutch Supercup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859424" start="32244" end="32248" title="1995 Dutch Supercup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="32250" end="32271" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q455985" start="32273" end="32280" title="1994–95 UEFA Champions League" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q26170" start="32293" end="32300" title="1995–96 UEFA Champions League" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="32302" end="32310" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q751828" start="32312" end="32319" title="1991–92 UEFA Cup" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="32321" end="32335" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192930" start="32337" end="32341" title="1995 UEFA Super Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="32343" end="32363" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086446" start="32365" end="32369" title="1995 Intercontinental Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="32382" end="32389" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q223368" start="32391" end="32398" title="1997–98 La Liga" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q644045" start="32400" end="32407" title="1998–99 La Liga" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="32409" end="32421" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q615973" start="32423" end="32430" title="1997–98 Copa del Rey" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="32432" end="32446" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q259310" start="32448" end="32452" title="1997 UEFA Super Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="32458" end="32468" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q592761" start="32470" end="32477" title="2008–09 Eredivisie" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="32494" end="32504" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q121318" start="32506" end="32513" title="2009–10 Bundesliga" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q150880" start="32515" end="32524" title="DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q835773" start="32526" end="32533" title="2009–10 DFB-Pokal" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q156973" start="32535" end="32547" title="DFL-Supercup" label="DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038506" start="32549" end="32553" title="2010 DFL-Supercup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="32555" end="32576" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q184182" start="32588" end="32595" title="2009–10 UEFA Champions League" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="32616" end="32622" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20119002" start="32624" end="32631" title="2015–16 FA Cup" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="32646" end="32660" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="32674" end="32678" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="32711" end="32743" title="World Soccer (magazine)" label="World Soccer Manager of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="32751" end="32783" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063946" start="32791" end="32818" title="El País King of European Soccer" label="El País Manager of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q44264" start="32826" end="32845" title="Rinus Michels Award" label="Rinus Michels Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32859" end="32889" title=":nl:Coach van het jaar (Nederland)" label="Dutch Sports Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q570775" start="32950" end="32988" title="Football Manager of the Year (Germany)" label="Football Manager of the Year (Germany)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32996" end="33030" title="Vereinigung der Vertragsfußballspieler#Coach of the Season (2010–present)" label="VDV Bundesliga Coach of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q121318" start="33032" end="33039" title="2009–10 Bundesliga" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q308705" start="33156" end="33171" title="France Football" label="France Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q139425" start="33272" end="33294" title="Order of Orange-Nassau" label="Order of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990769" start="33418" end="33481" title="List of European Cup and UEFA Champions League winning managers" label="List of European Cup and UEFA Champions League winning managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q900988" start="33484" end="33517" title="List of UEFA Cup winning managers" label="List of UEFA Cup winning managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624377" start="33519" end="33568" title="List of investors in Bernard L. Madoff Securities" label="List of investors in Bernard L. Madoff Securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314452" start="33642" end="33663" title="Voetbal International" label="Voetbal International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683972" wikidata="Q976184" url="?curid=683972" title="My Iron Lung">
<text>My Iron Lung is the third EP by the English rock band Radiohead, released on 26 September 1994 by Parlophone Records in the UK and by Capitol Records in the US. It was produced by Radiohead, John Leckie and Nigel Godrich. It marked Radiohead&#x27;s first collaborations with Godrich and the artist Stanley Donwood, who have worked on every Radiohead release since. 

The EP consists of the &quot;Bends&quot; song &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; plus several non-album tracks&quot;.&quot; Radiohead recorded most of the songs during the sessions for their second album, &quot;The Bends&quot;, released the following year. They wrote &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; in response to the success of their debut single, &quot;Creep&quot; (1992). Unsatisfied with the version recorded at RAK Studios, they used an edited performance recorded in May 1994 at the London Astoria. 

Retrospective reviews described &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; as a growth in Radiohead&#x27;s songwriting. &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; was also released as a single, and reached number 24 on the UK singles chart. 

== Recording ==
Radiohead recorded most of the songs on &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; at RAK Studios, London, during the sessions for their second album, &quot;The Bends&quot; (1995). The songwriter, Thom Yorke, said the EP was &quot;just for fans&quot;, and described it as a collection of songs that did not fit the album rather than outtakes: &quot;We think they&#x27;re good, otherwise we wouldn&#x27;t have plugged them on.&quot; The EP also includes an acoustic version of Radiohead&#x27;s debut single, &quot;Creep&quot; (1992), from a performance on KROQ-FM on July 13, 1993. 

&quot;My Iron Lung&quot; was Radiohead&#x27;s first collaboration with the producer Nigel Godrich, who was assisting the producer John Leckie at RAK as a tape engineer. It was also Radiohead&#x27;s first collaboration with the cover artist Stanley Donwood. Donwood was not a fan of rock music, and said he took the work because he knew Yorke from their time as art students at the University of Exeter. Donwood and Godrich have worked on every Radiohead release since.

=== &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; ===

Only &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; was included on &quot;The Bends&quot;. Radiohead wrote it in response to the request from their record label, EMI, to record a single to repeat the success of &quot;Creep&quot;. The caustic lyrics use an iron lung as a metaphor for the way &quot;Creep&quot; had both sustained and constrained them: &quot;This is our new song / Just like the last one / A total waste of time / My iron lung&quot;. Yorke said in 1995: &quot;People have defined our emotional range with that one song, &#x27;Creep&#x27;. I saw reviews of &#x27;My Iron Lung&#x27; that said it was just like &#x27;Creep&#x27;. When you&#x27;re up against things like that, it&#x27;s like: &#x27;Fuck you.&#x27; These people are never going to listen.&quot;

According to the journalist Mac Randall, &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; transitions from a &quot;jangly&quot; opening hook to a &quot;McCartney-esque verse melody&quot; and &quot;pulverising guitar explosions&quot; in the bridge. Jonny Greenwood used a DigiTech Whammy pedal to pitch-shift his guitar by one octave, creating a &quot;glitchy, lo-fi&quot; sound. Ed O&#x27;Brien used an EBow, an electronic sustaining device, to generate a drone on his guitar.

Radiohead recorded versions of &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; at RAK, but were not satisfied with the results. Instead, they used a performance recorded in May 1994 at the London Astoria, with Yorke&#x27;s vocals replaced and the audience removed. Leckie said: &quot;Considering it was recorded in the back of a truck outside the hall – not the best sound to get something from – we did quite well.&quot; The Astoria performance was included in the video &quot;Live at the Astoria&quot;, released in March 1995.

== Release ==
&quot;My Iron Lung&quot; was released as a single in the UK in September 26 in four versions, each with different track order. To encourage fans to buy multiple copies, EMI released two CD singles; one included the B-sides &quot;The Trickster&quot;, &quot;Punchdrunk Lovesick Singalong&quot;, and &quot;Lozenge of Love&quot;, while the other included the B-sides &quot;Lewis (Mistreated)&quot;, &quot;Permanent Daylight&quot;, and &quot;You Never Wash Up After Yourself&quot;. EMI later issued a &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; EP that compiled all the B-sides.

The single reached number 24 on the UK singles chart. In the US, it topped the college radio charts, but sold only around 20,000 copies. Yorke and Greenwood expressed disappointment that Capitol, EMI&#x27;s American subsidiary, had not promoted it more. The A&amp;R vice president, Perry Watts-Russel, said Capitol had not pursued radio play as &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; was intended for fans rather than as the lead single for &quot;The Bends&quot;. Randall noted that, unlike the UK, the US was not a major market for singles, and that the sales instead indicated that Radiohead had built an audience in America. He argued that &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; boosted Radiohead&#x27;s artistic credibility, creating commercial opportunity for &quot;The Bends&quot;.

On 18 December 2007, &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; was released as downloadable content for the music game &quot;Rock Band&quot;. On 31 August, 2009, EMI reissued &quot;The Bends&quot; in a &quot;Collector&#x27;s Edition&quot;, including the &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; tracks. Radiohead had no input into the reissue and the music was not remastered. The EMI reissue was removed from streaming services after Radiohead&#x27;s back catalogue was transferred to XL in 2016.

== Critical reception ==

&quot;My Iron Lung&quot; initially received mixed reviews, with critics likening its verse-chorus dynamic to the 1993 Nirvana song &quot;Heart-Shaped Box&quot;. According to Randall, it puzzled fans and critics, defying expectations, but &quot;makes much more sense&quot; on &quot;The Bends&quot;. Though he felt Radiohead were right to omit the other &quot;Bends&quot; tracks from the EP, he felt they were building their own identity and identified a growing sophistication and diversity in their songwriting. He praised &quot;The Trickster&quot; and &quot;Punchdrunk Lovesick Singalong&quot; as the most developed songs, likening them to Sonic Youth.

Leesa Daniels from &quot;Smash Hits&quot; gave &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; four out of five, praising it as &quot;magnificent&quot; and &quot;stupendous&quot;. The AllMusic critic Greg Prato praised the EP, writing: &quot;Because of the tracks&#x27; consistency and sequencing, it plays like a real album rather than a collection of B-sides and outtakes thrown together haphazardly.&quot; He felt the acoustic version of &quot;Creep&quot;, with a &quot;surprisingly harsh and off-key middle section&quot;, was &quot;the only weak spot&quot;.

&quot;Entertainment.ie&quot; wrote: &quot;While these off-cuts are inevitably more low-key and experimental than the classics we&#x27;re all familiar with, the same spirit of anguish [of &quot;The Bends&quot;] and fragility is still thrillingly familiar.&quot; The &quot;Pitchfork&quot; critic Scott Plagenhoef wrote that &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; had Radiohead finding &quot;new ways to pick apart and re-construct the typical alt-rock template&quot; and &quot;demonstrated a band whose collective heads seemed to crack open and spill out new ideas&quot;. In 2020, the &quot;Guardian&quot; named &quot;My Iron Lung&quot; the 10th-best Radiohead song, writing that it &quot;uses catchy hooks and brawny riffs to rally against commercialisation. It risks sounding bratty – it &quot;is&quot; bratty – but from insolence [Radiohead] fashioned a new identity: stadium-rock agitators declaring war on hypocrisy and greed – particularly their own.&quot;

==Track listing==
==Personnel==
Adapted from the liner notes.

Radiohead
*Thom Yorke
*Jonny Greenwood
*Ed O&#x27;Brien
*Colin Greenwood
*Philip Selway

Production
*John Leckie – production and engineering on tracks 1–4 and 6
*Nigel Godrich – engineering on tracks 1–4 and 6, production on track 5
*Chris Brown – engineering on tracks 1–4 and 6
*Guy Massey – assistance
*Shelly Saunders – assistance
*Jim Warren – mixing on track 5, recording on track 7

Artwork
* Stanley Donwood
* Thom Yorke
==Charts==
===Weekly charts===


===Year-end charts===


==Certifications==

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="54" end="63" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="98" end="116" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="134" end="149" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q542115" start="191" end="202" title="John Leckie" label="John Leckie"/>
<link wikidata="Q544301" start="207" end="220" title="Nigel Godrich" label="Nigel Godrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352622" start="298" end="313" title="Stanley Donwood" label="Stanley Donwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q221246" start="568" end="577" title="The Bends (album)" label="The Bends"/>
<link wikidata="Q863433" start="706" end="711" title="Creep (Radiohead song)" label="Creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993389" start="767" end="778" title="RAK Studios" label="RAK Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258938" start="840" end="854" title="London Astoria" label="London Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1045" end="1061" title="UK singles chart" label="UK singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993389" start="1149" end="1160" title="RAK Studios" label="RAK Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q221246" start="1220" end="1229" title="The Bends (album)" label="The Bends"/>
<link wikidata="Q188668" start="1260" end="1270" title="Thom Yorke" label="Thom Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q863433" start="1576" end="1581" title="Creep (Radiohead song)" label="Creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191043" start="1618" end="1625" title="KROQ-FM" label="KROQ-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q544301" start="1730" end="1743" title="Nigel Godrich" label="Nigel Godrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q542115" start="1776" end="1787" title="John Leckie" label="John Leckie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352622" start="1886" end="1901" title="Stanley Donwood" label="Stanley Donwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="2027" end="2047" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="2290" end="2293" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313477" start="2384" end="2393" title="iron lung" label="iron lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q127124" start="3013" end="3017" title="Hook (music)" label="hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="3029" end="3038" title="Paul McCartney" label="McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q286410" start="3125" end="3140" title="Jonny Greenwood" label="Jonny Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086794" start="3148" end="3163" title="DigiTech Whammy" label="DigiTech Whammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60630" start="3173" end="3184" title="Pitch shift" label="pitch-shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="3203" end="3209" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q842850" start="3256" end="3271" title="Ed O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Ed O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273117" start="3280" end="3284" title="EBow" label="EBow"/>
<link wikidata="Q893474" start="3333" end="3338" title="Drone (music)" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258938" start="3521" end="3535" title="London Astoria" label="London Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550578" start="3810" end="3829" title="Live at the Astoria" label="Live at the Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="4468" end="4484" title="UK singles chart" label="UK singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="4511" end="4524" title="Campus radio" label="college radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="4619" end="4626" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="4690" end="4697" title="A&amp;amp;R" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q133661" start="4843" end="4854" title="lead single" label="lead single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="5255" end="5275" title="downloadable content" label="downloadable content"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323659" start="5301" end="5310" title="Rock Band" label="Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="5646" end="5648" title="XL Recordings" label="XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="5803" end="5810" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q869706" start="5822" end="5838" title="Heart-Shaped Box" label="Heart-Shaped Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="6326" end="6337" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071032" start="6365" end="6375" title="Smash Hits" label="Smash Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="6501" end="6509" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380437" start="6886" end="6902" title="Entertainment.ie" label="Entertainment.ie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="7455" end="7463" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188668" start="7902" end="7912" title="Thom Yorke" label="Thom Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q286410" start="7914" end="7929" title="Jonny Greenwood" label="Jonny Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q842850" start="7931" end="7946" title="Ed O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Ed O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q842267" start="7948" end="7963" title="Colin Greenwood" label="Colin Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q842263" start="7965" end="7978" title="Philip Selway" label="Philip Selway"/>
<link wikidata="Q542115" start="7992" end="8003" title="John Leckie" label="John Leckie"/>
<link wikidata="Q544301" start="8054" end="8067" title="Nigel Godrich" label="Nigel Godrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352622" start="8292" end="8307" title="Stanley Donwood" label="Stanley Donwood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683977" wikidata="Q7647892" url="?curid=683977" title="Susan Griffin">
<text>Susan Griffin (born January 26, 1943) is a radical feminist philosopher, essayist and playwright particularly known for her innovative, hybrid-form ecofeminist works.

==Life==
Griffin was born in Los Angeles, California, on January 26, 1943, and has resided in California since then. Following her father&#x27;s death when she was 16, she bounced around the family but was eventually taken into the home and family of noted artist Morton Dimondstein. Her biological family were of Irish, Scottish, Welsh and German ancestry. Having spent a year in a post-War Jewish home, her German heritage wasn&#x27;t openly spoken of and she initially demonized Germans, but later made several trips to Germany (including to the Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp) to reconcile her Jewish and German heritages. She attended the University of California, Berkeley, for two years, then transferred to San Francisco State College, where she received her Bachelor of Arts degree in Creative Writing (1965) and her Master of Arts degree (1973), both degrees under the tutelage of Kay Boyle. She has taught as an adjunct professor at UC Berkeley as well as at Stanford University and California Institute of Integral Studies. Griffin has taught at the California Institute for Integral Studies, Pacifica Graduate Institute, the Wright Institute, and the University of California.

She currently lives in Berkeley, California. Griffin&#x27;s papers are located at the Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe Institute, at Harvard University.

==Work==
Griffin has written 21 books, including works of nonfiction, poetry, anthologies, plays, and a screenplay. Her work has been translated into over 12 languages. Griffin describes her work as &quot;draw[ing] connections between the destruction of nature, the diminishment of women and racism, and trac[ing] the causes of war to denial in both private and public life.&quot;

&quot;Rape: The All-American Crime&quot; (1971), an article published in &quot;Ramparts&quot;, was one of the first publications about rape from a feminist perspective.

&quot;Woman and Nature: The Roaring Inside Her&quot; (1978) has sold more than 100,000 copies, and draws connections between ecological destruction, sexism, and racism. Considered a form of prose-poetry, this work is believed to have launched ecofeminism in the United States. Griffin attributes her connection to ecofeminism to her upbringing along the Pacific Coast, which she believes cultivated her awareness of ecology.

Griffin articulated her anti-pornography feminism in &quot;Pornography and Silence: Culture&#x27;s Revenge Against Nature&quot; (1981). In this work she makes the case that although the pursuit of freedom of speech could lead to a position against the censorship of pornography, the freedom to create pornography leads to a compromise of &quot;human liberation&quot; (since liberation of humankind would include the emancipation of women). She argues that pornography and eros are separate and opposing ideas, with pornography &quot;express[ing] not a yearning for sexual liberation but its opposite, a desire to silence eros.&quot; According to Griffin, pornography&#x27;s origins are rooted in a widespread fear of nature, and pornographic imagery &quot;objectifies and degrades the (usually female) body&quot;. This, according to Griffin, teaches women to self-deprecate, and fuels an unhealthy, perverted culture. In contrast, Griffin argues that &quot;real sexual liberation requires a reconciliation with nature, a healing between body and spirit&quot;. Critics largely responded to &quot;Pornography and Culture&quot; with contempt, many complaining that it came off as more of a rant than realistic philosophical discussion.

==Awards==
Griffin has received a MacArthur grant for Peace and International Cooperation, NEA and Guggenheim Foundation fellowships, and a local Emmy Award for the play &quot;Voices&quot;. She is featured in the 2014 feminist history film &quot;She&#x27;s Beautiful When She&#x27;s Angry&quot;. She was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction in 1993 for &quot;A Chorus of Stones: The Private Life of War.&quot;

== Criticism ==
Many critics praise Griffin&#x27;s blunt takes and insights to the role of feminism in every major issue today, while others have criticized her writings for being too convoluted or ranting. Largely, reviews for Griffin&#x27;s work take opposing views on the intertwining and complicated connections she suggests between the woman and larger worldly issues such as war, disease, pornography, and nature itself. These webs are mirrored in her unique writing style which critics have reflected upon extensively.

In a 1994 review by Carol H. Cantrell, Griffin&#x27;s &quot;Woman and Nature&quot; is characterised as &quot;hard to describe. Most of it looks like prose on the page but the thought is fragmented, metaphorical, and discontinuous; there are plenty of stories, but they too are often elliptical and metaphorical.&quot; In a review of &quot;What Her Body Thought: A Journey into the Shadows&quot;, Susan Dion of &quot;The Women&#x27;s Review of Books&quot; wrote: &quot;...Griffin is not merely reiterating old themes in feminist scholarship or the history of medicine; rather, she probes, ponders, and suggests different ways of considering many interrelated issues...Griffin&#x27;s musings and hypotheses are fresh, smart, and instructive, if not always convincing.&quot;

==Published works==
*&quot;Woman and Nature: the Roaring Inside Her&quot; (1978) Ecofeminist treatise (1st Edition, has since been reprinted) 
*&quot;Rape: The Power of Consciousness&quot; (1979) OCLC 781089176 
*&quot;Pornography and Silence: Culture&#x27;s Revenge Against Nature&quot; (1981) OCLC 964062418 
*&quot;Sadomasochism and the erosion of self: a critical reading of Story of O,&quot; in &quot;Against Sadomasochism: A Radical Feminist Analysis&quot;, ed. Robin Ruth Linden (East Palo Alto, Calif. : Frog in the Well, 1982.), pp. 183–201
*&quot;Unremembered Country&quot;: poems (Copper Canyon Press, 1987) OCLC 16905255 
*&quot;A Chorus of Stones: the Private Life of War&quot; (1993) Psychological aspects of violence, war, womanhood OCLC 1005479046 
*&quot;The Eros of Everyday Life: Essays on Ecology, Gender and Society&quot; (1995) OCLC 924501690 
*&quot;Bending Home: Selected New Poems, 1967-1998&quot; (Copper Canyon Press, 1998) OCLC 245705378 
*&quot;What Her Body Thought: a Journey into the Shadows&quot; (1999) 
*&quot;The Book of the Courtesans: a Catalogue of Their Virtues&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Wrestling with the Angel of Democracy: On Being an American Citizen&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Transforming Terror: Remembering the Soul of the World&quot;, co-edited with Karen Lofthus Carrington (University of California Press, 2011)

==References==
==External links==
*Poetry Foundation Biography
*Papers of Susan Griffin, 1914-2015 (inclusive), 1943-2015 (bulk): A Finding Aid. Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University.
* Review of production of play &quot;Voices&quot; &quot;The Boston Phoenix&quot; (1982-07-06)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7647892" start="0" end="13" title="Susan Griffin" label="Susan Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914207" start="43" end="59" title="Radical feminism" label="radical feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q294949" start="148" end="159" title="Ecofeminism" label="ecofeminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="197" end="208" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="210" end="220" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q118557692" start="432" end="450" title="Morton Dimondstein" label="Morton Dimondstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q684424" start="717" end="750" title="Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp" label="Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="815" end="839" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="886" end="913" title="San Francisco State College" label="San Francisco State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q529639" start="1062" end="1071" title="Kay Boyle" label="Kay Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1141" end="1160" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444680" start="1165" end="1205" title="California Institute of Integral Studies" label="California Institute of Integral Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038222" start="1305" end="1325" title="the Wright Institute" label="the Wright Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="1385" end="1405" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431696" start="1448" end="1467" title="Schlesinger Library" label="Schlesinger Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1493" end="1511" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892135" start="1618" end="1628" title="Berkeley in the Sixties" label="screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290027" start="1969" end="1989" title="Ramparts (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Ramparts&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q294949" start="2309" end="2320" title="ecofeminism" label="ecofeminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="2964" end="2968" title="eros" label="eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424691" start="3760" end="3769" title="MacArthur Foundation" label="MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="3817" end="3820" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="NEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q507237" start="3825" end="3846" title="John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation" label="Guggenheim Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="3872" end="3882" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964584" start="3972" end="4014" title="She&amp;#x27;s Beautiful When She&amp;#x27;s Angry" label="She&amp;#x27;s Beautiful When She&amp;#x27;s Angry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="4049" end="4063" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5863" end="5913" title="Against Sadomasochism: A Radical Feminist Analysis" label="Against Sadomasochism: A Radical Feminist Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168700" start="6049" end="6068" title="Copper Canyon Press" label="Copper Canyon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756161" start="7072" end="7090" title="The Phoenix (newspaper)" label="The Boston Phoenix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683979" wikidata="Q683590" url="?curid=683979" title="Lost Patrol (video game)">
<text>Lost Patrol, also known as The Lost Patrol, is a survival action role-playing strategy video game developed by Shadow Development and published by Ocean Software for the Amiga and Atari ST computers in 1990. An MS-DOS port by Astros Productions was published in 1991. Set during the Vietnam War, the game follows a squad of United States Army soldiers who are stranded behind enemy lines after their helicopter crashes, and must reach a U.S. military outpost for rescue.

==Gameplay==
&quot;Lost Patrol&quot; is a survival strategy game in which the player must lead a squad of seven soldiers to safety after they are left stranded deep in enemy territory with little food and ammunition. The player assumes control of squad leader Sergeant Charlie Weaver as he attempts to organize the squad and lead them to safety.

The main gameplay interface is a map of the area, with the days since the crash and the in-game time displayed at the top of the screen, and the menu bar and in-game information displayed at the bottom. Most actions are performed in the menu bar&#x27;s drop-down list (various icons in the MS-DOS version): the squad can search the area for food or supplies, briefly rest for several minutes, or dig in and rest for several hours; consume regular field rations, half of a ration serving, or emergency rations; or lay a Claymore mine or grenade booby trap. Game functions can also can be accessed in the menu bar, as can bonus extras such as the game&#x27;s assets and credits. To move, the player must choose from the eight cardinal and ordinal directions on a compass rose; the player can also select how cautious the squad is while moving. The terrain the squad is traveling through, which can be viewed in detail in the map&#x27;s grid view, affects how fast the squad moves, with more treacherous terrain such as mountains slowing them down more than less-treacherous terrain such as paddy fields.

Information on the squad members can be accessed in the squad menu. Through the squad menu, players can set the squad leader and designated scout. The squad menu also displays each member&#x27;s strength, morale, and any injuries they have (can be inflicted through gameplay, though squad members can sometimes already be injured at the start of the game from the crash), as well as each member&#x27;s individual characteristics, which affect how they react to certain decisions and events. Some soldiers have exceptional skills for certain situations as mentioned in the game&#x27;s manual, such as Private Richard Backman being an expert marksman. Missing or killed squad members are permanently lost for the rest of the playthrough.

The game features five types of action sequences, in which the player controls a squad member in a combat situation against the Viet Cong. In all of them, the player can attempt to retreat, but this is risky. The five action sequences each take the form of a different video game genre, and are as follows:

* Battle: The squad is attacked by a Viet Cong patrol, and the squad must return fire to defend their position, in a common shooting gallery section. The player must defeat all of the enemies as they pop up, while also taking cover to avoid being shot. The player can switch their rate of fire between normal and heavy, which affects how fast they fire but also their shooting accuracy and ammunition usage.
* Sniper: One or more enemy snipers pin the squad down from a row of huts, and one squad member must serve as a counter-sniper to defeat the snipers before they can kill them and the rest of the squad, in a manner also similar to a shooting gallery. To locate the snipers, the player must scan the horizon with a scope for occasional muzzle flashes.
* Grenade: The squad encounters Viet Cong machine gun nests that pin them down with suppressive fire. As direct fire is too dangerous, one squad member must throw grenades at the machine gun nests, in what is essentially a first-person artillery game. To throw a grenade, the player must charge strength that determines how far the grenade will go before landing and exploding. Like the Sniper sequence, the nests are only marked by muzzle flashes, and they must be hit by a grenade explosion to be defeated.
* Minefield: The squad comes across an enemy minefield, and one squad member is sent to secure a safe path through. The squad member must crawl through the minefield and carefully find a safe way through before time runs out, with gameplay somewhat similar to a puzzle game. The player can stab the ground to reveal the outline of a mine if one is there; however, directly stabbing the detonator or going over a mine will cause the mine to detonate.
* Hand-to-Hand: A scout can occasionally encounter a Viet Cong guerilla, and must defeat them in hand-to-hand combat; here, gameplay is similar to a fighting game, and the player can choose between keyboard or joystick controls to play. The scout must defeat the guerilla before time runs out, or they will be presumed missing in action and lost.

Occasionally, the squad can come across Vietnamese or Montagnard civilians, as well as villages populated by them. Players can communicate with these civilians by typing keywords, while actions can be selected through a drop-down list. A variety of potential courses of action can be taken during civilian encounters or when in villages; the squad can search the area, attempt to communicate with civilians to gather intelligence or supplies, take one captive for interrogation, or kill one or even all of the villagers to force compliance or loot their belongings. A major risk factor in these interactions is that some civilians may be secretly working with the Viet Cong and attempt to kill the squad members or distract them for Viet Cong forces to arrive, while others may simply be innocent but find the English-speaking soldiers untrustworthy or difficult to understand. For example, one civilian encounter involves an elderly woman approaching the squad carrying an unidentified package without stopping; the package can turn out to be either a bomb or merely bánh chưng, which may or may not be poisoned. The squad can approach her with their guard down, hold her at gunpoint and attempt to maintain control over the situation, or simply shoot her and search the package themselves.

== Plot ==
On June 7, 1966 (June 1965 in in-game text), a squad of U.S. Army soldiers is returning from an R&amp;R break in Saigon when their Bell UH-1 Iroquois crashes in South Vietnam&#x27;s Central Highlands, which has a major Viet Cong presence. Only seven soldiers—Sergeant Charlie Weaver and Privates William Blom, Robert Case, Harvey Moore, Richard Backman, David Cain, and Juan Gomez—survive the crash, but are left with little food and ammunition; their radio is also lost in the crash, leaving them without a way to communicate with the rest of the U.S. military for rescue. The squad is forced to trek through enemy-occupied wilderness to reach safety at the nearest American outpost, Du Hoc, roughly 58 miles away.

==Development==
&quot;Lost Patrol&quot; began as an idea to make a game in the style of Cinemaware&#x27;s interactive film titles but with more gameplay, and the designer and artist Ian Harling even sent a game concept to Cinemaware and six other companies but was rejected, until Ocean Software&#x27;s Gary Bracey accepted it in early 1989 when they decided to move on to the 16-bit market. &quot;Lost Patrol&quot; was originally intended by Ocean as a follow-up to 1987&#x27;s &quot;Platoon&quot; and was thus initially subtitled &quot;Platoon II&quot;.

Upon reading more about the atrocities of the Vietnam War, Harling decided to incorporate moral dilemmas into the plot. Several segments were changed or abandoned altogether due to technical limitations and other reasons, such as the tunnel sequence which was cut altogether. Harling created the graphics using Deluxe Paint II, scanned hand-drawn images with photographic references, and digitized Vietnam footage stills for the Amiga as the prime platforms. His original 32-color graphics were then downgraded for the Atari ST.

The game was programmed by Simon Cooke, with whom Harling had previously worked on an unreleased game, &quot;Xenodrome&quot;. Nick Byron aided them with ideas and additional coding and also created the hand-to-hand sequence. There was a widely pirated, leaked Amiga version of the game that was incomplete, buggy and prone to crash. &quot;Lost Patrol&quot; was also later ported to MS-DOS by Astros Productions. The main theme playing throughout the game was composed by Chris Glaister.

==Reception==

&quot;Lost Patrol&quot; sold very well and was in the UK&#x27;s Amiga&#x27;s top ten chart in late 1990. The game received mostly positive reviews upon its release, including the scores of 85% from &quot;The Games Machine&quot;, 73% from &quot;The One&quot;, 79% from &quot;Amiga Format&quot;, and 83% from &quot;CU Amiga&quot;. &quot;Zero&quot; gave the Amiga version of &quot;Lost Patrol&quot; an overall score of 89%, while the ST version got 88%.

&quot;Computer Gaming World&#x27;s&quot; 1992 and 1994 surveys of wargames with modern settings gave the game zero stars out of five, criticizing the joystick controls as &quot;so poorly done that the entire game is totally unplayable&quot;.

According to Roberto Dillon&#x27;s 2011 book &quot;The Golden Age of Video Games&quot;, it was &quot;a unique game among military and combat simulations&quot; that &quot;offered a different perspective on war from any other game released before or since ... showing there is no glory in war but only pain and destruction&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21030988" start="49" end="57" title="Survival game" label="survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422746" start="58" end="77" title="action role-playing game" label="action role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q472055" start="78" end="86" title="Strategy video game" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="87" end="97" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408498" start="147" end="161" title="Ocean Software" label="Ocean Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="170" end="175" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="180" end="188" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="211" end="217" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="283" end="294" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207063" start="315" end="320" title="squad" label="squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="324" end="342" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="437" end="450" title="U.S. military" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812454" start="719" end="731" title="squad leader" label="squad leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q783066" start="1072" end="1086" title="drop-down list" label="drop-down list"/>
<link wikidata="Q91764" start="1215" end="1221" title="Defensive fighting position" label="dig in"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501106" start="1266" end="1278" title="field ration" label="field ration"/>
<link wikidata="Q332807" start="1310" end="1327" title="emergency rations" label="emergency rations"/>
<link wikidata="Q261152" start="1338" end="1351" title="Claymore mine" label="Claymore mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="1355" end="1362" title="grenade" label="grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568202" start="1363" end="1373" title="booby trap" label="booby trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718" start="1543" end="1574" title="Cardinal direction" label="cardinal and ordinal directions"/>
<link wikidata="Q640047" start="1580" end="1592" title="compass rose" label="compass rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="1907" end="1918" title="paddy field" label="paddy field"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="2062" end="2067" title="Reconnaissance" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="2127" end="2133" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="2143" end="2151" title="injuries" label="injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286979" start="2506" end="2512" title="Video game manual" label="manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529376" start="2562" end="2570" title="marksman" label="marksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169279" start="2608" end="2624" title="Permadeath" label="permanently lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q650711" start="2758" end="2764" title="combat" label="combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="2787" end="2796" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q659563" start="2928" end="2944" title="video game genre" label="video game genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379765" start="3014" end="3020" title="patrol" label="patrol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3091" end="3107" title="Shooter game#Shooting gallery" label="shooting gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q753454" start="3248" end="3260" title="rate of fire" label="rate of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="3403" end="3409" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310187" start="3487" end="3501" title="counter-sniper" label="counter-sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q198982" start="3688" end="3693" title="Telescopic sight" label="scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425142" start="3709" end="3721" title="muzzle flash" label="muzzle flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164253" start="3809" end="3825" title="suppressive fire" label="suppressive fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="3830" end="3841" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299049" start="3948" end="3960" title="First-person (video games)" label="first-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q122207" start="3961" end="3975" title="artillery game" label="artillery game"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="4279" end="4288" title="minefield" label="minefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q54767" start="4496" end="4507" title="Puzzle video game" label="puzzle game"/>
<link wikidata="Q602507" start="4781" end="4800" title="hand-to-hand combat" label="hand-to-hand combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="4833" end="4846" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344557" start="5003" end="5020" title="missing in action" label="missing in action"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="5072" end="5082" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261258" start="5086" end="5096" title="Montagnard (Vietnam)" label="Montagnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128340" start="5202" end="5210" title="Index term" label="keywords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588869" start="5885" end="5908" title="Language barrier" label="difficult to understand"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="6085" end="6089" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q564567" start="6100" end="6110" title="bánh chưng" label="bánh chưng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273231" start="6432" end="6439" title="R&amp;amp;R (military)" label="R&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="6449" end="6455" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q154106" start="6467" end="6485" title="Bell UH-1 Iroquois" label="Bell UH-1 Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="6497" end="6510" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140648" start="6518" end="6535" title="Central Highlands (Vietnam)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="6555" end="6564" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092474" start="7141" end="7151" title="Cinemaware" label="Cinemaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="7159" end="7175" title="interactive film" label="interactive film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408498" start="7334" end="7348" title="Ocean Software" label="Ocean Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="7430" end="7436" title="16-bit" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392005" start="7538" end="7545" title="Platoon (1987 video game)" label="Platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192568" start="7700" end="7713" title="moral dilemma" label="moral dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683487" start="7921" end="7936" title="Deluxe Paint" label="Deluxe Paint II"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="8039" end="8044" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="8129" end="8137" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="8384" end="8391" title="Piracy (media)" label="pirated"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="8512" end="8518" title="Port (software)" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="8522" end="8528" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319364" start="8847" end="8864" title="The Games Machine" label="The Games Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522087" start="8887" end="8894" title="The One (magazine)" label="The One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843316" start="8917" end="8929" title="Amiga Format" label="Amiga Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986814" start="8956" end="8964" title="CU Amiga" label="CU Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069492" start="8978" end="8982" title="Zero (video game magazine)" label="Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="9101" end="9122" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683982" wikidata="Q3525627" url="?curid=683982" title="The Lost Patrol">
<text>The Lost Patrol is an American rock band whose music falls into the categories of experimental, gothic, post-punk, dark wave, ethereal wave, folk, alternative country, shoegazing, Spaghetti Western and &quot;surf-a-billy&quot;. The band uses electric guitars, 12-string acoustic guitars, Moog and other synthesizers.

The band currently consists of Stephen Masucci, Michael Williams and Mollie Israel (the daughter of noted filmmaker Amy Heckerling and Neal Israel, biological daughter of Harold Ramis). The band began writing their own music in 1999, with two members touring as an instrumental duo at that time. Prior to forming the band, Masucci had music in two films by Hal Hartley, &quot;Flirt&quot; and &quot;The Book of Life&quot;.

In 2004, The Lost Patrol was featured by WFMU DJ Irwin Chusid on his show &quot;Gender Bias&quot;. Chusid&#x27;s WFMU colleague Bob Brainen featured a live appearance by the band. Music critic Chris Gerard named their album &quot;Launch And Landing&quot; as one of the Top 20 Albums of 2007. The Lost Patrol returned to WFMU with the current lineup in 2013 for a live set on the early morning show, Dark Night of the Soul with Julie.

In mid-August 2010, The Lost Patrol went on location to Detroit, Michigan to film for the new Amy Heckerling film &quot;Vamps&quot;. On September 27, 2010, their song “On The Run” from their album, &quot;Midnight Matinée&quot; was featured in The CW hit show &quot;Gossip Girl.&quot; Also, on January 23, 2012, their song &quot;This Road Is Long&quot; from their album, &quot;Rocket Surgery&quot; was featured again on Gossip Girl.

In February 2012, Hal Hartley released his new film &quot;Meanwhile&quot;, which featured The Lost Patrol&#x27;s track &quot;Nobody There&quot; from their 2010 album, &quot;Dark Matter.&quot; 

The Lost Patrol&#x27;s song &quot;Homecoming&quot; from their album &quot;Midnight Matinée&quot; also appears in the hit found footage film &quot;Chronicle.&quot;

The Lost Patrol holds the US trademark on the band name.

== Personnel ==

Current members:
* Stephen Masucci (all guitars, synths, lap steel, bass, programming)
* Mollie Israel (vocals, harp, percussion)
* Michael Williams (12-string acoustics, keyboards, vocals)

== Discography ==
=== Studio albums ===
* &quot;The Lost Patrol&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Creepy Cool&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Off Like a Prom Dress&quot; (2003)
* &quot;High Noon&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Lonesome Sky&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Launch and Landing&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Midnight Matinée&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Dark Matter&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Rocket Surgery&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Driven&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Chasing Shadows&quot; (2014)

=== EPs ===
* &quot;Scattered, Smothered &amp; Covered EP&quot; (2002)

=== Other ===
The Lost Patrol also appear on the compilation albums:
* &quot;Under the Radar&quot; (magazine) - 10th Anniversary Issue Compilation (2011)
* Rock Back for Japan - Volume 6 (Patetico Recordings, 2011)
* Innocence is Bliss (Dionysus Records, 2006)
* WFMU Gone Wild DVD (2005)
* WBJB &quot;The Night&quot; NJ/NPR Local Artists Sampler (2005)
* 2NMC Festival Sampler, Nashville New Music Festival (2001)

==Film soundtrack==
The Lost Patrol provided the music soundtrack to Ryan Dacko’s documentary feature film &quot;Plan 9 from Syracuse&quot;.

The Lost Patrol&#x27;s &quot;Nobody There&quot; featured on Hal Hartley&#x27;s &quot;Meanwhile&quot; soundtrack.

==References==
== External links ==
* The Lost Patrol Official Page
* The Lost Patrol on MySpace
* The Lost Patrol on BandCamp
* The Lost Patrol on Facebook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3525627" start="0" end="15" title="The Lost Patrol" label="The Lost Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="31" end="35" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640319" start="82" end="94" title="experimental music" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="96" end="102" title="gothic rock" label="gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="104" end="113" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840596" start="115" end="124" title="dark wave" label="dark wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q284543" start="126" end="139" title="ethereal wave" label="ethereal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="141" end="145" title="folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q438476" start="147" end="166" title="alternative country" label="alternative country"/>
<link wikidata="Q272167" start="168" end="178" title="shoegazing" label="shoegazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="180" end="197" title="Spaghetti Western" label="Spaghetti Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="208" end="220" title="rockabilly" label="surf-a-billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="242" end="257" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="270" end="285" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="288" end="292" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="303" end="314" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q442273" start="434" end="448" title="Amy Heckerling" label="Amy Heckerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337574" start="453" end="464" title="Neal Israel" label="Neal Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q286890" start="489" end="501" title="Harold Ramis" label="Harold Ramis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573906" start="569" end="576" title="tour (music)" label="touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q446294" start="675" end="686" title="Hal Hartley" label="Hal Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269372" start="694" end="699" title="Flirt (1995 film)" label="Flirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719261" start="716" end="732" title="The Book of Life (1998 film)" label="The Book of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434878" start="782" end="786" title="WFMU" label="WFMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075007" start="790" end="802" title="Irwin Chusid" label="Irwin Chusid"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="959" end="964" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="1232" end="1239" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1241" end="1249" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q442273" start="1270" end="1284" title="Amy Heckerling" label="Amy Heckerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554374" start="1296" end="1301" title="Vamps (2011 film)" label="Vamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="1419" end="1425" title="The CW Television Network" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q199853" start="1441" end="1452" title="Gossip Girl (TV series)" label="Gossip Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804107" start="1667" end="1676" title="Meanwhile (2011 film)" label="Meanwhile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272147" start="1924" end="1937" title="Found footage (pseudo-documentary)" label="found footage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087883" start="1949" end="1958" title="Chronicle (film)" label="Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="1996" end="2005" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="2146" end="2152" title="singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="2154" end="2158" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="2160" end="2170" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q678090" start="2192" end="2211" title="12-string guitar" label="12-string acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="2785" end="2802" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883372" start="2807" end="2845" title="Under the Radar (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Under the Radar&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384000" start="3221" end="3231" title="Ryan Dacko" label="Ryan Dacko"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="3234" end="3245" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200874" start="3265" end="3285" title="Plan 9 from Syracuse" label="Plan 9 from Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q40629" start="3497" end="3504" title="MySpace" label="MySpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q545966" start="3526" end="3534" title="BandCamp" label="BandCamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="3556" end="3564" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683985" wikidata="Q7300864" url="?curid=683985" title="Real Change">
<text>Real Change is a weekly progressive street newspaper based in Seattle, Washington, USA written by professional staff and sold by self-employed vendors, many of whom are homeless. The paper provides them with an alternative to panhandling and covers a variety of social justice issues, including homelessness and poverty. It became weekly in 2005, making it the second American street newspaper ever to be published weekly. Real Change is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization with an annual budget of $950,000.

==History and Circulation==
&quot;Real Change&quot; has been published by the Real Change Homeless Empowerment Project since 1994; the paper&#x27;s founder, Tim Harris, founded the &quot;Spare Change News&quot; street newspaper in the Boston area in 1992. After moving to Seattle in 1994, he started &quot;Real Change&quot; as a monthly paper with only one staff member. Later, the paper started producing every other week.

In February 2005, &quot;Real Change&quot; began publishing weekly due to increasing interest and sales, making it the second street newspaper in the country to do so. In addition to becoming a weekly newspaper, it hired several professional journalists shifting its focus to become a broadly progressive alternative paper. As a biweekly, it sold 18,000 copies every two weeks; and now has a weekly circulation of 16,000 papers. In April 2013, the paper&#x27;s price increased from one dollar to two dollars and was the sixth street newspaper to do so.

In 2012, it sold 872,562 copies and raised $957,949: 68.42 percent from donations and grants; 31.26 percent from circulation, advertising and subscriptions; and 0.32 percent from other sources. As of 2017, it has a yearly circulation of 550,000 copies and sales account for 30 percent of the $1.2 million budget; beginning in 2019, vendors are able to take payment using the Venmo app.

==Contents==
The topics covered in &quot;Real Change&quot; are a mixture of progressive local news and information specifically pertaining to the homeless and poor. Though it covers local news, it still openly advocates for &quot;social justice&quot; and attempts to educate readers about homelessness. Some readers, though, admit that they buy the paper more to help out and interact with the vendors than to actually read the contents; this pattern of buying is common among street newspapers. Part of the reason for the paper becoming a weekly publication in 2005 was to attract more readers and move the newspaper&#x27;s image from a &quot;charity buy&quot; to a legitimate source of news.

==Vendors==

Anyone may be a &quot;Real Change&quot; vendor. However, most are poor or unable to hold a regular job due to physical disability, mental illness, criminal records, or other issues. After attending an orientation and signing a code of conduct, Vendors get their first 10 papers free. They then buy the paper for sixty cents and sell it for two dollars keeping the difference, plus any tips. The paper has an average of 350 to 400 active vendors each month and there as many as 800 vendors in a year, if occasional vendors are included.

Most vendors sell within Seattle proper, although some sell in the Eastside, as far north as Bellingham, and as far south as Olympia, WA. Vendors may sell without restriction on sidewalks and public spaces, and sometimes need to obtain permission to sell in commercial areas like malls. Several vendors are very successful, selling as many as 2,000 papers a month and being known as &quot;fixtures&quot; in the community, however most sell far less than that. &quot;Real Change&#x27;s&quot; &quot;turf system&quot; allows vendors selling over 300 papers per month to have priority at certain spots; according to Harris, this system allows buyer-vendor relationships to grow and for vendors to become well known in communities, and can minimize conflict and competition between vendors.

Not all the vendors of &quot;Real Change&quot; are homeless, several are able to afford an apartment by selling the paper and others share accommodations with others. Like Washington, D.C.&#x27;s &quot;Street Sense&quot;, &quot;Real Change&quot; does not screen incoming vendors for income or living situation, nor does it &quot;retire&quot; vendors after they have obtained stable housing. The paper&#x27;s staff have stated, however, that the majority of vendors are living in poverty and no vendors are &quot;living in the bling-bling&quot; from selling papers.

==Awards==

2004:
:*Susan Hutchison Bosch Award for outstanding achievement

2006:
:*First place, personalities

2008:
:*Best feature writing
:*First place, general news reporting 
:*First place, social issues
:*First place, minorities
:*Third place, humorous writing
:*Honorable mention, personalities

2009:
:*First place, educational reporting 
:*First place, social issues reporting
:*First place, Arts reporting and criticism

2011:
:*First place, education news
:*First place, consumer affairs news
:*Third place, social issues, religion, minority affairs
:*Third place, personality profile

2012:
:*First place, general news coverage
:*First place, lifestyle reporting
:*First place, page design
:*Second place, government and politics reporting
:*Second place, feature photography
:*Third place, page design

2013:
:*First place, general news coverage
:*First place, government and politics reporting
:*First place, education reporting
:*First place, page design
:*Second place, page design
:*Second place, social issues reporting
:*Second place, general excellence
:*Third place, sports reporting

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Real Change News Homepage
*Real Change Wikispace</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="24" end="35" title="progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006125" start="36" end="52" title="street newspaper" label="street newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="62" end="81" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="83" end="86" title="United States" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="98" end="110" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="169" end="177" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q17572748" start="226" end="237" title="begging" label="panhandling"/>
<link wikidata="Q240625" start="440" end="449" title="501(c) organization" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573554" start="697" end="714" title="Spare Change News" label="Spare Change News"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="745" end="751" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="1227" end="1238" title="Progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="1630" end="1643" title="subscriptions" label="subscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q24839341" start="1863" end="1868" title="Venmo" label="Venmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="2105" end="2119" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="2714" end="2728" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070100" start="2730" end="2746" title="criminal records" label="criminal records"/>
<link wikidata="Q380640" start="2968" end="2971" title="tip (gratuity)" label="tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330922" start="3187" end="3195" title="Eastside (King County, Washington)" label="Eastside"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="3400" end="3404" title="Shopping mall" label="mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="3531" end="3540" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q180684" start="3864" end="3872" title="Conflict (process)" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q476300" start="3877" end="3888" title="competition" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="3958" end="3966" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q699405" start="4046" end="4060" title="Dwelling" label="accommodations"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4079" end="4095" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7622919" start="4109" end="4121" title="Street Sense (newspaper)" label="Street Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="4386" end="4393" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683987" wikidata="Q440356" url="?curid=683987" title="East Haven">
<text>East Haven or Easthaven may refer to:

;Places
*East Haven, Angus, Scotland
*East Haven, Connecticut, United States
*East Haven, Indiana, United States
*East Haven, Vermont, United States

;Games
*Easthaven (card game), a variant of the patience or solitaire known as Westcliff
*Easthaven, a place in the role-playing video game &quot;Icewind Dale&quot;

== See also ==
* Haven (disambiguation)
* New Haven (disambiguation)
* Newhaven (disambiguation)
* West Haven (disambiguation)
* North Haven (disambiguation)
* South Haven (disambiguation)
* Sun Haven (disambiguation)
* Milford Haven</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q440356" start="0" end="10" title="East Haven" label="East Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q440356" start="14" end="23" title="East Haven" label="Easthaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328565" start="48" end="65" title="East Haven, Angus" label="East Haven, Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q755413" start="77" end="100" title="East Haven, Connecticut" label="East Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895655" start="117" end="136" title="East Haven, Indiana" label="East Haven, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977565" start="153" end="172" title="East Haven, Vermont" label="East Haven, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987274" start="197" end="218" title="Easthaven (card game)" label="Easthaven (card game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137949" start="335" end="347" title="Icewind Dale" label="Icewind Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q295629" start="372" end="394" title="Haven (disambiguation)" label="Haven (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226637" start="397" end="423" title="New Haven (disambiguation)" label="New Haven (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226637" start="426" end="451" title="Newhaven (disambiguation)" label="Newhaven (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q400267" start="454" end="481" title="West Haven (disambiguation)" label="West Haven (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q403496" start="484" end="512" title="North Haven (disambiguation)" label="North Haven (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q357793" start="515" end="543" title="South Haven (disambiguation)" label="South Haven (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124147905" start="546" end="572" title="Sun Haven (disambiguation)" label="Sun Haven (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q991055" start="575" end="588" title="Milford Haven" label="Milford Haven"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="683988" wikidata="Q335263" url="?curid=683988" title="Martin Verkerk">
<text>Martin Willem Verkerk (born 31 October 1978) is a retired professional Dutch tennis player. He reached the final of the French Open in 2003 and achieved a career-high singles ranking of No. 14 in September 2003. During his career, he won two ATP singles titles.

== Early life ==
Verkerk began playing tennis at the age of seven, playing in local tournaments and training with his parents. He played in a tennis facility in his hometown of Alphen aan den Rijn, Netherlands, where his talent was recognized by local coaches, and he soon had the opportunity to train with many better players. He later won the 18 and Under Dutch title in 1995.

==Career==
In 2003, playing in only his third Grand Slam event and ranked 46, Verkerk reached the final of the French Open. Along the way, he beat Željko Krajan, Luis Horna, Vince Spadea and Rainer Schüttler before overcoming experienced clay court players Carlos Moyá (seeded 4th) and Guillermo Coria (seeded 7th). In the final, he lost to Spaniard Juan Carlos Ferrero in straight sets.

His unexpected run at the French Open as an underdog and his expressive on-court antics made him popular in the Netherlands. The final was watched by even more households in the Netherlands than when his countryman Richard Krajicek won Wimbledon in 1996. However, hampered by various injuries and mononucleosis, Verkerk was unable to reproduce similar results during the rest of his career, never advancing beyond the third round in any subsequent Grand Slams.

During his career, he won two titles and reached the quarter-finals of the 2003 Rome Masters. Verkerk played a close match against Roger Federer at the 2003 Paris Masters, losing in three tiebreak sets after holding four match points.

== Playing style ==

Verkerk&#x27;s game was based on powerful serves and backhands. He used a single-handed backhand and his favorite surface was clay.

==Grand Slam finals==

===Singles (1 runner-up)===
==ATP career finals==

===Singles: 4 (2 titles, 2 runner-ups)===


===Doubles: 2 (2 runner-ups)===


==ATP Challenger and ITF Futures finals==

===Singles: 20 (10–10)===


===Doubles: 7 (3–4)===


==Performance timelines==
===Singles===
===Doubles===
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335263" start="0" end="21" title="Martin Verkerk" label="Martin Willem Verkerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="77" end="83" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048978" start="120" end="131" title="2003 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="302" end="308" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213246" start="440" end="459" title="Alphen aan den Rijn" label="Alphen aan den Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="689" end="699" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083655" start="790" end="803" title="Željko Krajan" label="Željko Krajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q350266" start="805" end="815" title="Luis Horna" label="Luis Horna"/>
<link wikidata="Q54661" start="817" end="829" title="Vince Spadea" label="Vince Spadea"/>
<link wikidata="Q76760" start="834" end="850" title="Rainer Schüttler" label="Rainer Schüttler"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="900" end="911" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q295478" start="929" end="944" title="Guillermo Coria" label="Guillermo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="984" end="992" title="Spanish people" label="Spaniard"/>
<link wikidata="Q185722" start="993" end="1012" title="Juan Carlos Ferrero" label="Juan Carlos Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975393" start="1076" end="1084" title="Underdog (competition)" label="underdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q309859" start="1247" end="1263" title="Richard Krajicek" label="Richard Krajicek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="1268" end="1277" title="Wimbledon (tennis)" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207367" start="1329" end="1342" title="Infectious mononucleosis" label="mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="1480" end="1491" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800073" start="1569" end="1586" title="2003 Italian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2003 Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="1625" end="1638" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749578" start="1646" end="1664" title="2003 BNP Paribas Masters – Singles" label="2003 Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911683" start="1793" end="1799" title="serve (tennis)" label="serves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364175" start="1804" end="1812" title="backhand" label="backhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364175" start="1825" end="1847" title="single-handed backhand" label="single-handed backhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q198718" start="1877" end="1881" title="Clay court" label="clay"/>
</links>
</doc>
